Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 25 October 2001 .
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , since our last session , Spain has once again , unfortunately , been cruelly struck by terrorism .
On 7 November , José María Lidón Corbi , a judge and professor of law in the Basque region , was murdered in a cowardly attack whilst leaving his home in Getxo .
The previous day in Madrid , terrorists set off a car bomb , in which a hundred or so people were injured .
On my own behalf , and on that of the European Parliament , I immediately sent my deepest condolences to the victim ' s family and our best wishes for a speedy recovery to everyone who was injured in this attack .
Yet again , ETA terrorists have shown that they deny the right to life , that they reject the very principle of the rule of law .
By attacking a judge this time , the terrorists are demonstrating this once more .
Yesterday , Algeria was struck by catastrophic weather conditions , which so far have claimed 538 lives and left 316 injured .
I immediately expressed our deep sorrow to the Algerian people for the disaster that has struck Algiers , and our total solidarity for the human tragedy that the country is suffering .
I also asked President Bouteflika to pass on a message on our behalf to express our deepest sympathy to the victims ' families and loved-ones .
I hope very much that the European Union will play an active part in supplying emergency aid , which must be sent as soon as possible .
Yesterday , three journalists were killed in an ambush by the Taliban in Afghanistan .
Johanne Sutton , Pierre Billaud and Volker Handloik died whilst carrying out their profession , which was also their passion .
It was because of their courage that each of us was able to keep abreast of the events in Afghanistan .
I would like to pay homage to them and to express our deepest sympathy for their families and colleagues .
This afternoon , less than an hour ago , an American aircraft crashed not far from JFK airport in the Queens area of New York .
There were more than 260 passengers and crew members on board .
For the time being , we do not know the exact number of casualties or the precise circumstances surrounding this tragedy .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to ask you to observe a minute ' s silence to pay homage to all the victims .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Zimeray who travelled to Vientiane as soon as we had the opportunity to contact him , which was 10 days after we were imprisoned .
He immediately offered to act in our defence , and informed us of the diplomatic steps that you had promptly taken .
He also told us what many of our fellow Members had done to help us , particularly Mr Brok and our colleagues and friends in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , and many other Members as well .

Madam President , I would like to give my sincere thanks to you and all the Members , such as Ignacio Salafranca , Jules Maaten and many others .
I think that we should pursue this initiative and I see that this issue is also on the agenda of this session .
The situation in Laos is tragic .
I would like to reiterate to all my fellow Members that we were in Laos to fight the cause of five lost prisoners , known as the desaparecidos , but there are hundreds of other prisoners and the prison conditions in Laos are terrible .
These people do not even have the right to a fair trial , they are passing their final days in oblivion without even being able to see their family .
Unfortunately , this situation is nothing out of the ordinary .
Corruption is endemic in Laos .
I hope that we will have the opportunity to work together in order to change this situation as quickly as possible .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of Thursday 25 October have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , immediately following the vote on the 2002 Budget I asked how exactly Budget line B3-306 had been voted on .
My group 's co-ordinator and I wrote you a letter asking for the vote to be re-scrutinised .
We have as yet received no reply .
I therefore wish to lodge an objection to the Minutes on this point in order to get the matter properly clarified .
The background to this is that we had voted on a reserve - the amounts involved and the explanations of them .
It was intended that we would vote on them together , with a separate vote only on one short passage in the explanations . Then , though , there were suddenly separate votes on the amounts and the explanations .
That was not how it had been intended .
I therefore ask that this be looked into , and wish to put on record my reservations about the Minutes .
Mr Ferber , we shall take note of this .
If I am not mistaken , during voting time on Thursday 25 October , my vote by roll call on the second part of Amendment No 559 on the budget , and more specifically on premiums for tobacco , has been incorrectly recorded .
I voted against the second part , against the commentary , and I am shown in the register as having voted in favour .
I sent you a note and I received confirmation from Parliament ' s services that this will be corrected .
As far as I know , this has not yet been done .
I hope that this will be corrected , but I wanted to mention this to the House as well .
Certainly , Mr Korakas .
Thank you .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
Order of business
Madam President , my report on passenger transport by rail , road and inland waterway has been placed on Tuesday ' s agenda under item No 16 .
In recent months , different groups have continuously called for either bringing the discussion forward or postponing it .
Last week , I was informed that three of the groups , PSE , PPE-DE and the Verts / ALE , were in favour of postponing the discussion .
I then agreed to this on the assumption that the other groups needed more time for a fully-fledged discussion .
When on Thursday evening , much to my surprise , I heard that the Conference of Presidents had decided to go ahead with the discussion after all , I informed all Members that I was still prepared to postpone the debate .
It since transpired on Thursday afternoon that the PPE-DE Group had not been in favour of postponement and that it is no longer an issue for the PSE Group either .
Furthermore , the agendas of the two remaining plenary part-sessions of this year are already full .
Now that I have found this out , I am withdrawing my offer which I made in writing and circulated and I assume that the debate will go ahead tomorrow .
Of course !
Regarding Wednesday President .
I have received a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party to postpone Mr Fiori ' s report until the Brussels session of 28 and 29 November .
Is there a Member who wishes to move this request ?
Madam President , Parliament must be an open forum whose business people are able to follow .
That is something Parliament will not be if we debate the Fiori report this week , because it is only today that it has become available in ten languages .
I do not know what the situation is regarding the eleventh language , Danish .
According to our original timetable , to which the Conference of Presidents had agreed , it was to be debated during the November II part-session .
Nor do we think there is any reason for debating it before the Caudron report .
I would therefore ask , on behalf of the Liberal Group , that we move it to the November II part-session .
I believe it is only right that you should check up on how the groups vote .
On this point , as on many others , the groups are extremely divided . The main thing , however , is that the world outside should be able to follow what is happening .
We MEPs should also be able to form views on the extremely difficult issues discussed in this report .
Mrs Thors , I can give you an explanation which may not have been brought to Members ' attention .
The Conference of Presidents decided to put the debate on the Fiori report on the agenda at the same time as the debate on Mr Caudron ' s report .
With regard to the vote , it was decided that if there was insufficient time , Mr Fiori ' s report could be put to the vote at the second November session in Brussels .
I am simply giving you this information so that you are aware .
If the report is kept on the agenda , I will see whether or not we have sufficient time to take the vote .
We have just heard the speaker who moved the request .
Is there a Member who wishes to speak in favour of the request ?

Madam President , I would like to speak in favour of this request because , although , admittedly , only a small majority in the Conference of Presidents decided on Thursday to submit these two reports to a joint debate , it is certainly not straightforward for Parliament to allow the administrative services to take a decision that is political in nature .
In other words , this is a difficult requirement to meet .
We must not rush the vote on the Fiori report nor must we rush the debate .
However , if we set a deadline for tabling amendments for 9 p.m. on Tuesday and expect the administrative services to work like Trojans so that the Rules of Procedure are observed and Members have the documents 24 hours before the vote , we would be racing against time and this would not do credit to the Fiori report or to Parliament .
That is why we must support - and this is something that I support , along with my fellow Members from the radical group - the joint proposal to postpone the debate , so that we do not have to deal with this in a hurry .
Madam President , taking the language question first , I am informed that everything is in order so far and available in all languages .
I will now turn to the esteemed Mr Dell 'Alba 's comments and start by agreeing with him that this is a political issue , but then coming to a quite different conclusion .
This is not only a political issue but also an ethical one , and of the greatest significance for the Fiori report .
It had always been our opinion that the Fiori report should be considered together with both the Caudron reports .
As we have just decided , Madam President , to begin the debate with the Commission and the Council at three o 'clock on Wednesday afternoon , there will be sufficient time in the morning to debate the Fiori report and the two Caudron reports .
If that were not the case , then we too would have doubts about proceeding with everything on the agenda as it stands .
Now , though , that the debate with the Council and the Commission on the international situation is to take place on Wednesday afternoon , we take the view that the Caudron and Fiori reports belong together .
It is , though , an ethical and a political issue requiring an answer now , and so we would be very grateful if it could remain on the agenda .
So , we have heard the speaker who moved the request , one speaker in favour and one speaker against the request .
Mr Barón Crespo , do you wish to take the floor again ?

Madam President , I would like to point out that I have the right to speak , for my esteemed fellow Member Mr Poettering did not only talk about the Fiori report : he spoke about the whole of Wednesday ' s agenda , and as proposer , I feel that I have the right to speak , because it was my group that put forward the proposal to once again include in the agenda for Wednesday morning the oral questions that were initially put to the Council on a subject that is so important , especially if we consider the free time that we - according to what we are led to believe - have available .
I would like to take the opportunity , Madam President , to protest strongly and ask that you , yourself , do the same before the Council , for the representative of the Council , in the Conference of Presidents , gave a piece of information which I understand to be inaccurate , if not completely untrue , in relation to Council meetings .
Justice and Home Affairs Council is going to meet , as expected , on Friday , yet the representative of the Council at the Conference of Presidents said that the meeting would be taking place on 7 December .
This information is misleading , particularly at a time when Parliament is making a substantial effort to proceed with the emergency procedure on anti-terrorist legislation , and I think it was a serious mistake , because it has led to confusion that has had a negative effect on everyone concerned .
Firstly , in relation to this apparently empty Wednesday morning agenda , according to Mr Poettering .
Secondly , Madam President , I think it is a major political mistake to subordinate a legislative report such as the Caudron report to a question that will have ethical repercussions for all - not only for one particular political group - for we need to be working on that which is relevant to us all : the draft legislation .
Furthermore , as anticipated , we can remain perfectly calm and still have the time needed to deal with matters as serious as those set out in the Fiori report without necessarily having to resort to the emergency procedure .
We therefore agree that the matter should be debated in the November II part-session , as had initially been planned .
Mr Barón Crespo , everything is , in fact , perfectly in order , since there were two speakers to move this request .
Therefore , we were permitted to hear two speakers who are in favour and , in order to be fair , I shall now give the floor to Mr Lannoye , who I believe is going to speak against .
Madam President , unlike Mr Barón Crespo , I think that the debate on the Fiori report depends on the Caudron report .
I shall explain why .
We set up a temporary committee to deal with the subject of human genetics . Why did we do this ?
Because there are considerable ethical problems and I believe that everyone is aware of what they are . In my view , we cannot express a sound opinion on research programmes lasting several years , whose ethical aspects are fundamental , and then suddenly vote on the Fiori report which could lose a significant amount of its political impact .
I therefore believe that , in order to make the work of Parliament more coherent , it would be better to take the vote on the Fiori report at the same time as the Caudron report .
That said , I also agree that if the physical conditions are not appropriate , it is better to postpone the vote than to proceed under the wrong circumstances .
I think that we must respect Members .
I shall therefore put to the vote the request by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party to postpone the Fiori report .
( Parliament gave its assent )
I have received a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists to bring forward to this week the debate on criminal sanctions and Community law , which is currently scheduled for Wednesday 28 November .
Justice and Home Affairs . Madam President , on behalf of the committee I have the honour to chair , I would ask that this topic be reinserted on this week 's agenda , since , contrary to the advice given to the Conference of Presidents last week , the Justice and Home Affairs Council will be discussing it at its meeting this Friday .
This evening the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs will adopt a text , drafted in cooperation with the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , which we believe is a strong basis for a Parliament resolution on this matter .
If it is not possible to have a debate in plenary with the Council , we request authorisation to submit this text to the plenary in the form of a draft recommendation for a vote on Thursday , pursuant to Article 39 of the Treaty and Rule 94 of our Rules of Procedure .
Madam President , after listening to the explanation given by Mr Watson , whom I would like to wish a long presidency of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , for he does this job so well , my group withdraws its proposal and adopts the one tabled by Mr Watson .

Are there any objections to Mr Watson ' s proposal ?
( Parliament gave its assent )
Regarding Thursday
President .
I suggest that , in view of the busy voting schedule at midday , the start of voting time be brought forward by half an hour , in other words , that we begin voting at 11.30 a.m.
Even without the vote on the report by Mr Fiori , I think that this is necessary .
With regard to the topical and urgent subjects of major importance , I have received a request from the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left to add a fourth sub-item entitled ' Floods in Algeria ' .
I suggest that we add this item to item three , ' Effects of hurricane Michelle in Nicaragua and Cuba ' , and we call this item ' Natural disasters ' .
Madam President , if it is at all possible , I would like to add an oral amendment : ' on the effects of hurricane Michelle on Nicaragua , Cuba and Honduras ' , which is where it has caused the most damage .
Madam President , according to the British press today six Algerian nationals were arrested over the weekend by the French security services .
They are allegedly associated with the terrorist group al-Qa 'ida and with the five people arrested last year found in possession of maps which marked out the Parliament buildings in Strasbourg and the Cathedral .
Given the proximity both in place and time to our current part-session , what information does the President have on their hostile intentions towards Parliament ?
Given the current climate of suspicion , with another crash in New York of an airliner this evening , what additional security measures will be taken to protect us ?
I , for instance , was allowed into Parliament this evening without even showing my security pass .
What measures can be taken to protect us , given this danger ?
Mr Tannock , as you can imagine , I carried out a very thorough investigation into the report you mentioned .
I was told that the plans the terrorists had in their possession related only to Strasbourg cathedral and the Christmas market .
But , of course , this information gives us reason to be even more careful , and I shall now give the floor to Mr Balfe , who will give you more details on what has been done to step up security .
Madam President , I have no more information than you on this series of arrests .
No-one has informed me about it but I am sure that will happen in the course of the evening and I will then tell Mr Tannock .
I should like to point out , though , that whilst we welcome the new security on the periphery , this building has to operate in the interests of Members .
I hope that the Bureau will reconsider the question of security and try to fine-tune it somewhat , because far too many Members are having their visitors and other groups seriously inconvenienced by the way the rules are being applied .
They can be applied a little more subtly .
I hope we can do that .
As regards Mr Tannock 's question , I will find out what I can and inform him and the House .
In any case , I believe Mr Tannock welcomes the security measures that the Bureau thought it was necessary to take .
I can inform you that many Members submitted this question . We cannot be too careful at the moment , which is , admittedly , an extremely testing time .
Madam President , I would like to briefly draw attention to the case of one of our colleagues in Israel , Mr Bichara , whose parliamentary immunity has recently been waived by the Knesset , a step that was taken because Mr Bichara expressed his political views in public .
I think that this step goes completely against the concept of parliamentary immunity , as this is never used by a country to punish MPs for expressing political views .
I believe that Mr Bichara has an extremely important role to play in relations between the Israeli and Palestinian people and in bringing about a fair solution to this conflict .
I also think that it is important that you bring up this matter with the Israeli authorities and express Parliament ' s concern at this step which infringes freedoms and breaches the treaty signed by Israel and the European Union .
We shall look into this matter very carefully .
Thank you , Madam President , for your words of solidarity for Algeria at the beginning of the sitting .
It is said that you find out who your true friends are in times of need and I believe , in fact , that now is the time to show our alliance with the Algerian people by providing substantial emergency aid of various kinds to help them contend with the extensive damage caused by the torrential rain that has struck Algiers and northern Algeria .
A natural disaster of this kind is always a huge blow for any population , particularly the most deprived , but , in this case , Algeria is also a country that has already suffered so much due to Islamic terrorism , economic and political crises , which continue to dash everyone ' s hopes .
My group is , therefore , calling on the European Union to make the necessary resources available to help those affected by the disaster and , secondly , we believe that we must draw lessons , and not only in conjunction with the authorities and Parliament , but also with the relevant representatives of civil society in Algeria , from this tragedy and define priorities for our future cooperation .
If I may , Madam President , I would like to briefly give some information about another subject , since the request to add this item to the topical and urgent debate was rejected , that of the case of Leïla Zana .
The Bureau of my group recently held a meeting in Ankara .
We requested the opportunity to meet the Sakharov Prize winner , of course , but we were refused outright , and what we find particularly disappointing , especially since this concerns the Sakharov Prize , is that we were unable , at a time when we are combating terrorism , to meet Leïla Zana .
I think that it was only fair that my fellow Members are given this information and I also hope that the Commission is aware of this information since the Commission is currently drafting a progress report on relations between Turkey and the European Union .
Madam President , while Mr Dupuis was held in Laos last week , a large number of your colleagues , including myself , were detained in Brussels airport for eight hours , from 3 p.m. to 11 p.m. , because the government of Belgium would not ensure the free movement of European citizens around Europe , including that of MEPs .

We could not get out of Brussels at all ; we had to go back , and in the end departed from Charleroi the next day .
It took me 23 hours to get home .
Could you make representations to the Belgian Government , and to other governments , for that matter , to the effect that all European citizens , not just MEPs , should be entitled to free movement in Europe and that unjustified and illegal blockades of airports should be dealt with by the authorities in the proper manner ?

Of course , Mr Purvis , I will certainly do this .
Madam President , I would like to inform you that in July this year , in accordance with Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union , I tabled a question to the Council of Ministers with regard to the Sahara referendum and also to some statements made by Mr Solana , the European Union ' s representative for Foreign Policy .
A few weeks ago some EU Member States in the United Nations debated the common EU position on the Sahara .
Curiously , France distanced herself from the Belgian presidency ' s proposal and demanded that the line be adopted as set out in the response that the Council of the European Union gave me personally on 10 October .
To date , I have received no such response .
There was even talk of a diplomatic incident , of a crisis between Spain and France , and between Spain and Morocco .
I would like to say two things for the record : firstly , it has never been my intention to create a diplomatic incident between Spain and France , nor between Spain and Morocco .
And secondly , I would like to express my concern at the lack of transparency shown by the Council to this Parliament , for I have had no official answer to my question .
Madam President , you will know that the City of Strasbourg is twinned with the City of Leicester , my home city .
The Lord Mayor of Leicester , Councillor John Allen and the Lady Mayoress , Mrs Allan , are in the public gallery .
This twinning is an important political and social union and I very much hope you will welcome the Lord Mayor and the Lady Mayoress here in Strasbourg .
Madam President , I rise to draw your attention to a report broadcast by the BBC last week , about child trafficking between European Union countries and West Africa .
This was a most disturbing report and I will send it to your services .
On behalf of colleagues in this House who I know are very concerned about these issues , I ask that you raise this subject with the Commission and the Member States and ask whether action can be taken across the European Union to stamp out this appalling abuse of young people from a very deprived part of the world .
Madam President , I should like once again to condemn the barbaric bombings which have been killing civilians and even destroying hospitals for days , or rather weeks now .
Bombings which , unfortunately , have the support of our countries ' governments .
Statements by the US leadership that the objective of the attack is not Bin Laden but to break up Al-Qaeda , even though no one knows where it is , and that it is now the turn of other countries are particularly worrying and reveal the real purpose of the USA , proving that the attack on 11 September is merely being used as a pretext for pushing ahead with previous plans to gain control of this extremely important area and use up stocks of weapons .
On the other hand , grass-root reaction is increasing both here and in the USA , with the people calling for this barbaric attack to stop at once and for our countries and governments to call off their plan to send troops to Afghanistan .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece support these movements , heart and soul , and trust that they will become even stronger and put a stop to the crime which is being committed .
Mr President , I would like to intervene to say that the television system here still does not receive images or sound from Finland .
Since the beginning of September , we have intervened in this matter on four separate occasions : first orally , then by e-mail , following which all the Finnish Members signed and dispatched a letter to the Quaestors on 2 October ; finally , I raised the matter once again during the first session in October .
None of these requests has obtained any response whatsoever .
We may as well be talking to Siberia .
Finland is , technologically , at the top of the league ; and we are ashamed of such behaviour .
I am asking you to intervene promptly in this matter , since so much is going on in the world that this sole Member State which is left outside the information loop needs to be included without delay .
I must say that I , myself , am very surprised .
I certainly recall what the Finnish Members said on this subject and I thought that the problem had been resolved long ago .
In any case , you can rely on me to remind the Quaestors of this , although I cannot see any of the Quaestors in the Chamber at the moment , because I believe that this is a very important issue and that we really must ensure that this is working as soon as possible .
Madam President , as has already been mentioned , this week is certainly not a normal plenary part-session .
For two months , this thing we call war has been in progress , a terrible war against terrorism .
This very morning , Italy ' s military involvement and its support for the United States have taken on a practical form , for indeed , today , Italian troops are leaving to go and help the United States and all the European Union troops which are actively , practically engaged in the war against this barbaric civilisation .
Well then , in the light of this development , to which we must certainly not become used or accustomed , the debate on the agenda , a Commission communication scheduled for Wednesday , seems decidedly inadequate .
Madam President , I expected something more ! I do not know what is happening to the Members , but when I go home I am surrounded by European citizens , my fellow citizens , all asking me the same thing : " What is your view of these events down at the European Parliament ?
What can you say to reassure us and allay our concerns ? "
Well then , I am frankly disappointed by the presence , with all due respect to her , of the Belgian Deputy Prime Minister , Mrs Durant , whose remit is transport , not war , and though she will , I am sure , have a dramatic speech from the Presidency to read out to us .
I feel that it is almost an affront to Parliament that the Belgian Prime Minister is not going to be here at this important time .
Moreover , I would ask you , Madam President , to see whether it would be possible for Mr Solana to be present here too , for he is our foreign policy representative and it is his duty , or rather his obligation , to provide us with clear , practical , specific information .
We cannot be content with just another declaration of good intentions or the assumption of a political position .
We are at war , but some people appear not yet to have understood the full implications of that fact or the importance of the present time .
To give practical effect to this speech , then , I call upon Mr Solana to come to Parliament and tell us clearly what is happening in Afghanistan so that we know not just the details of the military operations but also the extent of our combined endeavours in the field of humanitarian aid to help the communities affected .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we were extremely worried to hear that the government of the United Kingdom is pushing through an emergency bill allowing terrorist suspects to be held indefinitely .
We also hear that it intends to withdraw from the European Convention on Human Rights , which bans detention without trial .
This development , coupled with the recent anti-terrorist law passed by the US Congress , which also grants extensive detention rights , and plans for the European Union ( arrest warrant , definition of terrorism , reinforced police collaboration ) is a highly dangerous development .
Unfortunately , it confirms our reading that the appalling attack on 11 September is being used by the imperialist powers not just to settle international accounts but also to defeat the enemy within , by eroding individual and collective rights .
However , it is encouraging that the American Civil Liberties Union and numerous American , British and other human rights organisations have condemned this action outright .
In fact , only grass-roots reaction , only a united grass-roots movement can bring about the repeal of such laws and prevent them from spreading throughout the continent of Europe .
Madam President , on a point of order .
It would be a pity if no Member from the United Kingdom were to stand up and say to Mr Alyssandrakis that we are also deeply concerned at this proposal and we hope it will not go through unchallenged .
Madam President , since you have announced that the votes will start at 11.30 a.m. on Thursday , could you tell me what will happen to my report on the European Year of People with Disabilities ?
It would be very wrong if a report dealing with disabled people 's rights were put back to Thursday afternoon when most of the Members are not here and most of the Members will not be here to vote .
We are very remiss about disabled people 's rights in this Parliament in terms of access .
It would demonstrate a great lack of awareness of the problems that disabled people face if we do not give them some degree of respect by scheduling this debate at a time when Members will be present to debate and vote on this important issue .
Mrs Lynne , of course I understand what you are saying , but in any case , and you are well aware of this , it is not because we are bringing voting time forward by half an hour that your report cannot be dealt with in the morning .
If you look at the agenda , which I have before me now , you will see that before your report , we are due to have a statement by the Council and the Commission on the economic and employment situation , and deal with the Figueiredo report and the Bouwman report .
It is obvious that , with all these items on the agenda , we would not , in any case , have been able to finish dealing with your report between 10 a.m. and 12 noon .
I am extremely sorry about this , but I think that you are quite right to highlight the problem .
Public access to Parliament documents
The next item is the report ( A5-0349 / 2001 ) by Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the adaptation of the European Parliament ' s Rules of Procedure to the Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council regarding public access to documents of the European Parliament , Council and Commission ( 2001 / 2135 ( REG ) ) .
. ( NL ) Madam President , this week marks the provisional end of the discussion on the ' public access to Parliament documents ' Regulation .
Technically , this Regulation is entitled ' access to documents ' , but it ended up with a different name in the vernacular .
In May , after months of negotiations with the Council and Commission , we were able to bring the Regulation to a successful end .
This was an important moment for me personally , because I have fought for more transparency in the European Union for years .
According to the Resolution , each of the institutions , namely the Commission , the Council and Parliament , must ensure that the Regulation has been incorporated in the institutions ' own rules of procedure , work instructions and meeting procedures by 3 December .
For our Parliament , this meant that we needed to check out our Rules of Procedure to establish whether more improvements were needed .
We often feel that the Commission and the Council fail to come up to the mark in this area , but we have noted that there is room for improvement in one or two areas in our Rules of Procedures too .
When I use the word ' we ' , I would like to make it clear that I also want to include my fellow rapporteur , Mr Cashman , with whom I have worked closely .
The assessment was made in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , but also in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
That is logical because both committees had worked together before .
I thank Mr Cashman very much for the constructive manner in which we have always managed to enter into consultation .
So what are the proposed changes to our Rules of Procedure for which we are asking your backing ?
First of all , what matters is the right of all citizens in the European Union , in other words , including those of third countries , to access EP documents .
That right may have been in place for European citizens , but this was not the case for citizens from third countries registered in the EU .
On that score , therefore , we need to broaden the scope .
Moreover , this corresponds to the ' Freedom of Information Act ' of the United States .
We are therefore not doing anything out of the ordinary .
Secondly , the definition of documents which are eligible for access must , according to the Regulation , be widened compared to the current Rules of Procedure .
It should include all parliamentary documents , including the preparatory documents , such as working documents by rapporteurs or by parliamentary delegations .
There is no need to include MEPs ' personal correspondence or the groups ' internal documents , because these are not official parliamentary documents .
The European Court of Justice has made statements to this effect , which we should , and want to , observe , of course .
The third requirement in the Regulation for which our Rules of Procedure do not provide , is the requirement to register all public documents and to include all documents by name and number in this registration .
Furthermore , this registration must be available and accessible on the Internet .
That will require the necessary efforts to be made and that is why the institutions have until June to achieve this .
We must wish our team and the deputy Secretary-General all the best for this task , for it is quite a job to organise the whole system .
We will have a look in June to see whether everything has turned out well .
A fourth requirement for which our present Parliament does not provide , is access to the Minutes of the Parliament ' s Bureau .
That cannot be such a big problem because these Minutes become public after a certain time anyway .
The only difference is that our Rules of Procedure did not make it compulsory before , and now this obligation has to be stipulated in the Rules of Procedure .
In fact , my advice would be to publish those Minutes even earlier than is now the case .
After all , our entire Parliament knows what is being discussed the afternoon after the meeting anyway .
Fifthly , we still maintain the system of closed meetings in our Parliament when delicate matters are discussed .
Our proposal is to leave those meetings in camera , but to verify the Minutes against Articles 4 and 9 of the Regulation .
Anything which does not fall within this must be made public via the Minutes .
I hope that this could persuade the committees not to have the meetings declared closed unnecessarily .
The final point concerns the conciliation between the Commission , the Council and Parliament in the event of disputes .
Parliament must be involved in the conciliation , and it appears to us to be the best solution if a Vice-President of the European Parliament were to be appointed especially for this purpose .
We would also like to see this laid down in the Rules of Procedure so that it is clear who is responsible .
This concludes the most important changes to our Rules of Procedure .
At the final vote , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs backed these amendments by a large majority .
There are not that many and I therefore believe that we can bring this to a good conclusion here as well .
Four additional amendments have been tabled , including one by my group and three by the Greens .
I do not have much of a problem with that of my group , but we should take another good look at those by the Greens , for it makes no sense to go beyond what is stipulated in the Regulation .
As we should have dealt with this when we were discussing the Regulation , I am tempted to say no to these amendments .
On a final note , this Regulation and change to our Rules of Procedure are very important because they grant our citizens more access to internal documents of our Parliament and of the entire European Union , which improves transparency .
Public confidence , which is very much needed , will also increase as a result .
I welcome this and that is why I hope that we can approve these Rules of Procedure on Tuesday .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Maij-Weggen for her comments .
I have heartily enjoyed the way we have worked together on this and I am pleased to say that the work in her report represents our joint work .
I also accept what she has said on the amendments .
Before I speak further , I should like the services to rule whether Amendment No 17 from the Green Group is admissible , because it seeks to rewrite the regulation .
It calls on Parliament to adopt criteria for the definition of sensitive information and documents .
Now the definition of sensitive documents is contained in the regulation , Article 9 , reference to Article 4 ( 1 ) ( a ) .
I should again like to thank Mrs Maij-Weggen for her consistent approach to transparency and openness .
It is absolutely right that we adopt changes to our Rules of Procedure so that we not only conform to the regulation on access to documents but can also begin to be held accountable by the citizens whom we purport to represent .
Therefore , now that Commissioner Barnier is here , it is important for me to refer to some of my concerns about the entry into force of this regulation on 3 December 2001 .
When the regulation enters into force , the citizen 's right of access to institution documents will no longer be a discretionary concession but a fundamental right , rooted in Article 255 .
As no other legal basis on access to documents is provided in the Treaty , the regulation on Article 255 will be the framework for all other secondary legislation and for the internal rules of the institutions , which should be in conformity with it .
The Commission , therefore , has the responsibility to present formal proposals to repeal or amend secondary legislation which is not coherent with the principles and limits defined in Article 18 ( 3 ) of the regulation .
This is extremely important if we are to bring this regulation into force .
Similarly , on the wider definition of institutions and the bodies and agencies , the Commission is mandated by Recital 8 and by the joint statement to review the rules of agencies and , where necessary to propose amendments as soon as possible .
On the matter of the Interinstitutional Committee - and all of these points are relevant if we are ourselves adopting changes to the Rules of Procedure - the Council presidency has said that it believes the Interinstitutional Committee should operate at secretary-general level .
This differs from the opinion of President Prodi and of Parliament .
Though I hesitate to say this , it is nonsense to suggest that secretaries-general should sit in this Interinstitutional Committee .
The whole point of political presence is political accountability .
Finally , Mrs Maij-Weggen has done an excellent job on this and now is the time for the Commission to ensure that the Treaty is respected and that the regulations flowing therefrom are brought before Parliament .
Mr President , the report we are debating this afternoon in Parliament is important , because it relates to something we have always defended in this House : the principle of transparency , which means citizens ' right to access documents and also the principles of openness and proximity to these very citizens .
For this reason , we are debating Article 255 of the Treaty as reformulated in Amsterdam , and also an important article of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , Article 42 .
After the agreement reached by the Council and Parliament , we need to incorporate the principles promoted by the aforementioned Articles of the Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights respectively into the Rules of Procedure of this House .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Maij-Weggen most sincerely on her excellent work ; her report , in addition to the amendments she tabled , was adopted in committee with 25 votes in favour to one against .
I would also like to congratulate Mr Cashman .
I think that a good relationship was maintained between all those involved , and I also believe that all of the proposals tabled by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs have been taken into consideration by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Therefore , Mr President , in the vote that is going to take place tomorrow we shall be transposing a political principle of fundamental importance and incorporating it into our Rules of Procedure .
In doing so , we will be including a fundamental principle in the interests of the aforementioned transparency and openness into the set of rules that regulates our relations .
Mr President , my group is going to support an amendment it has itself tabled , not by pure chance , but because it is a good amendment .
Furthermore , we will support Mrs Maij-Weggen ' s proposals .
I trust that the result of the vote will be sufficient , that is to say , more than 314 votes , for these proposals to be incorporated into the Rules of Procedure of this House .
On behalf of the European People ' s Party , I would like to once again congratulate the two rapporteurs for the great work they have done .
Mr President , what is transparency ?
Transparency is guaranteed , or so one might and should argue , when as many of the European institutions ' documents as possible are made accessible to all citizens of the EU with an interest in them and also when meetings of the Council are guaranteed to be open to the public .
It is to this banal sentence that we can reduce the foundation document of the European Transparency Initiative , called into being by a very wide range of parliamentarians and people in public life across Europe and only now beginning to become effective on the basis of Regulation 1049 / 2001 and the adjustments which we in this Parliament are now making to it .
There are still different conceptions of what we want transparency to be like .
I , myself , want the European transparency formula to be an American-Swedish hybrid , with unlimited access to almost everything , with not even a registry , and with a real possibility of watching over and permanently examining what we do in Parliament , and especially what is done in the Council , where the really important decisions are taken .
This Parliament does not yet , unfortunately , have the majority required for this .
It can be argued that the European public , in all its diversity , is far from ready .
There is also room for the argument that , if an Italian or Austrian citizen writes to one of the EU institutions , and his letter is promptly recorded in a public registry , he would certainly not have reckoned with that and might react differently from a Swede , who would treat it as a matter of course .
I think we must , in any case , carry on along this road , especially now that events around the world make the definition of European values an issue . Transparency is definitely one of them .
What we now have in front of us is a step in this direction .
Mention has already been made of the deliberations in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
I would like the Greens to come up with a substantially clearer explanation of Amendment No 15 than has been produced to date .
I would personally have no problem whatever with the production of necessary documents in the context of budgetary control , or indeed with what is demanded at the end .
But if it only scores an own goal , it would be better to leave it out .
Mr Cashman has already said all that needs to be said about Amendment No 17 .
Amendment No 14 meets with our group 's undivided approval .
It represents an improvement .
Even the deletion of the restriction to ' permanent ' committees in the first part of Amendment No 15 is only to be welcomed .
We must all be aware that there can be no democracy without transparency .
We still have plenty of work to do before that is achieved .
Mr President , as has been pointed out , this report is , of course , a consequence of the quite arduous work done on the report on Article 255 of the EC Treaty , which concerns public access to documents and on which we voted on 3 May .
Thanks to the extremely strong alliance for transparency which existed , and still exists , in Parliament and in which Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Cashman have played a significant role , we finally succeeded in getting the Council and the Commission to endorse a proposal reflecting this House ' s desire for as much transparency as possible .
The legislation we adopted is deficient and unclear in certain respects but constitutes a first and very important step forwards in the fight for greater transparency in the EU ' s work on behalf of its citizens .
We also decided to review the regulations by January 2004 at the latest .
In the same way as we did then , we must now take the lead in the work aimed at taking a further step forward .
Transparency and public control are the bases for a democratic form of government and a prerequisite for people ' s being able to follow , and participate in , public decision-making .
The opportunity to access EU documents creates greater confidence and legitimacy , two things in short supply in the EU at the present time , unfortunately .
When we adjust our regulations , let us not therefore make them too complicated .
Let us interpret Article 255 as generously as possible and the concept of a ' document ' as broadly as possible .
There are exemptions in the legislation , in Article 4 , but let us not leave the way open for new interpretations of secrecy or of classification of documents as top secret , and let us not construct unnecessary bureaucracies , either .
It is important for people to be able to obtain documents to which they are entitled as soon as possible , as well as for documents to be available on the Internet .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party tabled amendments along these lines in the committee , but they were not adopted .
I hope that they will nonetheless be adopted in practice .
My group supports this report because , for us , transparency and public control are efficient and democratic , not bureaucratic and unnecessary .
Through progressive and extensive regulations in Parliament governing transparency , we can show that it is we who are there for the people , and not the other way around .
Mr President , it is customary to thank rapporteurs but we genuinely want to pay tribute to Mrs Maij-Weggen for the work she has done on this .
I would like to echo what Mrs Malmström has just said about the urgency of transparency and openness , especially in Parliament and I would like to endorse Mr Cashman 's remark that this must be taken as a political responsibility .
We , as elected politicians , are responsible to our electorate for ensuring that all proceedings are as open as possible .
With that in mind , I should like briefly to mention the amendments in the name of our Group .
I hope Mrs Maij-Weggen will accept the first one , extending the rules to cover all committees .
I only have limited experience of being a vice-chairman of the recent Echelon committee , but I see no reason why special committees and committees of inquiry should not be bound .
The further extension later in the amendment that broads out the range of documents from Members which count as parliamentary documents is helpful as well .
I hope that will be accepted .
On the question of political responsibility , it seems to us that for some questions the Conference of Presidents would be a better organ to decide matters than the Bureau , in the sense that in the Conference of Presidents people are representing their political party , whereas in the Bureau people are supposed to speak for the Parliament as a whole , rather than putting forward a political case .
Our third amendment suggests that we need a parliamentary definition of sensitive documents .
Mr Cashman has challenged the validity of this .
We think that within our rules , there is room for an expanded definition in relation to parliamentary documents .
We will check that and withdraw the amendment if , on reflection , we think we have gone too far .
Finally , we should like a split vote in relation to the adoption of security rules for the EP to leave out the words ' on the basis of a proposal from the Bureau ' which would again push the responsibility back on to the Conference of Presidents .
However we very much appreciate the spirit in which Mrs Maij-Weggen has put this forward and we are grateful for her willingness to look carefully at our amendments .
Parliaments must be transparent .
It is very sad that the more we open our glass-houses , the less people seem to look into them .
The media need to help in this as well .
If this Parliament is to be transparent it must be reported , as well as open .
Mr President , Mrs Maij-Weggen ' s report on public access to Parliament documents is an advance we cannot but support .
The problem is everything that is not included .
The main problem is that the Commission and the Council do not supply Parliament with documents from the phase during which legislation is prepared , and that is , of course , the phase in which people have an interest in participating so as to influence the content of the legislation .
Our rapporteurs and committee chairmen can often get hold of the relevant papers .
Members of the executive can , more often than not , obtain what they need from their political friends in the Commission or the Council ' s delegations , but such documents are not , and will not be , available to all MEPs or to the public .
Nor does the report make any change to the disgraceful framework agreement which the majority of Parliament has entered into with the Commission and which divides MEPs into first and second class Members according to whether or not they have access to confidential information .
It might be relevant to distinguish between rapporteurs and ordinary MEPs , but the distinction is not made according to who has need of the confidential information .
It is all right to impose tough sanctions on MEPs who breach confidentiality , but it is contrary to the principle of equality , and thus unlawful , to regard committee chairmen as especially eligible , while a rapporteur with the same need does not have access in the same way .
Moreover , it is completely insane and contrary to every parliamentary tradition that Parliament ' s Committee on Budgetary Control , the ombudsman and the EU ' s own Court of Auditors are never in a position to check all the documents concerning the Commission ' s discharge of its office .
This , too , is something which Mrs Maij-Weggen ' s otherwise quite excellent report does nothing about .
Nor are those of us who are to approve the enlargement agreements able to obtain the screening reports , even if they do not , in fact , contain anything other than an analysis of the gap between existing EU legislation and the candidate countries ' arrangements for transposing the EU regulations into their own legislation .
This situation will scarcely be changed when the regulation regarding public access to documents comes into force .
We are still in the dark ages when it comes to transparency , but even a small step in the right direction must be endorsed , so it will be the green button I press tomorrow in order to encourage Mrs Hanja Maij-Weggen to continue working for greater openness in the EU .

Mr President , Commissioner Barnier , Mrs Maij-Weggen , Mr Cashman , ladies and gentlemen , if , today , the window of the European Parliament is opened a little wider , as Mr MacCormick has put it , then Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Cashman will have played a great part in it .
Thank you for your commitment and congratulations on the success you have achieved in making us more open .
I certainly do not see myself as groping in the dark , as Mr Bonde put it , but I do think we are on the road towards the light .
Tomorrow 's resolution will also be our invitation to the citizens of the European Union to put our openness to good use , to look in on us , to , if you want to put it that way , take a look at the cards we hold , even to see behind the scenes .
Openness makes little sense , of course , if nobody is interested in the work we do .
We do not wish to complain about the lack of interest on the part of our citizens and voters , but we would like to seriously urge them to avail themselves of this new openness on the part of the European Parliament , as today 's technology makes things conceivable which a few years ago would not have been possible .
With the click of a mouse , they can see the original texts we discuss in this House .
Even if press reports on Europe are sometimes incomplete , the interested citizen can nonetheless look straight in on us with the help of the Internet .
That is an opportunity , and because of it we strongly support this report .
I would have liked to say something to the representative of the Council of Ministers .
Unfortunately , he is not here , but there was not going to be much to say about transparency .
Mr. President , I also wish to congratulate Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Cashman on this second success .
They already deserve our congratulations on their work on the original legislation , Council and Parliament Regulation 1049 / 2001 , where their work was crucial in securing that positive result .
Now they are coming back to translate that into our Rules of Procedure to ensure that our work is transparent .
It is arguable that the European Union is in some ways already more transparent than some of our Member States .
It certainly does not reach the highest standards set by some of our Member States , but we are moving in the right direction , although of course it is still not perfect .
However we will review it in a few years in the light of experience .
Looking at the package of amendments to our Rules of Procedure tabled by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , I can say on behalf of my group that we will support the thrust of what the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has put forward .
We shall listen to the arguments that are being put forward in this debate and then review our position again , but our group is leaning towards accepting Amendment No 14 from the PPE-DE Group , the first half of Amendment No 15 from the Verts / ALE Group , and possibly Amendment No 16 from the Verts / ALE Group .
We are opposed to the second half of Amendment No 15 from the Verts / ALE Group , which is entirely unworkable and would raise a number of practical problems if it were adopted .
As Mr Cashman explained , we question whether Amendment No 17 from the Verts / ALE Group it is admissible , and I welcome the fact that Mr MacCormick was doubtful about that .
I gather it may well be withdrawn and I would welcome that .
That is the position of our group , subject to the arguments we are listening to now .
However , whatever happens to those particular amendments , I am quite confident that there will be a successful outcome in the vote tomorrow .
Mr President , I add my congratulations to Mrs Maij-Weggen for an excellent report .
It is quite clear that Parliament must get its own house in order after the agreements we have had vis-à-vis the Commission .
Access is important but too much lip service is paid to access .
I thought that at the beginning Mr Corbett was being rather congratulatory .
I agree with him that we are moving in the right direction , but we still have a long way to go .
I want to bring to Parliament 's attention the specific problem that the Committee on Petitions is still experiencing with access to documentation .
I know the problem here is largely the Commission , but it impacts on Parliament .
A number of European citizens have petitioned this Parliament about problems with Lloyds of London .
A very detailed questionnaire was sent to the British Government .
Only Members of the Petitions Committee have been allowed to see that questionnaire ; no other Members of Parliament .
Even Members of the Petitions Committee , behind closed doors , are not allowed to have any legal advisers , or political advisers , and are not allowed to take copies .
Nobody in Parliament has been allowed to see the reply from the British Government .
Mr Bolkestein said that he cannot reveal this information because it could be subject to legal action by the Commission against the British Government .
The British Government reply was that they would not let us see it because they regard it as an informal communication at the request of the Petitions Committee by the Commission .
Twenty-one detailed questions to the British Government and the British Government says that it is an informal communication !
We want some clarity here , so that we know precisely what we do and do not have access to .
At present , Members , committees and Parliament itself cannot do their jobs properly because of excessive secrecy .
I would certainly urge that a representative - the chairman of the Petitions Committee - should be on the Interinstitutional Committee so that citizens know that the Members of this Parliament who look after their interests ensure that this secrecy does not go any deeper than it does at present .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for allowing me to speak briefly on behalf of the Commission , about the work that we have done , and I am referring not only to myself and the Commission , but also to Parliament and the Presidency , to bring about the regulation of 30 May .
This is also an important time for you , because Parliament ' s adoption of the report by Mrs Maij-Weggen means that as of 3 December , you will be able to apply the regulation on public access to documents .
The Commission believes that this regulation represents a very significant step forwards in achieving greater transparency and accountability on the part of the institutions towards Europe ' s citizens .
The efforts made by Parliament to ensure that the regulation was adopted within the time limits imposed by the Treaty , a point that I also highlighted during a previous speech , clearly indicates the importance that your institution also attaches to transparency in general , and to the public ' s right of access to documents , in particular .
You will , therefore , allow me to acknowledge and draw attention to the effort made , and to express my gratitude to the Chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , Mr Watson , but also to you , Mrs Maij-Weggen , and to Mr Cashman , who has done a great deal of work with you , Mrs Maij-Weggen , on these issues .
I would also like to tell you that the Commission is finalising a draft decision on the implementation of the regulation of 30 May .
This decision will be adopted during November by the Commission , which will annex it to its own internal Rules of Procedure .
The Commission will also be in a position , therefore , to implement this regulation within the required time limits , and this will guarantee that the public can fully exercise its right to access these documents .
In these circumstances , it is natural for the Commission to pay particular attention to the approach that the European Parliament used to amend its Rules of Procedure .
This approach will be a very useful source of inspiration for the Commission ' s own internal rules , as I think it is important that the institutions follow a similar approach in applying these important rules .
The way they are applied must , of course , respect the spirit of the Rules of Procedure .
This is the main thrust of the message that the Commission wishes to give to you today , whilst we , of course , fully respect your autonomy in how you choose to amend your own rules .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to make a very brief comment about a point that Mrs Maij-Weggen raised in her report , which concerns the framework agreement between our two institutions , and reiterated the different nature of the two acts - firstly , the regulation of 30 May 2001 and secondly , the framework agreement that I have just mentioned .
As far as the Commission is concerned , we believe that there is no obvious incompatibility between these two documents , since Annex III of the framework agreement regulates the forwarding of confidential documents to Parliament which cannot , in any case , be forwarded to the public , due to the exceptions laid down by the regulation of 30 May .
What happens in practice should naturally reflect this legal interpretation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would , however , like to confirm the Commission ' s very clear intention to faithfully apply all the provisions contained in this framework agreement .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Membership of interparliamentary delegations and joint parliamentary committees
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0346 / 2000 ) by Mr Carnero González , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure as regards the setting-up of interparliamentary delegations and joint parliamentary committees .
Mr President , until this current parliamentary term , the standing committees , the interparliamentary delegations and the delegations of the joint parliamentary committees of this House were set up using a uniform procedure : Plenary , at the proposal of the Conference of Presidents , appointed Members , and these , at the inaugural meeting , elected the bureau for each of these bodies .
The reform of the rules introduced as a result of the decision made by this House in plenary at the end of the last parliamentary term changed this situation with regard to the interparliamentary delegations and the delegations in joint parliamentary committees .
From that point on , both were elected and set up in a different way from the standing committees : their bureaux were approved by this House , at the proposal of the Conference of Presidents , which appointed the remainder of its Members .
Proceeding in this fashion , at the start of this fifth parliamentary term , it was noticed that there was a contradiction in Rule 170 .
This Rule stated that the delegations of joint parliamentary committees would be set up in the same way as the standing committees , and , at the same time , it was stated that this would be carried out in accordance with Rule 168 , that had already been amended in the way I previously mentioned .
This gave rise to a contradiction , no doubt caused by an error in this House , which had adopted an oral amendment by simple majority without having removed the reference to the former procedures from the text of the Rules of Procedure .
In order to resolve this contradiction , the Conference of Presidents asked the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to look into the matter .
The report we are debating today is the result of the work carried out by this committee .
It approved this report exactly one year ago , almost unanimously .
I would point out that , for one year , this text has been ' sleeping the sleep of the just ' .
The reasons for this escape me .
In any case it is clear that , during this time , the chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Napolitano , and several coordinators , insisted that it should be included on the agenda of this plenary sitting .
I have the report right here .
The most important thing is that during this period there was time to be able to reflect upon the following : in the first instance , we have to remove the current contradiction in the Rules of Procedure ; this is absolutely crucial if we want to prevent the same doubts we had in July 1999 arising next January .
At the same time , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposed in its report to return to a uniform procedure with regard to the standing committees , the interparliamentary delegations and the delegations of joint parliamentary committees .
It seems that this time used in ' sleeping the sleep of the just ' with regard to this report has been of use for the parliamentary groups to consider that , although it is absolutely necessary to amend the Rules of Procedure to remove this contradiction in Rule 170 , doubts still remain about the need to once again standardise the constitutional procedures of the three bodies in this Parliament that I mentioned at the start of my speech .
I am clear on several points : when dealing with a reform of the Rules of Procedure , two principles should be given priority ; firstly , consensus and secondly , efficiency .
And , whilst we are talking about consensus , it is clear that your rapporteur understands the opinion of the political groups and , therefore , considers that tomorrow we should proceed to remove this contradiction in Rule 170 and leave the procedure for the setting up of interparliamentary delegations and the delegations of joint parliamentary committees as it stands at present .
The second issue is efficiency .
In January we will , once again , have to deal with a new process for setting up these bodies . This should take place quickly , so that they can continue to function as well as they have up until now .
Whilst we are on this subject , I would also like to congratulate , personally , and on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , these interparliamentary delegations and the delegations of joint parliamentary committees .
I would like , if you will allow me , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and its representatives , to insist on a third principle , coherence , which is also always of fundamental importance .
Lastly , Mr President , I would like to remind you of that old proverb which says : ' a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush ' .
Let us resolve this contradiction , which is the most important thing for us to do today .
Mr President , Mr Carnero , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , am glad that the history of this legal contradiction will , it is to be hoped , come to its end for the time being when we adopt Mr Carnero 's report tomorrow .
Thank you very much , Mr Carnero , for the good work you have done , and , also , for finding your way through this apparently very technical material and bringing out the political dimension to the decision we are to take .
In political terms , of course , it is a matter of some significance whether the chairpersons of the joint parliamentary committees and of the interparliamentary delegations are appointed en bloc by this , albeit rather thinned-out , House or whether every single candidate in every single joint parliamentary committee or every single interparliamentary delegation has to be elected or appointed as an individual .
It is , of course , clear that the Rules of Procedure have to provide for a process ensuring political balance in the composition of the delegations and the joint parliamentary committees .
It is likewise clear that the results of that process also have to be implemented and that this , too , can be safeguarded by the Rules of Procedure .
It is also evident , on the other hand , that these important decisions about personnel cannot be completely removed from the plenary .
We must , then , be clear in our own minds that the joint committees and interparliamentary delegations perform duties of a distinctly sensitive nature with respect to our partner countries , and also that the appointment of certain persons to chair these committees can become a political issue , may be seen as discourteous or even taken to be provocative .
It must therefore be possible for this plenary to retain control over who is actually appointed to the offices in question .
We cannot , then , have the situation in which Parliament gives , as it were , carte blanche for the appointment to specific positions , only for the individual groups , or even national delegations within them , to decide at the end of the day who is to be appointed .
Parliament must hold on to its supremacy in this respect .
I believe this also means that it must be ensured that , when we reassemble in January , we at least know the names of the people involved before proceeding to the ballot .
This was not in fact the case at the start of this Parliamentary term .
In the medium term , though , I think we must consider handing over the responsibility to the joint committees and delegations .
That is where the Members sit who know the relationships with the partner countries and their sensitive aspects .
In the long term too , they should also bear responsibility for deciding who should preside over them .
Mr President , this proposed set of amendments to our Rules of Procedure that has been so ably drafted by our rapporteur is intended to resolve a contradiction .
In one sense it is a very simple matter : we either resolve it one way or we resolve it the other way .
In the view of myself and many in my group , it is not absolutely crucial whether it be resolved this way or that .
There are arguments in favour of either solution . Some of these arguments have been put with great clarity in this short debate .
But resolved it must be , one way or the other .
As is so often the case when things are relatively simple , everybody has an opinion and these opinions do not entirely coincide .
Some people have a preference for the solution that has been put forward by the committee . Others prefer the solution that has been tabled in an amendment signed by several political groups .
The vote tomorrow will determine which way we go .
Either way , it is crucial that we settle this tomorrow .
It needs to be sorted out before the constituent sitting in January .
I concur with our rapporteur that it is somewhat of a scandal that this report has been sat on for over a year since it was adopted in the committee and is only coming now , almost at the last minute , to plenary to be settled .
It should have been settled a long time ago .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his patience .
I am glad he was still able to remember the crucial arguments underpinning his report a whole year after he steered it through the committee .
Thank you , Mr Corbett .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Europol - joint investigation teams
Mr President , Commissioner , despite the importance of the initiatives before us , the European Parliament is , on this matter , only being consulted . That means that , as often happens in these cases , the decision we take with our vote will not be taken into any account by the Council .
In spite of this , or rather , especially because of this , I want to focus on the need for urgent reform of Europol , in order to allow democratic and judicial control .
Parliament has been calling for this for at least five years , since the presentation of the Nassauer report in 1996 .
The Nassauer report sent a strong political signal to the Council .
It called upon the Member States not to ratify the Europol Convention until it had been placed under the control of the Court of Justice , that is , until the Court of Justice had been given the necessary decision-making authority over its interpretation and proper implementation .
Mr Nassauer ' s report was exemplary in its handling of the problems encountered by Europol and the Convention , which remain the same today .
Resolution of these problems does not depend on the political groups , the rapporteur or Mr Nassauer : the judicial and democratic control of Europol is an institutional matter .
The refusal to bind up this wound inflicted on European democracy , if we can talk about the system regulating the Union ' s institutions today in these terms , implies that it would be impossible to make any tangible progress in creating an area which is genuinely an area of security , of justice and of freedom but which we feel must be first and foremost an area of democracy .
Since the setting-up of Europol , the European Parliament has pointed out the need to supervise it .
The plan to increase Europol ' s powers to deal with the critical situation with regard to terrorism , the scandal involving a Europol senior official and the reluctance of the national police forces to transmit their data to Europol , as well as the creation of Parlopol - a group of national and European Members of Parliament upholding the importance of increasing democratic control over Europol and its decisions within the area of justice , freedom and security - have already led the Council to reflect at least on the need to introduce some reforms .
Most importantly , the Council requested that the Commission draw up a communication on the democratic control of Europol by the end of the year .
We know the opinion of Commissioner Vitorino , who has stated many times that he considers it appropriate to set up a committee composed of members of the national and European parliaments , but we hope to hear now that the timetable for this reform will be speeded up .
We feel that , in a democratic framework , Europol should be subject to financial , budgetary and judicial control as well as democratic control .
Financial and budgetary control are currently impossible in that Europol is funded by the national States and not by the Community budget ; thus Parliament and the Commission have no power of budgetary or financial control and cannot therefore either criticise or direct the activities of that body .
Judicial control has also been denied . Indeed , the Court of Justice has been denied full powers of judicial control .
We should also note that Europol officials benefit from immunity that is so wide-ranging that it is like a guarantee of impunity , protecting them with regard to the judicial control which can be exercised at national level .
Then there is the problem of the gradual increase in the mandate and powers of Europol .
Although Europol initially dealt with drug-related crime , the act under consideration widens the powers of Europol to what is , in essence , all types of crime .
To enable the European Parliament to express its concerns and requests to the Council and the Commission at a time when they are preparing to take decisions enlarging Europol ' s powers and jurisdiction , we feel that , in addition to the amendments on the two Acts proposed by Belgium and Sweden , other amendments are necessary to resolve this issue .
In our opinion , the amendments tabled may perform the function of clarifying and improving the initiatives under consideration and send the Council and the Member States a clear political message criticising the current situation and proposing several fundamental guidelines for reform .
Lastly , the combination of the factors I have mentioned and the lack of codecision powers conferred on the European Parliament with regard to justice and home affairs must prompt all those who hold dear the principles of democracy and freedom to reject the two initiatives under consideration , for I feel this would make the Council and the Member States more aware of the urgent need to reform Europol .
rapporteur .
Mr President , as you would expect , I will concentrate on my own report , which deals with the establishment of joint investigation teams .
I am very proud to be the rapporteur in an extremely innovative area , which has taken on great importance following the appalling events of 11 September .
It is perhaps all the more important because we are trying to implement Article 13 of the EU Convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters which , although it was signed in May 2000 , looks unlikely to be ratified for some time , making it vital that we have a legal framework in place as quickly as possible so that we can take these matters forward .
Joint investigation teams will allow two or more countries to join together for the purposes of investigating terrorism , human trafficking , drug trafficking and indeed other serious organised crime .
This is an important venture which we must all support .
A joint investigation team will take the talent and ability from different Member States and join them together for a purpose which is clearly defined and with a clear termination date , but in a way which will allow that expertise to work effectively and sharply in dealing with criminality and with bringing criminals to book .
It will be a flexible instrument and one which we have been in need of for some time .
There have been concerns expressed , although not followed up in amendments , about the extent of participation in such teams .
For instance , there have been references to the national criminal intelligence services of Member States .
As a minister responsible in the United Kingdom for setting up our own national criminal intelligence service a few years ago , I am very confident that the make-up of these organisations in Member States is already well addressed .
By giving those setting up the teams the discretion to determine their composition and to express objections when necessary , it seems to me that this point has been tackled very effectively .
Although all the States concerned are signatories to our Human Rights Convention , I have nevertheless asked in this report that we draw particular attention to the need to protect and preserve human rights in the conduct of these teams .
Terrorism is uppermost in our minds at present .
But trafficking in human beings is something else we should be deeply concerned about and something which these teams could perhaps help with .
Only recently it has been revealed in the United Kingdom that there are hundreds , even thousands , of young children who have been sold into the slave trade from other parts of the world and are now in Europe suffering the most appalling treatment .
There has been a case of this nature in the UK , and there has also been a recent case in Italy .
The operation of joint investigation teams , say between Italy and ourselves , or with the participation of the French expertise in this area , would help to bring this sort of appalling offence to an end .
So the report does not concern just terrorism but these other matters too .
Indeed it may also be possible to make a significant impact on a whole complex of issues currently of topical interest comprising fraud , money laundering and economic crime of that kind , if the talents and abilities of specific small teams able to operate in different countries can be brought to bear under the control of a single operation .
There is one further point .
I have made quite clear in my report that it is important that all these operations should be under the clear parliamentary control of the European Parliament .
Within the annual debate on the area of freedom , security and justice , this particular debate should go forward as well .
We should be sure that we consider these operations carefully .
Finally , a lot of sensitive information may emerge as a result of this process .
If something akin to a select committee were perhaps to be established to receive such confidential information , that could also help to boost confidence in the operation of these teams , which are a very important and significant development in crime prevention in the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it was in 1999 , at Tampere , that , for the first time in the history of European integration , the Heads of State and Government of the 15 Member States of the Union put justice-related issues at the top of their political agenda and gave the commitment that an area of freedom , security and justice would be established within a maximum of five years .
One of the Union ' s major objectives is , therefore , to enable its citizens to live in this area of freedom , security and justice , which must be an area in which freedom goes hand in hand with a high level of security , and it is in this framework that the creation and operation of joint investigation teams are being planned .
The call for the rapid creation of joint investigation teams was made at Tampere as the first stage in the fight against trafficking in human beings and drugs and against terrorism .
In the wake of the appalling events of 11 September , this initiative has come to the fore as part of a framework of measures to be adopted in the fight against terrorism and seeks to secure the adoption of a framework decision that will provide a legal framework to enable us to set up joint investigation teams made up of members of the police and judges who are specially trained in the fight against terrorism and of representatives of the Provisional Judicial Cooperation ( Pro-Eurojust ) unit and Europol , in order to coordinate investigations undertaken in this field .
I share the rapporteur , Mr Kirkhope ' s , enthusiasm for this initiative and I congratulate him on the work he has carried out , which seeks to speed up the entry into force of the provisions of the Convention , still not ratified to date , that are considered to be most urgent by the Member States .
I must draw your attention , however , to the need for this Convention to be ratified quickly so as to prevent the risk of any potential fragmentation of this legal mechanism .
Furthermore , we must also welcome the extension of Europol ' s sphere of action to all serious forms of international crime , which are listed in the annex to the Convention , for this will help to make cooperation under the Europol Convention more effective .
Priority areas for action must , nevertheless , be identified according to trends in crime in the Union .
You will all agree that , now more than ever , we must devote particular attention to terrorism .
Mr President , never has there been more need for a stronger Europe to address the issues of citizens ' security and freedom , to implement that area of freedom , security and justice that the Treaty of Amsterdam promised us and the Tampere European Council planned to create .
The momentum to implement the necessary measures has repeatedly faltered in the face of often short-sighted resistance on the part of the governments .
It took the tragedy of 11 September to , at last , shake up a large number of our leaders and substantial impetus has been lent to the adoption of certain necessary measures .
I fervently hope that it will not take more tragedies to set the Tampere process in motion , not least because the laws made under the emotional pressure of inhuman tragedies are not always wise ones .
In these cases , we are sometimes in danger of disregarding the need to safeguard peoples ' fundamental rights .
I am glad to say that the three reports before us do not fall into this trap and I particularly welcome the contributions of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , which tabled amendments improving the proposal .
Mr Kirkhope ' s report calls upon us to support the proposal of four Member States to adopt a framework decision on joint investigation teams , already provided for by the Tampere European Council and the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union , endorsed by Parliament a year ago when it adopted the Di Pietro report .
Therefore , Mr Kirkhope ' s report deserves the widest consensus , not least because it contains amendments improving the proposal with regard to respect for fundamental rights , parliamentary scrutiny and extending the use of joint investigation teams to combat organised crime as well as terrorism and trafficking in drugs and human beings .
Mr Turco ' s reports , as adopted by the Committee on Citizen ' s Freedoms , going against the rapporteur ' s recommendation , move that we should adopt the two proposals on Europol with appropriate amendments .
The first stipulates that Europol ' s mandate may be extended to all serious forms of organised crime already listed in the Annex to the Convention in accordance with the priorities established by the Council upon the proposal of Europol ' s management board .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms ' amendment on the subject moves that this decision should be a qualified majority decision adopted by the Council after it has consulted the European Parliament and obtained the opinion of Eurojust , a body which is particularly experienced in this field .
I am sad to see that , although the Members of the European People ' s Party voted for the motion in committee , they have now changed their minds and feel that Eurojust ' s opinion should not now be taken into consideration . The opinion is certainly not binding but it is certainly very useful , and it would be absurd not to make use of it .
We therefore support the first Turco report , as tabled in committee .
The second Turco report on the transmission of personal data from Europol to third States also warrants full consensus .
I would say that , irrespective of the rapporteur ' s opinion which we have heard today , these proposals should be adopted en masse .
However , I fully agree with what the rapporteur has said , which is also stressed in the amendments adopted in committee .
They firmly reiterate the opinion , often expressed by Parliament , that it is becoming increasingly necessary to communitise the instruments of judicial cooperation and to consolidate the judicial and democratic control of these instruments , which are , in fact , quite vital .
Ladies and gentlemen , our group backs the report by Mr Kirkhope and certainly the words he has spoken this evening .
I believe that the joint investigation teams are a positive step in the fight against all kinds of organised crime .
First of all , in connection with the Turco report , which specifically deals with the two aspects of Europol ' s scope , extending the mandate appears to be a rather pointless exercise if Europol is unable to carry out the mandate properly .
After all , Europol ' s usefulness has so far proved very limited in practice .
Moreover , Europol does indeed work with police and court information but is not involved in any way in the internal security service in practice .
This creates an imbalance and repressive action after the events without sufficient preventive action .
Secondly , with regard to the databases , the call for a decentralised system is justified on account of manageability .
It would therefore be a big step forward if every Member State were to develop such a database .
These initiatives are therefore to be welcomed , but the same cracks seem to be appearing again .
On the one hand , we are relying too heavily on the benevolence , or lack thereof , of the Member States , while on the other hand , there appears to be an evident lack of confidence in democracy , notably parliamentary supervision of this highly important area of policy .
If we are truly concerned about the protection of civil rights and the maintenance of democracy , we must , without delay , build an adequate system based on criminal law that can meet the challenges we are now facing , and invest in a powerful preventive policy .
Internal security services , in particular , have an important role to play here .
The cooperation between the internal security services and the judicial services , in other words , between preventive and repressive action , must be better coordinated as a matter of urgency , with the emphasis placed firmly on the prevention of serious crimes .
Mr President , the European Union , in close collaboration with the United States , has used the terrorist attack on 11 September as a reason to speed up the witch hunt on anyone who stands up to their imperialist plans and preferences .
And Europe , which is being given wider and wider powers , powers which go beyond national laws and constitutional protection for its citizens , is being called on to play the lead role here .
The information collated in the Member States , the well-known files , are now common currency ; joint files are being kept on potential suspects , that is , every one of us , and the distribution list for these files is getting longer and longer .
Joint investigation teams basically have carte blanche , in that they are set up by however many Member States want to , for however long they want , with the involvement of any services they want and for whatever purpose they think fit .
This is an orchestrated attack on grass-roots movements .
They want to extinguish the personal and collective rights and democratic freedoms that workers have fought for .
Unfortunately , not only do the reports make no attempt to put a halt to this anti-grass roots and anti-democratic development ; on the contrary , they incorporate it in an overall reform of the means available for judicial and police assistance .
Mr President , it has never been so appropriate as now , in the wake of the events of 11 September , to establish joint investigation teams to improve cooperation between all the national investigation teams , particularly with a view to enhancing and speeding up that necessary exchange of fresh information between all the information services of the Member States of the European Union .
Clearly , this is a police cooperation tool that will be of truly strategic importance in preventing crime .
It is a vital , useful tool which will help to tackle the critical terrorist situation in Europe in the wake of the severe international crisis caused by the attack on the twin towers .
We have all had the opportunity , although , sadly , only since the New York and Washington carnage , to reconstruct the series of preparations for terrorist attacks made on our own European territory over the years by people and organisations linked to Osama Bin Laden : the many , apparently unimportant signs actually linked by a single thread and whose connection , sadly , we did not realise until it was too late , until after 11 September , when thousands of innocent people had already died .
Clearly , closer judicial and police cooperation involving more joint investigations might well have made us more effective in preventing terrorist crimes .
However , it is worth noting that , in addition to helping us respond to the critical terrorist situation , joint investigation teams would also play a useful general role in helping to fight the many phenomena linked to large-scale organised crime at international level such as the illegal trafficking of arms and drugs and the trafficking and exploitation of human beings .

Mr President , I would like to end by thanking Mr Kirkhope and pointing out that the fight against crime , both terrorism-related and general , has , for years now , been the subject of the most insistent requests from European citizens , who are demanding increasing efforts from the national and European institutions fully guaranteeing the fundamental , inalienable right to safety , that precious thing which is under increasing threat .
Therefore , I look forward to the greatest possible endeavours from the European Union too , making use , not least , of the tool of the joint investigation teams , precisely to restore the necessary confidence of the European citizens .
Mr President , it appears that the Council may have arrived .
If I am not mistaken , someone from the Council has arrived .
Is that so ?
Are you from the Council ?
We don ' t know !
I would ask you not to address the Commission or the Council in a direct or personal fashion .
Any comment of this nature that you wish to make should be made through the Presidency .
Thank you , Mr Cappato .
Mr President , I was , in fact , addressing you in order to ask you whether we have , in effect , been honoured by the arrival of the Council .
I just wanted to point out that the Council was not present at this debate and has arrived only now .
I just wanted everyone to realise , to be aware of the consideration given to Parliament ' s decisions and debates , the translation into 11 languages , the amendments translated into 11 languages , the speeches translated into 11 languages , which serve absolutely no purpose whatsoever .
We are discussing the extension of the European police coordination mandate to include the most serious crimes ; indeed we are aware that the coordination of information is , in itself , an implementing power , and that the distinction between coordination powers and implementing powers is very , very fine , hazy and difficult to define ; we are therefore plumbing the depths of Member States ' police and police cooperation policies .
The implications for our countries and our codes of criminal procedure are huge , for , as we know , procedures vary greatly between the 15 Member States in terms of the relationship between the police and the law and the government .
Well then , all this is taking place without Parliament being given any say whatsoever in the legislative process , the process by which laws are formed , and I would stress , none whatsoever , without any input from democratically elected assemblies .
We know that President Prodi is in favour , yes , of course we do , but we also know that we are sacrificing with a single blow any balance of powers to the urgent , critical need for effectiveness in the fight against crime .
The Council official blithely arrives here at the very end of the debate .
Our speeches and decisions , the votes we take will serve no purpose at all , for Presidency itself has decreed that this and other debates are to be held at the same time as the meeting of the committee responsible , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , which is voting now , at this very moment .
Therefore , the two Non-attached Members and the other three or four Members who are in the Chamber are missing the vote on terrorism and the European arrest warrant because of this decision which , I feel , ties in with the Council ' s decision not to be present during this debate and is typical of the way the European Union legislates .
Mr President , the extension of Europol ' s mandate is not some new issue that has arisen after 11 September .
It is , however , self-evident that , right now , there is a particularly great need for such an extension .
Naturally , we need to exchange information with third countries ' police forces in order to help them combat crime , a fact that was emphasised by an as good as unanimous Parliament when we voted on the report on combating computer-related crime .
There are those who are anxious about Europol ' s being given unduly large resources .
They might like to reflect upon the consequences of Europol ' s having 388 employees to cover a population larger than the United States ' s , while the FBI has 27 000 employees .
There is no comparison at all between the resources involved , nor between the activities concerned .
Europol is not operational .
When information is transferred , it is incredibly important that we should continue to protect data and , as far as possible , to maintain personal privacy .
The human rights we have laid down both in the European Convention and in the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights are a characteristically European feature of which we should be proud and which we should also be sure to maintain .
We must nonetheless beware of creating a Big Brother society .
Just as Mr Turco emphasised , it is therefore important that Parliament be there to exercise its democratic control .
It is quite unreasonable that these issues should be excluded from the structures of the EU and that issues which are so very important to people should be discussed in a largely empty Chamber .
The fact that crime statistics are being gathered is naturally welcome .
There is something not quite right about the fact that the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction in Lisbon gathers a large quantity of statistics concerning drug addiction , while we have little in the way of statistics when it comes to the fight against crime .
Europol naturally has an important role to fulfil in this area .
When it comes to the issue of whether or not Eurojust should be mentioned in this context , it has emerged that many people interpret the wording in terms of a desire to upset the balance of power between the executive and the judiciary .
It should not , of course , be interpreted in that way .
I do not , however , want any misunderstandings to arise concerning this matter .
To avoid misunderstandings , it would therefore be better to change the Eurojust wording .
Finally , I want to thank Mr Turco for having dealt with the Swedish and Belgian initiative so well .
Mr President , the two government initiatives on Europol that we are examining today , the first on the definition of areas of action , the second on the rules on the transmission of personal data , provide the European Parliament with the opportunity to raise a genuine question , which is how to organise democratic control over Europol .
This is a very important question , since police and judicial cooperation and , in particular , the management of analysis files that are kept by Europol , are very closely related to civil liberties .
Today , since Europol is an intergovernmental body , it is controlled by the national parliaments ; first and foremost , by the governments at the Council of Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs or their representatives on Europol ' s management board , and lastly by a supervisory body made up of leading , independent figures .
The relevant parliamentary committee is proposing to completely change this system , even though it has only been in operation since 1999 , and would like to entrust control of Europol solely to Community procedures , in other words , to the European Parliament .
We do not think this proposal is suitable .
We do not consider the European Parliament to be the appropriate institution to undertake the democratic monitoring of sovereign police operations in the Member States , which are carried out by the national services and have implications for the very territory of the Member States .
It would be better to keep an open mind while Europol is just beginning to carry out its work and to give the national parliaments the chance to organise and refine their control .
They are also aware of this need .
For example , in September , the French Parliament imposed a ban on its parliament debating the draft agreements between Europol and Eastern European countries .
It then lifted this ban when it had sufficient guarantees as to the security of the transmission of personal data .
We believe that this is a very positive approach .
It is evidence that there is effective control by the national parliaments .
In order to exercise this control further , the French Senate has also set up an internal specialised working group responsible for investigating issues of police and judicial cooperation .
This is the example we should be following , Mr President , and we should even , without doubt , go further by improving horizontal coordination of the control carried out by the national parliaments .
They should work together in setting up an interparliamentary assembly to monitor Europol and police and judicial cooperation .
Better still , the Intergovernmental Conference , which is due to meet in 2004 and which , in fact , must deal with the role of national parliaments within the European structure , should propose to develop this type of interparliamentary cooperation and turn this into a new pillar of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission considers these three initiatives to be particularly important , especially now , at a time when cooperation not only between Member States but also between the European Union and third countries and international organisations is crucial if we want to combat organised crime and , in particular , terrorism , effectively .
The initiatives we are discussing today are intended to speed up the timetable , to bring forward the time when the Member States will have a Community legal basis for establishing joint investigation teams which , if necessary , could include representatives of third countries or of international organisations , to extend Europol ' s mandate to enable it to deal with a wider range of criminal activities , and also to enable Europol to transmit personal data to third countries and to other organisations effectively . This will undoubtedly be an important factor in ensuring that cooperation with these third countries and with these international organisations is reliable and functions effectively .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the European Parliament supports the draft framework decision on joint investigation teams that Belgium , Spain , France and the United Kingdom have proposed .
We hope that the time saved by allowing Member States to put together such teams will enhance the effectiveness of the fight against transnational crime .
The Commission also welcomes the fact that Parliament has given a positive response to the proposal to extend Europol ' s mandate and to allow the transmission of personal data to third countries and other organisations .
These two initiatives will help to make Europol an organisation which is more effective in the fight against organised crime , a matter which is of increasing concern to the public of the Member States of the European Union .
Mr Turco ' s report raises the issue of the democratic control of Europol with regard to the initiatives in question .
In June this year , I had the opportunity to discuss this issue at the interparliamentary conference organised by the Dutch government in The Hague , which was attended by representatives of practically all national parliaments of the Member States and which Mr Turco also attended .
In light of the discussion that took place on that occasion with the representatives of the national parliaments , the Commission , as provided for in its working programme for this year , is now finalising its communication on the democratic control of Europol , in which it will put forward a number of ideas designed to improve this process .
As you will be aware , this democratic control cannot and must not exclude the irreplaceable role of the national parliaments , specifically with regard to control of their national Europol antennas . Indeed , it must not only enable interparliamentary cooperation with national parliaments , but also provide the added value that comes from Parliament ' s commitment to democratic control so as to ensure that , in this way , through close cooperation between the European Parliament and the national parliaments , we are able to develop an overall picture of how Europol is actually working without losing any elements of the detailed work produced by national parliaments on their own actions to exercise control over Europol .
At the same time , I acknowledge the importance of coordination between Europol and Eurojust and of the role Eurojust should play in relation to the judicial supervision of Europol .
I do feel , however , that it would be preferable to wait for the Council ' s decision , which will determine the final form Eurojust is to take , before we move ahead with solutions on coordination between police and courts at European level .
With regard to extending Europol 's mandate , the Commission takes note of and shares the concerns expressed in the report about the decision-making structure under the Union 's third pillar .
This is indeed slow because priorities tend to change from one presidency to the next , and the role of Parliament itself is limited .
We therefore welcome the fact that the European Parliament has emphasised the need for the situations of organised crime in each Member State to be reflected when priorities are established in the fight against organised crime at European level .
Hence the importance of Member States providing Europol with sufficient , timely information so that it can produce an annual report on the situation of organised crime in the European Union of the required standard .
With regard to the amendments proposed in Parliament ' s report , the Commission might propose that the public version of this annual report be annexed to the report that Europol also submits annually to the European Parliament .
Lastly , with regard to the initiative on the transmission of personal data , the Commission broadly supports the amendments Parliament has proposed .
It shares the opinion that the safeguards for data protection provided today under Article 7 of the 1999 Council Act on data transmitted to third countries and to international organisations , also apply to the transmission of data arising from this Swedish initiative .
Since , in this case , the Swedish initiative only changes Article 5 ( 5 ) of the aforementioned 1999 Council Act , Article 7 , which is the article relevant to this matter , will still apply in full .
Hence my doubts as to whether there is a genuine need for the proposed amendment to Article 7 of the Council Act .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote on this item will take place tomorrow at noon .
Extradition between Member States ( 1995 and 1996 Conventions - Schengen Acquis )
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0371 / 2001 ) by Mr Marinho , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on an Initiative of the Kingdom of Sweden with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision determining which provisions of the 1995 Convention on simplified extradition procedure between the Member States of the European Union and of the 1996 Convention relating to extradition between the Member States of the European Union constitute developments of the Schengen acquis in accordance with the Agreement concerning the Republic of Iceland 's and the Kingdom of Norway 's association with the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis .
Mr President , Commissioner , curiously , two European States that have never been members of the European Union , Norway and Iceland , were the first to establish , on a regional basis , an area for the free movement of persons .
Towards the end of 1957 , through the Nordic Passport Union , Denmark , Sweden , Finland , Norway and Iceland , five European States , opened their borders to people while another six sketched out a common market , giving priority to the movement of goods in a Customs Union .
The two groups of States chose to take quite different routes : the first establishing EFTA , and the second aiming for a Europe that would be united in more than just economic terms .
Fortunately , the project embodied by the Six , which are today Fifteen and will soon be almost double that , although the more ambitious and complex of the two , has proved to be more than just a facilitator of free trade or of border crossing .
It has proved to be attractive to many of the founders of the Nordic institutions and , for that very reason , our report attempts to make sense of the contradictions and the chance events of history , by integrating Norway and Iceland into the Schengen area and , most importantly , in the case of the Swedish initiative , into the European Union ' s area of freedom , security and justice .
Thus , this Swedish initiative extends the Union ' s area of free movement beyond the official geographical borders of Europe , with the corresponding consequences for the legal and judicial sphere , making Norway and Iceland countries in which the common rules on extradition contained in the Schengen acquis will apply .
Who could have imagined , 45 years ago , that this would be possible ?
Underpinning this historical development , or rather , this need , which implies new requirements and commitments , and thereby changes Europe and requires it to make progress , is the certainty that the Tampere programme , which involves moving from the intergovernmental method to the Community method , will lead to the communitisation of judicial cooperation , because this is what the governments of the Fifteen wanted , because the work of the Commission and of Commissioner Vitorino must not be betrayed by ongoing hesitancy on the grounds of sovereignty and , most importantly , because the situation today requires Europe to have a legal and criminal protection system that serves as the primary instrument for combating international and cross-border crime .

The real difference , which should make us proud to be Europeans , does not lie in our military arsenal but in the quality of the new European laws that we in this House are helping , or will help to construct . These laws will have the power to reconcile deterrence and respect for freedoms without attacking the philosophical and cultural differences that shape the criminal law of any Member State .
The European arrest warrant , based on the principle of mutual recognition of national court sentences , is , in the form proposed by Commissioner Vitorino , an example we should follow when considering the other aspects of Tampere , particularly the harmonisation of criminal law .
For all of these reasons , I hope that this Swedish initiative , which we welcome as timely and necessary , rapidly becomes obsolete , having been superseded by effective Community law , specifically on the arrest warrant , eliminating the two Union conventions , which were , admittedly , well-intentioned , but of limited effect .
The idea is that these will be replaced by the mutual recognition of court sentences and the simple transfer of persons guilty of committing crimes , a step , Commissioner , which will create a single European area for extradition .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will first thank the rapporteur , who has analysed this very technical report with great expertise and proposed a range of editorial amendments that we can all support .
We , likewise , welcome and support the Swedish initiative , which is before us now , to further develop the Schengen acquis .
Some parts of it have , however , already been overtaken by reality , as the breakneck speed of developments in European internal affairs and justice policy since the terrorist attacks on 11 September might well have made this report and this submission largely obsolete , at least as regards extradition policy .
Thus , the Council of Ministers of Internal Affairs and of Justice , on 20 September , had already set in motion a simpler procedure for handing over criminals and for the mutual recognition of court judgments .
We welcome the fact that there is broad European agreement on criminal law and criminal procedure as well .
This will lead to better combating of crime on our continent and promote the Community legal area .
This being so , I could save myself further great speeches on the Swedish initiative , as Mr Marinho has already made the main points .
I would , though , like to enlarge on one point , namely that the provisions of the 1995 EU Agreement on simplified extradition procedures and the 1996 EU Agreement on extradition between Member States are , according to this proposal , to be extended to Iceland and Norway as a further development of the Schengen acquis .
So far , so good .
Yet , out of Belgium , France , Ireland , Italy , Luxembourg and England , none have , to date , ratified one of these agreements .
This is especially scandalous in view of the candidate states having undertaken to accept the Schengen acquis .
The Member States must at last become aware of their need to set an example , specifically as regards the transposition and ratification of EU acts .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Marinho on his excellent work on this report and say that we are all aware of how sensitive and how incontrovertibly important issues such as asylum policy , measures to combat crime , the improvement of external border controls and the fight against terrorism are for the Member States .
Nevertheless , I would say that we also all understand now that common problems require common solutions , that to resolve them effectively and coherently , apart from the national dimension , the necessary European dimension must also be in place .
The main objectives of police and judicial cooperation on criminal matters in the European Union are the fight against transnational organised crime and the approximation of legal and statutory provisions .
Nevertheless , in the field of judicial cooperation , Schengen has concentrated its efforts on ensuring that requests for extradition are rapidly dealt with by means of the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) .
The Swedish initiative that we are considering today does not contain , as Mr Marinho has already stated , major substantive provisions , specifically in the field of extradition , and seeks mainly to clarify the relationship between the various positions on extradition at European Union level and involve Iceland and Norway in the implementation of these provisions .
It is crucial that we make the area of justice and security in Europe a reality .
The events of 11 September clearly demonstrate the need to conduct the fight against terrorism not only by military means , but also with judicial instruments .
It is also worth pointing out that the European Union ' s strategy for the beginning of the new millennium , the prevention and control of organised crime , already envisaged the possibility of a single legal area for extradition being created at European level .
The events of 11 September only reinforced the urgency and the need for such a decision .
This is why the Justice and Home Affairs Council took the decision , on 20 September , as part of its objective of combating terrorism , to replace the extradition process within the Union with a simple process of handing over the perpetrators of such crimes , which will render obsolete all laws on extradition currently in force , as has already been stated , and will involve the removal and replacement of the two conventions on extradition through the mutual recognition of court sentences and through simply handing over the perpetrator of the crime , thereby creating the single European area for extradition , the need for which we also wish to highlight .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission ' s job has been greatly simplified in this debate , because it needs only to fully agree with the speech by Mr Marinho , whom I should like to congratulate on his excellent report .
I simply wish to add that , in the view of the Commission , this initiative by Sweden is important and useful because it clarifies that the laws on extradition contained in the 1995 and 1996 conventions can be integrated into the Schengen acquis , an idea that has important consequences , particularly in light of the decisions that Mr Coelho has just mentioned and which were adopted by the Council of Justice and Home Affairs on 20 September .
Completely replacing the rules on extradition within the European Union with the mechanism of the European search and arrest warrant will have an effect on the Schengen acquis and must also be reflected in the workings of the Schengen Convention .
Furthermore , for this very reason , because our aim is to replace the 1995 and 1996 conventions , the issue must also be raised of extending the European search and arrest warrant to cover Norway and Iceland once the mandate is adopted by the Council , which I hope will happen on 6 and 7 December .
This debate is , therefore , not pointless ; it is one step forwards , one step on the path that we hope will lead to approval by the Council of Justice and Home Affairs of the European search and arrest warrant , in order to consolidate the area of freedom , security and justice in the field of protecting fundamental rights and of combating transnational organised crime , especially terrorism .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Electronic communications ( processing of personal data and protection of privacy )
The next item is the debate on the second report ( A5-0374 / 2001 ) by Mr Cappato , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector .
Here we are again , Mr President , and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs is still voting on terrorism . Never mind .
Second attempt : privacy in the electronic communications sector .
I seem to remember that , last time , this House failed in its attempt to adopt a majority position because the two proposals made on the issue of unsolicited commercial e-mails - the proposal for compulsory European opt-in and the proposal allowing Member States the freedom to choose whether to opt in or opt out - as well as a joint proposal presented to the Members , too late in my view , cancelled each other out .
The three proposals , therefore , cancelled each other out .
Now , however , I feel that Parliament is , at last , ready to take a decision on this point , since the position of the Parliamentary Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights leaving the Member States the freedom to choose and the position of the Commission , compulsory European opt-in , have both been tempered , so to speak , and have become more reconciled in that the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights has taken into consideration the concerns relating to voice mail , in particular , and , on the other hand , the position advocating the introduction opting in , making an initial binding choice , at European level has taken into consideration the need to communicate with existing clients of a particular company or business .
I hope that the Members and the groups , in particular , will be able to decide between these two alternatives without getting confused at the last minute .
Parliament will have the opportunity to choose between these two alternatives .
In my opinion , and I would like to make this quite clear , there is not enough information or evidence showing that the countries operating the opt-in system are better equipped to fight spamming .
Internet spamming is illegal in any case , because it is already illegal to collect addresses without authorisation , it is already illegal to use them without authorisation , it is already illegal to send messages without clearly specifying the sender and it is already illegal to send messages without making it possible for the recipients to delete their details easily from the lists .
On the other hand , making opting in compulsory is not without risks either , in terms , for example , of freedom of communication .
It is no accident that the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights has been cautious on this matter .
There are , in fact , groups of non-governmental organisations which have expressed their concern at the possibility , for example , of Internet campaigns being used to raise funds .
I feel that this debate , this legislation , has now already been made obsolete by technology and practical facts .
It appears that consumers now already have the facility to choose , themselves , individually , between an opt-in or opt-out system , without having to contact the sender of the message before deleting their details from the lists but simply placing the address of the sender in question on a black list so that they no longer have to receive messages from that sender .
However , in view of the fact that six years have passed since the adoption of the General Data Protection Directive and many of the Member States have still not ratified it , that four years have passed since the adoption of the directive to be amended by this proposal for a directive and that many of the Member States have not even applied the ' 97 directive , it is reasonable to predict , given these time frames , that this legislation will also take who knows , maybe three , four or five years to enter into force .
If , in three , four or five years ' time , consumers and users really feel the need to be protected against unsolicited commercial e-mails , the market and technology will make the systems already available today even more simple .
It would be a shame , however , if , after displaying this great , understandable concern about the nuisance caused by unsolicited commercial e-mails , we prepared , on the other hand , to give national police authorities full access to our personal data whenever they want it .
This is not purely a problem of this directive : it is a more general political problem . I realise this .
I fear that this is the direction in which we are heading and that the citizens ' greatest privacy concerns are not caused by the prospect of receiving a few more or less unsolicited commercial e-mails .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have already voted once on this report .
Now , at second reading stage , all we have to do is find a solution to the opt-in / opt-out problem .
I will therefore be speaking only about that .
Looking at the various proposals currently before Parliament reveals , in my opinion , that they are different kinds of opt-out proposals .
Only the Commission 's document would mean a real opting-in .
This means , then , that only the Commission 's proposal would guarantee that citizens would themselves be able to say that they wanted ' spamming ' , that is to say , to receive electronic advertising , or that they wanted to have the option of consistently refusing it .
All other options , that is , the various proposed opt-outs , do not , in my judgment , guarantee this .
So I cannot be greatly satisfied with what is offered here as a compromise , and I believe that , to live up to the title of this proposal , a text with some bearing on data protection would have to be passed , in which case you have no option but to take the Commission 's line , support this proposal , and reject the other proposals that have been submitted to Parliament .
Nevertheless , I am in fundamental agreement with much of this report and find many of the points addressed in it sensible .
But that was voted on at the last session .
Now , it is just about the opting out and opting in .
I think that , if we are talking in terms of data protection , we have to support the Commission 's proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow we will be voting on the Cappato report for the second time .
Our positions have moved closer , without , however , becoming identical .
So the rapporteur has taken misgivings on the left of this House into account , in that the consumer 's consent will in future be required for the sending of SMS advertising .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has accepted by a substantial majority the so-called soft opt-out compromise supported by the rapporteur .
This proposal alone defends the interests of consumers without doing away with European jobs on a massive scale .
Why ?
If Parliament were to generally prohibit business-to-customer advertising from the outset , as Mrs Paciotti 's proposal would have it , businesses would simply send their advertising material into the European Union from the USA or other third States .
The European consumer would have gained nothing , absolutely nothing , and the only effect would be to weaken the European e-business market .
We therefore want to let those states that at present have an opt-out system retain it , keep an eye on developments and come to a new decision after two years .
At the same time , the Cappato proposal takes three steps to protect the consumer .
First , the consumer can put his name on what is termed a ' Robinson list ' , so that advertising material may not generally be sent to him .
Secondly , the consumer can , simply and without charge , indicate his wish not to receive e-mail advertising from specific companies .
Thirdly , e-mail advertising will be easily recognisable as such in the inbox and will be able to be deleted simply and without cost .
This last option is already available from providers such as AOL - I am sure Mr van Velzen is about to point that out - but this does not put AOL in a monopolistic position .
Such an assertion is complete nonsense , as anyone can already download from the Internet a spam recognition program of this sort , no matter what Internet Service Provider he has a contract with for everything else .
By the way , AOL was itself opposed to such a regulation .
So I would ask you to support Mr Cappato 's proposed compromise by a significant majority .
Mr President , the return of this file to committee has certainly made the positions clearer , but I feel it has not improved the result : it fact it has , to some extent , had quite the opposite effect .
Indeed , last time it voted , the European Parliament had the wisdom to accept the Commission ' s proposal at least on the point relating to electronic directories , thereby ensuring that each of us is free to choose whether to be included in a public directory .
Thus , the decision , which I consider to be a mistake and damaging not just in terms of freedom but of the very development of electronic commerce as well , to allow the sending of unwanted messages while leaving recipients the option to complain and request not to be sent any more , appeared to be less harmful too .
By refusing the proposal for opting into public directories for everybody , without even making an exception for mobile phones , we are all placing ourselves at the mercy of all kinds of annoying petitioners and solicitors .
We do not even have the protection that once existed in the days when there were only fixed telephones and printed directories .
In those days , we could protect ourselves effectively by becoming ex-directory or changing our telephone numbers .
Nowadays , when every public directory ends up on the Internet , we have no way of protecting ourselves .
We can ask for our phone number or e-mail address to be deleted but it is no use !
By now , it is in the hands of users and parties who cannot be traced .
Therefore , deciding to amend Article 12 of the directive would really appear not to benefit us in terms of freedom and , quite frankly , I fail to understand how we can give freedom of advertising precedence over individual freedoms .
As far as unsolicited messages , as mentioned in Article 13 of the directive , are concerned , giving the Member States the choice takes away the usefulness of the directive itself in view of the need for harmonisation .
Quite frankly , I cannot believe that all this will benefit electronic commerce .
In fact , I feel that , as well as people such as our rapporteur , who is expert at using electronic tools , there are also still many , many citizens like myself who have little aptitude for such tools and are therefore concerned .
To be honest , I can promise you that I will not be sending requests to any businesses and I will not open any messages for fear that what currently happens to me will continue , even though I am protected in my country , namely that my provider , no less , which has of necessity to know my address , constantly sends me unwanted communications and so , alas , does an airline which I once made the mistake of emailing .
I therefore feel that , until I am protected - I am speaking on my own behalf but there are also many other people , older people like myself or people who have less expertise than many young people - I will do without electronic commerce , because it is not something in which I have confidence .
The idea of being in a directory which is accessible throughout the entire Internet , of receiving messages and then requesting that they be deleted , of having to open them first , of having to try and understand these tools , does not inspire me with confidence .
It may be that as electronic commerce develops , it will provide greater protection , but it does need to develop first .
We must start by allowing electronic commerce to develop , but in order to do so we need to have confidence in it , and this proposal does not inspire that confidence .
Mr President , it is not often that I completely agree with my colleague in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , Mr von Boetticher , but this time I agree with him that we need a national choice regime to allow opt-out on e-mails and I am speaking against the socialist amendments .
There is one great myth that has gripped the Left and that is that spam is the same as unsolicited e-mail .
I am afraid to say , Commissioner , that the Commission is at the root of this confusion .
In your original proposal you said that spam equals unsolicited e-mails .
It is not true .
I am afraid the spammers who are already breaking the law are going to carry on breaking the law .
Mrs Paciotti , you will continue to get spam !
I support the opt-out on two grounds .
The first is that opt-in will unjustifiably harm both business and charities .
Big American firms can afford TV advertising , press , billboard and so on .
We are going to damage small- and medium-sized European firms for whom commercial e-mail provides a legitimate way into e-commerce .
It is going to put them at a disadvantage .
It is going to put charities at a disadvantage and studies show that people do not mind receiving them .
They will not opt out even if they could .
But of course it is human nature not to opt in to get them .
There is also a misunderstanding about the civil liberties implications .
Under opt-out , it is very easy to show that you have opted out and reputable senders have no interest in ignoring your request because they will just irritate you .
Opt-in is superficially pro-consumer , but you would have to prove that you never opted in , which is actually more difficult .
Finally , under an opt-in regime , people might opt to receive mailings from organisations that could be embarrassing for them , such as gay organisations when they did not wish to come out , or they could be open to malicious abuse .
If they opted in to get mailings from subversive political movements they could find themselves attracting unwarranted surveillance from the police , for instance .
The Left has got it wrong and for once Mr von Boetticher is right .
Mr President , although in my view , national legislation is preferable to European legislation in most cases , this is different in this report .
In the case of direct marketing by e-mail , this is clearly a matter with cross-border implications .
I do not call for a complete ban on direct marketing by e-mail , but it is of the utmost importance for consumers to be given the choice beforehand whether they want to deal with this kind of direct marketing and for them to grant their approval or not , as the case may be .
After all , that saves them a great deal of time , money and bother .
Rapporteur Cappato suggests leaving the choice of opting in or out to the Member States .
However , that would produce an incoherent European policy .
A Member State that has chosen in favour of opting in will experience many difficulties in countering unwanted e-mails , if Member States that have chosen in favour of opting out do permit them .
If European policy is divided and fragmented , the chances of establishing international agreements concerning unwanted e-mails are as good as non-existent .
The problem is that businesses can easily side-step European rules from countries outside the European Union .
This should not stop us from drafting legislation at European level .
It is preferable to look for practical solutions to these problems and to work on international agreements .
In that way , you and I will not be faced with e-mails from businesses which we do not need at all .
Mr President , allow me to say straight away that although I represent a minority position , I am very proud of it .
I have the ' Automatiseringsgids ' of a famous Dutch newspaper , in front of me .
On behalf of all my fellow MEPs who want to learn from technology neutrality , it might be useful to read out a few quotes from it .
NTT DoCoMo earmarks USD 8.2 million to control unsolicited e-mails on mobile phones .
The e-mail addresses of NTT DoCoMo mobile phones are based on the phones ' telephone numbers .
That enables all kinds of advertising agencies and dating agencies to advertise their services by sending messages to randomly generated numbers .
The article also states that in Japan , the receiver of the text message contributes towards the cost of sending it .
This might be food for thought for all those people who claim that the proposal of Amendment No 35 by Mr Cappato is technology-neutral .
It clearly is not , for as soon as one is faced with UMTS , the difference between e-mail and SMS fades into the background , with all the consequences that this entails .
That is why it is much preferable to talk about electronic communications , as is done in Amendment No 44 .
That is , in fact , the final step which rapporteur Cappato should have taken in order to put an excellent proposal before us .
Let us be very aware that citizens are not all computer-illiterate .
Despite this , they are saddled with most problems .
If we were to adopt the proposal of Amendment No 35 by Mr Cappato to change e-mail services of this kind , the entire computer system would need to be changed .
Indeed , we would then need to change over from the POP 3 system , which nearly everyone in Europe has , to the e-map system which is offered by only one American provider .
However , if that were the case , the Commissioner would immediately receive a complaint about the lack of competition in Europe .
That is another reason why I believe it should not be done .
I therefore propose approving the Cappato report but also improving on it further by voting in favour of Amendment No 44 instead of Amendment No 35 .
Mr President , unusually for me I can stand here and say that virtually everything has been said .
I agree with Mr von Boetticher and Mr Cappato and especially with Baroness Ludford .
We are all members of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs ; we have adopted a position and we have not rushed into it just because we have been bullied and lobbied on the Internet and via the fax machines that are in all our offices .
We have to be very careful about legislating on the hoof .
I have to say to the Commission that what it is proposing is wrong and hurried .
In 2003 we will have a very good opportunity , in the e-commerce directive , to gather the information and the wisdom obtained from those Member States which have chosen either to opt in or to opt out .
We must only propose and adopt legislation on the basis of good counsel and good experience .
We must never underestimate the civil liberties implications to which Baroness Ludford has rightly alerted this House .
At this time , when we perhaps are being a little over-assertive with some of the legislation we are bringing forward , I do not want anyone to have to confirm why they have opted to receive , for instance , Ammunition Weekly or why they have chosen to get some information from Amnesty International .
The Internet has freed people from dictatorships and oppressors , and yet here we are introducing a kind of censorship by the back door .
It is wrong and ill-informed .
The Commissioner may shake his head and smile , but does he want to have to explain to a government agency or some other agency why he has chosen to opt in ?
That is not freedom : that is being answerable for using a service that is intended to free you .
On the issue of the right of privacy : we all have the right of privacy , but that right cannot be imposed on individuals .
Individuals choose the right of privacy and then legislation backs it up .
On the matter of unsolicited commercial e-mail : not all UCE is spam .
Here again the Commission has played right into the hands of those who want to drive jobs out of the EU and who pretend that , just because the EU is imposing a ban on sending UCEs within its territory , such a ban will be respected by people in Japan , the Philippines , the USA or anywhere else .
Finally , on spamming , I myself have been spammed .
My name has been put on various lists and the spam comes in .
That has been done by individuals who have opted me in to the lists held by the spammers .
I have a very good option : I have a filter , I have a delete button .
We must encourage people to use the technology and stop being their nannies .
Please support the Cappato report , as amended .
Mr President , tonight British Members from three different political parties and other colleagues are going to be in agreement , which is a rare occurrence .
I am not a member of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , but I particularly want to commend Mr Cappato and colleagues here tonight for their courageous stand in amending the Commission 's original proposal .
I was sorry that we did not uphold all of Mr Cappato 's report last time .
This compromise has all the hallmarks of a compromise .
In other words it is not terribly satisfactory but at least it is better than the original proposal from the Commission , and the amendment by the Socialist Group which I hope will not be supported tomorrow .
We have to consider this essentially a transitional piece of work .
I think everyone here tonight is working on legislation in the electronic age .
I have worked on the e-commerce directive , the copyright directive and we are working on the electronic communications bills .
What is quite clear is the immense pace and change of technology and the reconstruction of markets that is going on all the time .
As a number of colleagues have said tonight , the world of electronic communications is offering immense benefits to the citizens , whether it is in their own personal access to charities or political parties or in the marketplace .
What some colleagues want to do , is to shut that down .
Clearly we cannot do that because it operates on a global level .
That is where the spam is coming from .
So we have promised something to our citizens we cannot deliver .
Clearly we have to work towards a global solution that will be driven by technology .
We want a global format that will allow people to tag their e-mail messages by sender and by subject .
We can have the technology to give people complete control .
If we adopt this proposal and pass this amendment , we will be walking away from the opportunity to create the right environment so that people can really benefit from the immense power of the new communications world .
The Commission has already expressed its position on the amendments that were adopted on 6 September .
I am tempted to go back to that debate , but I want to be brief and concentrate on the essential question about unsolicited e-mail .
I would just like to point out that the Commission cannot support Amendments Nos 16 , 25 and 34 that were rejected by Parliament on 6 September and are now resubmitted to the vote .
The Commission can support the new Amendment No 43 on itemised bills .
I will now focus on what has turned out to be the single most important topic in the debate on the proposed directive , namely unsolicited e-mail .
This House has been discussing the question of opting in or opting out for several years now and the result of the vote on 6 September showed how difficult it still is to find a compromise solution that is acceptable to a broad majority .
However we cannot hesitate for much longer , we need to decide .
We have not hurried this decision .
There has been huge public international debate with industry , with scientists , with lawyers .
I have myself participated in intensive debates in the United States and in Europe on this issue .
I strongly disagree that asking a person whether they wish to opt in before you can bill them is a restriction on civil liberties .
That is completely illogical .
We can disagree on the details , but if people are asked to pay , they should have a choice beforehand , not afterwards .
We should no longer be thinking mainly about messages arriving at a PC on our desk .
We should be thinking about the future .
Technology is changing rapidly .
The wireless Internet will be different from the Internet available only on desktops .
The positive point about the proposal made by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms in Amendment No 33 is that it recognises that unsolicited commercial messages to mobile phones are a real problem which can only be addressed by a harmonised opt-in approach .
I fully agree .
However , the flaw in that proposal is that it is based on the assumption that a mobile terminal can only receive SMS messages .
Unfortunately that is no longer true .
You can already receive e-mail messages on mobile devices which are connected to the Internet .
If you want to test that I can give you good examples .
And with convergence it is very clear that SMS will certainly merge with other electronic messaging systems .
The sender cannot know whether a message will be received on a mobile or fixed terminal because of the convergence .
That is a technological fact .
Banning unsolicited commercial SMS messages while allowing unsolicited electronic messages based on other technologies is therefore not a workable solution .
Another problem I have with Amendment No 35 is the technologically biased approach in paragraph 4 . This paragraph apparently tries to address the problem of cost for users but the solution proposed is not a good one .
European ISPs tell us that the technology of viewing the subject line before downloading a message is not compatible with the majority of systems used in Europe today .
It would require substantial investment ; it would be costly for the industry to introduce this feature and this does not seem justified when it is only a halfway solution .
In short , apart from not being compatible with the single market , Amendment No 35 does not meet the need for technology-neutral and future-proof legislation .
Amendment No 44 , on the other hand represents a technology-neutral compromise solution and has the merit of being a fully harmonised EU approach to unsolicited commercial e-mail .
In paragraph 2 of this amendment a rather substantial exemption from the opt-in principle is made for e-mail addresses obtained within existing customer relationships .
Here an opt-out approach would continue to be allowed , although this will mean an important concession as compared with the original Commission proposal .
The exception can be justified because in the context of an existing customer relationship , companies have a lot to lose and are more likely to use marketing instruments with consideration .
We should look at the future challenges . It is interesting to see what is happening in Japan today , where the wireless Internet has already taken off successfully .
Nevertheless , the operator is facing a serious problem .
It estimates that 85 % of the 950 million messages sent daily to mobile devices are unsolicited commercial messages to mobile numbers chosen at random .
This is causing a huge problem for network capacity , especially since most of these messages are addressed incorrectly and cannot be delivered .
Moreover , it greatly annoys users who have to work their way through great quantities of unwanted commercial messages .
The cost of purging the system of junk mail is estimated to be more than USD 8.2 million .
So if we want to create a positive environment for the development of electronic commerce and third generation mobile services , now is the time to make sure that the uptake of wireless Internet services is not hampered by huge amounts of junk mail which the consumer is paying for against his will .
Valuable capacity within networks and in battery-dependent mobile terminals must be available for communications , messages and services that users really want to receive .
Amendment No 44 is most likely to achieve that purpose .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
European films
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0351 / 2001 ) by Mr Vander Taelen , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on achieving better circulation of European films in the internal market and the candidate countries .
Mr President , I rise to speak in place of Ruth Hieronymi , who actually should have been speaking , but is unfortunately unwell .
I am very glad to be able to do so , and congratulate the rapporteur .
It is not that often that we have somebody speaking here who is as knowledgeable about his subject as is Mr Vander Taelen , who is a film-maker himself .
So , well done , my dear Mr Vander Taelen .
I think your report really does provide much needed impetus .
As you said , the market share of European films in the cinemas of the European Union is at an historic low point of only 22.5 % .
The dominance of the American film industry is also reflected in the grossly excessive trade deficit of EUR 6.8 billion .
The situation in the acceding countries is even more dramatic .
There is another problem , apart from the clear dominance of films from the USA , which we must not draw a veil over .
We often talk in this House of our desire to promote European films , but many are thinking only of their own national film industry and not of their neighbour 's , whose films , European films , are not seen in neighbouring regions often enough .
The Commission and the Council as well , must , as a matter of urgency , at last produce a plan to make the European film industry competitive .
This is also a sector in which there is money to be made , as the Americans show us .
Perhaps the powers-that-be will eventually wake up and do more here .
The central deficits are in the distribution and marketing of our films and , of course , the industry is chronically undercapitalised .
I am therefore very glad that we , Parliament , Commission and Council together , have , in the Media-Plus programme above all , got to grips with the twin areas of marketing and distribution and are endeavouring to give help .
I am , of course , also glad that , at the Commissioner 's suggestion , the European Investment Bank is also willing to do something about this by making risk capital available for the realisation of audiovisual projects .
I believe , then , that we have given a lot of things a push in this area , but can do still more .
I also find it a good thing that we are achieving tax breaks at the level of the Member States , and that we can do something to enable filmmakers from one country to get resources and help from another .
That , then , is possible .
I think this could also be used in the framework of the i2i initiative to promote investment in the infrastructure of independent cinemas , as we propose in this report .
I believe that the extension of cinemas in economically weaker regions in the framework of the European Structural Fund can be helpful .
There is a lot more that I could say .
I am not entirely in agreement with item 7 , in which the call is made for television broadcasters to be obliged to reserve a certain proportion of transmission time for foreign films .
That , of course , meets with great resistance from the broadcasters .
We will discuss that when examining the ' Television without Frontiers ' directive and will perhaps find a way through .
Again , congratulations !
Mr President , I have to admit that I envy Mr Vander Taelen ; not only does his report contain very meaningful conclusions , thanks to his remarkable knowledge of the film industry , but he also has tremendous vision and has tabled very specific proposals as to what we should do , what policy we should apply in connection with European films .
I think that this is an exemplary report in which the economy and culture are perceived in a highly coherent manner , to the benefit of both .
The committee naturally agreed that European films are an educational and cultural vehicle and have a huge impact on the social and aesthetic values of the European public .
I see it as a noble industry which has nourished generations of cinema goers and to which we have no hesitation in entrusting our children so that they can learn about the past and acquire a penetrating and analytical perception of the society in which we live and intuition about what will happen in the future .
We love European films ; we each of us in our own countries love the national films which have marked out our lives , but we all agree that American films are stealing the show .
Consequently , we need to bring about a reversal , to ensure that European films take the place they deserve , and this will only happen if we implement a series of measures , as proposed in the report , all of which , I think , are essential if we really want European films to live up to our expectations in the next decade .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to thank Mr Vander Taelen for his sterling report .
I fully subscribe to his view that it is sheer madness to think that we produce excellent films in Europe , while only 22 % of those end up in cinemas , not to mention the percentage of non-national films that are being shown in the Member States , despite the fact that for people of all ages , film is the ideal medium to get to know each other ' s culture .
Why is it that European film attracts such a small audience , while the cinema-viewing public is on the increase ?
It seems appropriate to me to commission the European Audiovisual Observatory to carry out an in-depth study into the motives of the film public and its film choices .
Based on this , it would then be possible to use a programme such as Media Plus to support the distribution of the European film in a more focused and effective manner .
In addition , the other media play an important role in the promotion of European film , of course .
Radio and television may devote attention to it , but television in particular could do so in a more structured way by means of a fixed amount , or quota , in other words , of transmission time .
An alternative example might be specific European channels which specialise in one particular field , for example , a pan-European children ' s channel which broadcasts high-quality European children ' s programmes and children ' s films .
Unfortunately , I am not of the same mind as Mr Vander Taelen when he states that it should be compulsory for TV channels to invest a proportion of their turnover in the film industry .
As a Liberal , and also on behalf of my group , that is excessive intervention from the powers that be .
As has been stated before , it seems to me that the European Investment Bank has a role to play in this .
One of the areas in which investments must be made is e-cinema .
Among other things , it will enable producers to make different language versions of their films in a more straight-forward manner , which will certainly benefit children ' s films , for example .
After all , although we insist on a sound command of languages here in this House , the supply of adapted language versions would be another excellent way for the citizens of a Member State to get to know the culture of their European fellow citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that the report by Mr Vander Taelen has come just when it is needed .
It reminds me of when we arrived in Parliament two and a half years ago .
I realised that , in the space of two and a half years , by the autumn of 2001 , we have gained the commitment of the European Investment Bank , the balance proposed by the Commission for state aid , the recognition of state aid , and now the report by Mr Vander Taelen is telling us that we must circulate films .
That is what I mean when I say it has come just when it is needed .
It has come just at the right moment to give great support to the audiovisual industry and to the cinema tradition , which we must highlight and which I see as a new development .
I would like us to get to grips with this , because we speak a great deal about cultural diversity , but tell me , please , what is cultural diversity if you do not circulate works ?
If cultural diversity means to strengthen each specific characteristic within another specific characteristic , we will not gain anything in terms of diversity , in the way that we want to here in Europe .
It is therefore essential and necessary to circulate films .
In order to illustrate how important this is , I would first of all like to thank Mr Vander Taelen , and also to express my regret that one of his amendments , and not everyone agrees on this , since it was not reviewed by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , that one of his amendments , proposing that coercive measures be used to ensure the circulation of films , was not adopted .
We therefore reached an agreement on undertaking a feasibility study into this circulation .
That is all very well , it sounds good .
I regret that we did not choose a better way .
And I would like to stress two other aspects of this report .
Firstly , in today ' s Europe , we like to say that we have European works .
That is wonderful .
We have criteria to define European works , in terms of production , but we now know that it is film heritage which will also define and which defines European works .
I therefore welcome the fact that the rapporteur has highlighted the issue of building up our heritage .
We know that the Commission hopes to give us a European Cinematic Heritage Foundation .
We also know that the Council of Europe recently stressed the importance of building up our heritage .
We know very well that this cannot merely be achieved by conserving European films , but , as several of my fellow Members have already said , this comes from providing education on the diversity of European works and on what European works represent for future generations .
I therefore attach great importance to the issue of heritage .
To sum up , I would like to stress one important point , that of new technologies .
New technologies are instruments for the circulation of many things , such as information , knowledge , and cinema .
New technologies have their own linguistic facilities which could be of valuable help in circulating European films .
I shall therefore stress the opportunities that this report could provide in this area .
I have emphasised this issue in my report on the Sixth Framework Programme that we will be voting on in a few days .
However , I believe that new technologies , research into new technologies and digitalisation are all important .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on his excellent work .
This document gives a clear picture of the difficulties European cinema has been striving painfully to overcome for many years now .
I would like to focus briefly on two of the many points contained in the motion for a resolution which caught my attention .
Firstly , I fully support the call for the funds made available to the film-making industry to be increased . In effect , considering that the cinema has become an important part of our cultural heritage - cinemas have been more popular than bookshops for many years now in Europe - and given the high potential for employment in this sector , there is no doubt that greater Community financial aid would facilitate its development .
And this is precisely one of the problematic areas .
Without incentives and investment , there is no growth or impetus , and there is no quality either .
Europe has been overrun with film productions which are foreign to our cultural identity and often of dubious quality for too long now .
That is not to question the existence of the opportunity or rather the need for cinema to encourage awareness of diversities , of course , but I do feel that Europe needs to protect and encourage its own film heritage .
If , in addition , we consider the competition which came from television during the 1970s , it is not hard to see why hundreds , thousands of cinemas have been closed for so long .
Secondly , I fully support item 18 , which refers explicitly to the restoration and protection of the European film heritage .
We do indeed need to encourage public institutions , local authorities and cultural associations to search for old and short films and to restore film material , thus ensuring that they are preserved and are available to the public .
There are very few film libraries in Europe which are worthy of that name and genuinely properly equipped and efficient .
They often suffer from miserly public contributions from the governments of the Member States .
Well then , the European Union cannot remain insensitive to this additional urgent need if we genuinely want to preserve the past heritage and guarantee the future of cinema .
Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
He sums up very clearly to what an extent the success of a product , film in this instance , is dependent on the promotion of sales through marketing and advertising .
When American production companies set aside 30 % of their budgets for marketing , it is not to be wondered at that European products lose in direct competition for customers , when they themselves use only 3 to 6 % of their budgets for this purpose .
It follows that European film producers must do more to market their products .
We , as taxpayers , are also entitled to demand that they do so .
One could envisage state support for follow-up projects being made dependent on the filmmakers ' efforts at reaching their public .
More subsidies cannot be the solution on their own .
Too much money was spent in the past on films that never reached their public .
Austria spends over EUR 30 million per annum on promoting films .
Taking the number of cinema-goers into account , every ticket to see a film is subsidised to the tune of EUR 1 000 .
State promotion of film cannot have this as its objective .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to start by thanking not only the rapporteur for this initiative , as all of you have done , but also the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , which has backed his initiative so strongly .
As you may know , the latest Europacinema conference began here in Strasbourg last weekend , and it is continuing through today and tomorrow .
The final panel discussion will be taking place in our rooms tomorrow .
There have been many discussions and many problems to resolve , such as : What is the problem , why is there no internal European market ?
In discussing many specific problems , whether to do with nation-states or the subsidy issue , we came up against the same point over and over again , that the distribution system does not work .
We have a European internal market , but it is not accepted that this product , film , can really circulate .
It is at this hurdle that we fall .
Now as always , there is a national logic to film promotion , which also applies to a film 's success : if it was not a box-office success at home , it will not be an international one either .
I have to agree with Mr Sichrovsky that an increase in subsidies would not help , but an increased subsidy from the country we both come from would help the market a bit .
It would be wrong to demand that producers should take greater risks .
There are no independent producers .
First , we must promote this market economically , we must engage in business development , so that this market can emerge at all .
Here , too , one of the demands the Culture Committee makes over and over again in many contexts would seem to be appropriate here .
We must endeavour to make business development , whether it originates from large or small enterprises , tax-deductible .
We will support this report not only for reasons of ideology , but also out of wholehearted conviction .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Vander Taelen for the excellent work he has done and for his constructive approach to this report .
Today , we find ourselves faced with a terrible paradox .
Europe produces more films than the United States , and these are often of a very high quality , but the market share of European films has never been this low before , it stands at 22 % , whereas films from the United States take 73.7 % of the European market .
Furthermore , European films secure only 26 % of their box office takings from sources outside the country where they were produced .
These are just some observations .
This is a good report because it does not limit itself to providing an analysis of how things stand .
It tackles the very reasons why the European film industry is weak , namely , its capacity for development and distribution .
In order to render the European film industry more competitive , the rapporteur makes very specific proposals which , in my view , are excellent .
Of course , and I agree with him , we must urgently adopt an ambitious multiannual plan to improve the competitiveness of the European film industry and to strengthen the transnational distribution structures for European films .
We must develop research into digital film distribution and projection techniques ; we must promote the creation of a European Heritage Foundation and perform a feasibility study of ' interconnecting ' support funds of Member States so as to increase the sources of financing .
Of course , when revising the ' Television Without Frontiers ' Directive , we must ensure that we include a requirement for television broadcasters to invest a certain amount in the European film industry , and the obligation to promote and broadcast European films .
This should also be an opportunity for Member States , which do not yet benefit from them , to consider the appropriate fiscal incentives .
I therefore hope that the Commission , as well as the Council , understand the challenges we are faced with , and that they take appropriate action .
Today , we are debating something that is not only a major challenge in terms of the economy , but also something that is an integral part of the European Union , in other words , culture , creation and identity .
That is why this is so urgent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like the House to know how pleased I am that the Committee which I have the honour of chairing has unanimously , and rightly so , adopted the detailed , comprehensive report of the rapporteur , Mr Vander Taelen .
Without going back over aspects which have already been debated , I would point out here that the rapporteur has provided comprehensive proof , as I said before , that both a cultural problem and an organisational problem exist . The problems are related .
I feel that the measure tabled by the committee and the decision the House makes tomorrow are so important as to warrant due reflection from the Commissioner and , indeed , a number of proposals and initiatives as well .
As we have said before and will continue to say , there needs to be a substantial cultural element in the integration of Europe , and films play a major , fundamental role in both informing people about cultural diversities and providing authenticity , allowing the message of cinema to be disseminated in all the States .
There is a need for more than just organisation .
That is important and , in my opinion , the report certainly raises basic issues which will lead us to greater organisation and investment than in the past .
What Mrs Sanders-ten Holte said just now is important .
If European film production increases , the number of distribution channels will have to increase too .
That is why the problems are related , and it is therefore our task , our responsibility , the responsibility of Parliament , especially , and of the Commission , in particular , and the Council , to achieve this .
There is nothing we can do to change the current structure of the industry .
When we debate television without frontiers , then we will be able to establish rights and clear guidelines ; we will be able to require television companies to distribute , promote and commission European films , but it is imperative that , in cultural terms , we realise that we must make it quite clear that all the European countries must be able to benefit from films .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my colleague , Viviane Reding , was unable to join us for this debate because she is in Brussels at the Council meeting of sports ministers , but she asked me to pass on her thanks to Mr Vander Taelen for his excellent report .

This initiative shows that the European Parliament is fully aware of the strategic importance , both economic and cultural , of the European film industry , but also of what hampers the circulation of films and other audiovisual works in the internal market and candidate countries , as several Members have pointed out .
The European Commission , which fully supports the report ' s objectives , welcomes its adoption .
The Commission is also pleased that our two institutions share the same viewpoint regarding the need to pursue an ambitious European policy in order to make the European audiovisual industry more competitive .
Several recent initiatives by the Commission in this area are proof of this common approach .
As you are more than aware , the recent Commission communication on certain legal aspects related to cinematographic and other audiovisual works that my colleague , Viviane Reding , presented to the Council on 5 November , tackles the issues of the circulation of E-cinema , the tax regime applied to the industry , the protection of European audiovisual heritage , the classification of works and other problems affecting the circulation of films and other audiovisual works .
The implementation of the measures set out in this communication , combined with the application of the MEDIA Plus programme ( 2001-2005 ) and the joint initiative undertaken by the Commission and the European Investment Bank , i2i Audiovisual , should help to significantly improve the situation of European films .
If I may , Mr President , I would like to come back to some points of the motion for a resolution which has been submitted to you .
With regard to the measures that are currently being undertaken , the second point of the motion for a resolution calls on the Commission to pursue a consistent Community policy on the film industry , particularly as regards the application of its competition policy .
The above-mentioned communication provides the film industry with increased legal certainty by specifying , as part of a constructive and positive approach , the criteria used by the Commission when assessing national support schemes for the film sector under the Treaty ' s rules on State funding .
To date , all the national schemes reviewed on this basis have been accepted by the Commission .
Item 5 of the motion for a resolution calls on the Commission , in implementing MEDIA Plus , to draw attention to the Europa Cinemas network of cinemas , and item 6 calls on the Commission to support the ' Shooting Stars ' initiative of the organisation European Film Promotion .
These projects are undeniably of value and have received Community support for several years as part of the MEDIA programme .
However , it is important to point out that the actions under the MEDIA programme are subject to calls for proposals and to the principle of fair competition and project selection according to a transparent procedure .
Item 7 of the motion for a resolution calls on the Commission , when revising the directive , to investigate the desirability and feasibility of imposing new quotas on broadcasters .
The Commission has already launched , pursuant to Article 25 ( a ) of the directive , an independent study to assess the impact of measures for promoting the production and distribution of European television programmes .
This study will also assess , more specifically , the effectiveness of quotas laid down under the directive , compared to other support measures .
Furthermore , at the beginning of 2002 , the Commission will undertake a public consultation on this subject .
It will urge all the parties concerned to submit written comments .
The results of the various studies and of the public consultation will provide a significant contribution to the communication on the review of the directive and any proposals for amendments , which the Commission plans to submit to the Council and to the European Parliament towards the end of 2002 .
Item 33 of the motion for a resolution calls on the Commission to consider introducing specific European regulations in order to stimulate the development of the film industry in the candidate countries .
This central concern is taken into account as part of the external action of the European audiovisual policy under the heading of enlargement .
Candidate countries are therefore obliged to respect the ' acquis communautaire ' where the audiovisual sector is concerned .
As you know , this mainly concerns the ' Television Without Frontiers ' Directive .
In addition , they will be able to take part in the MEDIA programme as soon as they have reached a high degree of compatibility with the ' acquis communautaire ' .
Furthermore , nine candidate countries were asked to take part in the MEDIA Plus programme .
The aim is for these countries to participate from the beginning of 2002 .
Item 26 of the motion for a resolution calls on the Commission to perform a feasibility study of the possibility of ' interconnecting ' the existing automatic support funds of the Member States and regions .
It must be reiterated that an assessment was already carried out in 1998 in Birmingham , by the ' Club des Producteurs Européens ' .
The working group associated with the Commission came to the following conclusion : the proposed mechanism would , in practice , exclude many Member States who have no automatic support system for production .
As a result , the automatic support funds of the smaller countries would be drained by the more commercially successful countries , in other words , the main producing countries .
Item 27 of the motion for a resolution calls on the Committee to perform a feasibility study of the possibility of setting up a European Promotion Fund .
Council Decision No 2000 / 821 / EC establishing the MEDIA Plus programme already , in its ' Promotion ' section , lays down support for promotional activities in favour of European creation , in other words , approximately 8 % of the budget .

Lastly , the Commission welcomes the amendment , which was tabled in plenary by the rapporteur , to set up an implementing agency .
The Commission will inform the rapporteur and Parliament about its proposal on this issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , these are the Commission ' s comments on the report by Mr Vander Taelen , who I would again like to thank .

Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Protection of animals during transport
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0347 / 2001 ) by Mr Maat , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Commission report on the experience acquired by Member States since the implementation of Council Directive 95 / 29 / EC amending Directive 91 / 628 / EEC concerning the protection of animals during transport .
Mr President , I should also like to welcome Commissioner Byrne , who could play a significant role in this field .
A great deal needs to be said about the implementation of Directive 95 / 29 / EC and animal transport .
The lack of adequate supervision , carriers who are slapdash at times and abuse during the export of animals for slaughter outside the EU give rise to much commotion .
In addition , the unlimited transport of animals for slaughter by the EU has made a compelling contribution to the spread of animal diseases , including foot-and-mouth and swine fever .
It is striking that the effects of this are more or less entirely shouldered by the animal farmers .
Abuse during transport and the spreading of animal diseases directly impact on the image , and often the income , of animal farmers , while they are not to blame for these causes .
Consequently , anyone who wants to adopt a pro-active stance in the fight against animal diseases such as foot-and-mouth and swine fever , anyone who is concerned about the difficult position European animal farmers are already in , or anyone who cares about animal welfare , will not put up with a culture of tolerance and chaotic rules for animal transport .
The fact that Parliament has decided to present an initiative proposal to tighten these directives now sends a strong political signal to the Council and the Commission .
After all , next month , the Council will be holding a conference on the European vaccination policy , and in this report , an initial proposal is made for effective prevention of infectious diseases .
Additionally , the Commission will soon table proposals to tighten the rules for animal transport .
This report also reflects Parliament ' s great displeasure at the implementation of existing legislation by the Member States and the Commission ' s lack of opportunity to notify Member States .
This report mainly aims to identify the key conditions which sound legislation on animal transport must meet .
First of all , there is supervision .
The supervision of animal transport in the European Union must be tailored to European needs by taking the following measures . First of all , 15 EU inspectors should be appointed with the task of submitting annual reports to the Council , the Commission , but also the European Parliament , as well as the parliaments of the Member States .
Secondly , adequate regulations must be put in place for sanctions , both financial and in terms of licences .
The third point concerns the introduction of an adequate European licensing scheme for carriers of animals .
I should like to make the following observations with regard to transport times . We propose to limit the duration of the transport of animals for slaughter and productive livestock to four hours , or 250 km , with a possible extension to eight hours , provided that the carrier is licensed and the animals can lie down and have a supply of fresh water .
As for animals intended for breeding and sporting purposes , we suggest a transport duration of two 24-hour legs by specialist carriers , provided that the animals have a supply of fresh water and feed .
With regard to possible exceptions , I should like to draw your attention to two problems .
The Commission may grant exemption for areas with few or no slaughterhouses by increasing the said distances and durations by up to 50 % .
For small islands , but also for Ireland , and I wish to make a point of highlighting Ireland , transport by ship is subject to a separate arrangement .
Furthermore , the said regions are disproportionately hit by tightened European legislation on food safety , and I would therefore suggest earmarking structural funds for those regions to invest in small , semi-mobile slaughterhouses .
The export refunds for the export of live animals for slaughter should be stopped as soon as possible , but that is only possible if an international discussion is held about the transport of animals for slaughter and by adding this item to the agenda .
With regard to the amendments , I should like to comment as follows . Together with the Liberal Group and the Socialist Group , I have tabled three amendments to enhance the report ' s practical implementability .
These concern Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 6 , which deal , among other things , with temperature , but also a number of other practical points .
I should like to express thanks to Mr Heinz Kindermann and Mr Neil Busk for their very constructive cooperation .
As far as I am concerned , the report could also have been referred to as the Maat-Busk-Kindermann report .
I assume that the Liberal Group will withdraw Amendment No 3 as it is identical to the joint amendment tabled by the PPE-DE , the PSE and the ELDR .
The policy of tolerance and the feel-good factor surrounding the transport of animals must be brought to a halt .
In the EU , literally millions of animals have been killed and destroyed in the last four years as a result of an explosive spreading of animal diseases including foot-and-mouth and swine fever .
Abuse during animal transport and the shocking images of this are an indictment of European culture of which caring about animals and the countryside form an essential part .
The sad truth is that in every single case , it is the animal farmer who ends up footing the bill at a time when meat prices are unacceptably low and consumer prices remain at an all-time high .
Commission and Council , it is time for action , time to choose in favour of the quality of our animals and our countryside .
Mr President , on behalf of the Environment Committee , I welcome Mr Maat 's excellent report .
It does not go as far as the Environment Committee would have wished , particularly in relation to the duration of travel - the Environment Committee would have preferred four hours - however , if eight hours is complied with , it will be a really welcome advance in animal welfare .
This is the first realistic report on animal welfare , Mr Maat has done an excellent job and I congratulate him .
My group supports this report .
Although the report does not go far enough in relation to the eight hours , paragraph 1 is extremely important .
The maximum journey time of eight hours for slaughter and for further fattening should be welcomed because animals were being transported long distances over long periods in completely unacceptable conditions .
Another important paragraph is paragraph 20 , which calls for an end to the payment of export refunds on the export of live animals to third countries for slaughter .
This is long overdue .
The vast majority of European taxpayers are against the idea of their taxes being used to fund something that they fundamentally disagree with .
The onus is on the Commission to ensure that Member States comply with the rules .
The Commission must take very strong action against any Member States which do not comply .
They must be taken to court and fined .
In relation to the reduced need for long transport , it is extremely important to promote local abattoirs and also the trade in meat .
It makes much more economic sense to have a trade in meat than a trade in live animals , because jobs are then created within the EU .
The same applies to Ireland : it could make a lot more exporting meat than live animals .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to start by expressing my thanks to Mr Maat .
I think he has approached this subject in a very realistic way , many years of discussions on animal transport mean that , in my view , an emotional approach is no more use to us .
Nobody , when talking about animal transport , means the kitten in the hand luggage on an aircraft , and nobody mentions the little dog on a lead on the Intercity train and certainly not the racehorse in its specialised horsebox on the motorway .
No , in the Maat report we are discussing the well-being of animals on their way to be slaughtered .
Now , I have been in this House for a very long time , and so it is to the Commissioner that I am speaking when I say this : On paper , or so it seems to me , we have produced variations on this theme for years , and we have been constantly demanding more .
All the same , we are still repeatedly shocked by the often intolerable situations revealed in individual cases by the checks , which are far too few and far between .
Better transport conditions are wanted not only , indeed , by campaigners against cruelty to animals , but also by producers and consumers .
In reports and amendments , we demand expert staff , purpose-built vehicles with adequate space for the animals to lie down in , ventilation , supplies of food and water and , for animals for slaughter , journey times limited to a maximum of eight hours .
The proposal to end the payment of export refunds for live animals is one which I find quite crucial and also particularly deserving of support .
There are objections to this , amounting in the final analysis to this being an interference with the market .
Even Jewish ritual slaughter is brought into the argument .
I could smile a little at that , for even that is now possible in the EU .
It would be better to transport the meat afterwards .
Commissioner , I find that a person 's weak spot is very often his or her wallet or purse .
More inspection , more controls , high penalties and loss of the licence where offences are found to have been committed , these would bring about more effective improvements for us all .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report of the Committee on the Transport of Animals , which is under discussion this evening , has borne out what is repeatedly seen on television : the brutal way that animals are treated , the disregard of limits on journey times , the overloading of vehicles and many other breaches of current regulations on the transport of animals , none of which has been an infrequent occurrence .
This situation is no longer tolerable , and the European public is right to demand speedy measures to remedy it .
I must , though , say quite clearly that European regulations on the transport of animals , when correctly enforced , already guarantee a high degree of protection to animals .
As the Committee highlights in its report , the fundamental problem is that the regulations currently in force are applied only very inadequately in most of the Member States .
Quite apart from the difficulty of transposing the directive into national law , this is attributable above all to Member States ' defective control procedures and the far too weak sanctions imposed when breaches are discovered .
Criticism arising out of these problems should therefore be directed mainly at the Member States .
In my opinion , the Community control policy needs a thorough re-think here , as comparable problems exist in other areas of veterinary control .
I would like , though , to enlarge on two further points .
The abolition of export refunds for animals for slaughter , contained in this resolution , was decided on by Parliament in the course of the 2002 Budget procedure and has long been demanded by Social Democrats .
In the past , Parliament has already given financially preferential treatment to meat as opposed to livestock for slaughter in paying export refunds , in order to remove the economic incentive from the export of live animals .
At present , then , only about one-half in export refund is paid for livestock in comparison with meat .
Even that , though , is not yet enough , and export refunds for animals for slaughter should be reduced to zero .
The other point I would like to make is that the proposal for a resolution calls for a maximum transport time of 8 hours for animals intended for slaughter , and that , too , is an old demand from the Social Democrats .
There is to be no general maximum journey time , and prime consideration was given to the situation of remote regions and islands .
Here , too , there will be limited exceptions to the rules on maximum journey time , which we greatly welcome .
In conclusion , I would like , on behalf of the Social Democrat Group , to thank Mr Maat for the constructive work we have done together , and I believe it will continue in future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I want to begin by thanking Mr Maat for his excellent cooperation in connection with this report .
Partly in conjunction with Mr Kindermann , we have prepared quite a few amendments , and this has , in my view , turned out to be an excellent report .
I should also like to thank the Commission which , without hiding anything , has clearly described how the Member States have implemented or , more to the point , failed at all to implement , the many decisions taken in 1991 and 1995 .
It is really frightening to see how European ministers sit and take joint decisions about something as important as animal welfare and the transport of animals under satisfactory conditions .
They then travel home and totally forget what they have been involved in deciding , that is to say they do not transpose any of these decisions into national legislation .
We could have well done without the huge number of hideous television pictures we have seen of animals suffering in a wide range of appalling situations .
Lorries have been opened , to reveal dead animals inside , with other animals trampling upon them .
That situation is simply unacceptable , and it must be brought to an end now .
It is therefore time to put a stop to our traditional practices of many years in the EU whereby animals are transported from north to south and from east to west .
There is no good reason for doing this .
Animals suffer as a result , and the call must now go out for animals to be slaughtered at the nearest abattoir .
Obviously , we are also obliged to transport animals for breeding purposes from areas which excel in producing such animals to areas which have a need for new animals of this kind .
I therefore look forward to the Commission ' s now tabling proposals for common regulations governing the transport of animals , and I repeat : these must not be minimum regulations , but common regulations governing the transport of animals .
Mr President , I welcome this report and would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work .
However , I would first of all like to highlight my concern that the current debate has consistently failed to acknowledge the failure of many Member States to implement existing Community legislation in this area .
The latest Commission report , together with numerous mission reports , has highlighted that there is a serious disregard of animal welfare in some countries .
The Commission must show a much greater willingness to initiate infringement proceedings against Member States which fail to enforce this directive properly .
With respect to journey times , I hope the Commission will follow the recommendations of their scientific advisory committees and propose workable limits that allow businesses to function effectively , whilst maintaining a high standard of animal welfare .
I will be supporting the 8-hour or 500-kilometre limit , and strongly support the view that the climate conditions of each Member State should also be taken into consideration .
However , in areas where these journey times are unrealistic , a temporary dispensation to the maximum 8-hour travelling time should be granted where there are no slaughterhouses within a radius of 500 kilometres .
I am thinking particularly , in the UK , of the islands of Western Scotland , and of other parts of the European Union that are affected adversely in that regard .
Although putting a limit on journey times is an important step forward , the treatment of animals en route , vehicle ventilation , overcrowding , and the definition of space and temperature requirements during transport etc. are equally important issues .
The recent foot-and-mouth crisis provided evidence enough that the unnecessary long-distance transport of animals was a factor in the quick spread of that disease .
I look forward to the Commission 's policy plan scheduled for 1 January 2003 aimed at the regionalisation of meat production chains , so as to limit the long-distance transport of live animals in future .
Mr President , the report on the protection of animals during transport has evoked great public interest .
Various associations , but above all individual citizens , have watched attentively to see what steps , if any , Parliament will take to prohibit intolerable conditions in the transport of animals .
The report 's concern is with the use of legislation to prevent animals in transit from being endangered or brought to a cruel demise .
Nothing , though , must be left to chance , but there must rather be firm negotiations when the report is elaborated .
Among the European rural model 's special features , the expectations of society are a decisive element .
The BSE crisis and the consequences of the destruction of animals due to the foot-and-mouth epidemic have put a definite question mark against what had so far been achieved .
An estimated 250 million farm animals a year are transported across the EU .
The people involved have for years vigorously disputed how necessary or pointless this is .
This basic regulation itself contains numerous practical and legal provisions on the transport of animals .
It is clear that national authorities do not act in the same way everywhere , which shows how weak the animal protection clause really is .
There is a lack of seriousness , transparency and honesty in this area .
If , for example , hares living wild in Poland are caught with nets and transported into the EU in containers that are torment to them , just so that people can shoot them for sport as a leisure pursuit , that has nothing to do with sport and even less with the protection of animals .
I would be happy if the Commissioner were able to say that it does not .
At this particular stage of negotiations on the enlargement of Europe , this incident bodes ill for well-regulated agronomy as the basis for protecting Europe 's environment and species .
The report before us opts , in this sense , for cooperation rather than confrontation between agriculture and animal protection .
Mr President , animal transport has been put in a bad light by the many infringements which carriers have committed .
These infringements are an indication that , in addition to transport rules , additional attention must be devoted to supervising compliance with these rules .
In the past year , we have had to face yet another disastrous outcome of animal transport , namely the spread of animal diseases .
One now notorious incident of the transport of calves across different Member States cost the lives of 265 000 animals .
One of the conclusions we are drawing from the foot-and-mouth crisis is that agriculture must focus on the regionalisation of production and that the transport of live animals must come to an end .
With this in mind , I give my wholehearted support to the report by Mr Maat .
However , it is beyond me why in his amendments , he wishes to scrap the maximum and minimum temperature requirements inside the means of transport on the strength of the futile argument that everything is fine as long as the truck has mechanical ventilation .
Animal protection groupings will certainly find it difficult to accept this argument .
My amendments have the same objective as those by Mr Maat , except that mine still include the temperature requirements .
I support the call to end the payment of export refunds in respect of live animals for slaughter .
The evasion of European transport and slaughter rules by having animals slaughtered outside the Union under conditions which would be banned in Europe does injustice to the European farmers .
The Commission would like to encourage farmers to produce quality products .
Animal welfare forms an essential part of this quality which extends from farm to fork .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is a report on a Commission report on the implementation of the directive concerning the protection of animals during transport .
Commissioner , once more in this Parliament we are giving in to the temptation to tell the Commission exactly what it should be presenting us with , in great detail , in the next proposals for a directive they submit to us , to the extent that we are practically doing their job for them .
The rapporteur , Mr Maat , has done a great piece of work .
I trust that the Commission and the Council will take this into account .
Animals must be transported in conditions that are reasonably good ; legislation should dictate standards to ensure that this is the case , and the authorities should verify compliance with these standards .
Having said this , I would like to share two thoughts with you : firstly , that conditions should be the same for both long- and short-distance transportation .
We should not demonise the long-distance transportation of animals , because that would lead to distorted competition in the internal market .
And secondly , transportation conditions should also be the same for all animals that are transported , in cases where animals are being taken to the abattoir as in cases where animals are transported to be reared close to , or far away from , their place of birth , or in order to take part in a competition .
These issues are not raised in the report , and I , Commissioner , would personally like to see them included in the next Commission proposals .
On the other hand , I would like to applaud and thank the rapporteur , who put forward an amendment on behalf of my group to delete the references made to temperatures , for it makes no sense to talk about temperatures without also referring to the corresponding relative humidity .
Additionally , from Lapland to the Canary Islands , Europe is a very large continent with a very diverse climate , population density and socio-economic conditions .
Finally , I would like to draw your attention to the importance of transportation in the propagation of epizootic diseases .
This is never related to the length of the journey , but we should be absolutely rigid with regard to standards and compliance with them .
For example , the classical swine fever we had in Spain in 1997 was caused by piglets travelling from Holland .
This can and should be avoided .
Mr President , Mr Maat ' s report is excellent and summarises the legitimate and powerful criticism that has to be directed , in the first place , against the Council of Ministers and the Member States .
It is disgraceful that those of us in a civilised and cultivated part of the world , calling itself Europe , should treat animals in the way we do .
Moreover , no one can convince me that it is economically necessary .
Presumably , it is economic madness .
I want first of all to deal with Paragraph 14 .
Anyone who drives when drunk loses his driving licence immediately .
How can a driver arrive with a load including dead animals and yet retain both his driving licence and his licence to transport animals ?
That is absurd !
Paragraph 20 is about ending the payment of export refunds in respect of live animals .
That is a first small step able , in actual fact , to be taken by the EU .
Mr President , Mr Maat 's report is an important tool for thinking globally and acting more locally in agricultural and environmental policy .
Your report , Mr Maat , deserves our full support , as it does not make any compromises to the detriment of animal welfare and again emphatically brings to the light of day deficiencies which have long been well known .
There are particular expectations of the report since the vote in plenary which cut the budget for the export refund regulation .
The agreement with which this met naturally gives grounds for hope that the Maat report will be adopted as a whole , especially as it has made past misdemeanours in animal transport policy particularly apparent .
There are a number of points I would like to make , but time is too short .
Let me perhaps just say in conclusion that checks and supervision must be improved , and the amounts levied in fines must be harmonised and raised to a level that will act as a deterrent for transport businesses .
The same should apply to sanctions imposed on Member States .
We are all acquainted with the problems , the European public is right to be sharply critical of the European institutions and of the fifteen governments .
This report is to be highly valued also from the point of view of enlargement .
Ladies and gentlemen of the Council and of the Commission , it is high time that action were taken .
Mr President , it is probably indisputable that Europe-wide public opinion is demanding an immediate end to the animal cruelty associated with the transportation of live animals .
The EU has the means to reduce these problems , but lacks the political will to do so .
There exist directives whose purpose is to improve the conditions of animals during the time of transportation .
There is , however , no control over the implementation of these .
Mr Maat 's report recognises this situation ; it states that the directives issued on transportation are being violated .
It sees problems which arise from the different driving and resting times which apply to the drivers and to the animals being transported .
It pays particular attention to the export of live animals to countries outside the EU , which , of course , always involves the longest journey .
It reminds us that such transportations are a cause of the explosive spread of infectious animal diseases .
The most radical demand is that the Commission is being required to end payments of export aid with regard to animals being transported for slaughter , as from the start of next year .
The Commission must respond to these requirements ( which will form the opinion of Parliament ) in such a way that the ethical / moral demands of the civilised world regarding respect for life will , in the EU , also be met in the case of animals destined for slaughter .
Mr President , Ireland is committed to working with all Member States and international bodies to achieve higher standards in animal welfare .
Due to our peripheral location and our island status , as Mr Maat has recognised - for which I thank him - we have no realistic alternative to exporting our live cattle by boat , and we need to find export markets for nine out of the ten animals produced on our farms .
While I fully support the general principle of slaughtering animals as close as possible to the point of production , the reality is that many of the export markets available to us demand live animals rather than the processed products and for the foreseeable future the proper functioning of our market will require a balance between the dead meat and the live meat trade .
Regulation 615 / 98 links all payments of export refunds to compliance with strict animal welfare standards during transport , including full clinical examination of every animal .
We must police and enforce this fully .
The live export incident involving Germany and the Lebanon this summer resulted from the inexperience of the German authorities , as they are infrequent exporters of live animals and had no prior veterinary agreement with the Lebanese .
Hard cases make bad law .
I do not agree with the German agricultural minister 's view that export refunds on live cattle can now no longer be justified .
If Europe does not fulfil the requirements of third countries , they will get their supplies from far further afield , with little or no controls and regulation from an animal welfare point of view since there are still no internationally agreed standards on transport .
We have to have the highest possible standards not just in the interest of the animals but also of the producers , who will get a far better price for healthy unstressed animals .
It is true that we must continue to review our standards of protection of animals during transport and each Member State must be willing to police and enforce the law .
However , with over a million tonnes of surplus beef in the EU , export refunds will be required for some time to come and I will not be supporting any proposal to remove them .
Mr President , Commissioner , it goes without saying that cruelty to animals must be stopped .
This already forms the specific ethical basis of European agricultural production .
The Commission must have adequate powers to intervene in the activities of Member States ; penalties must be sufficiently severe ; and executive measures to correct these matters definitely need to be intensified .
I would like to thank Mr Maat , the rapporteur , for taking the exceptions into consideration .
There exist such things as sparsely populated areas , islands , and long distances , and these areas too must be able to function ; in this report they have been taken into consideration in a balanced and even-handed way .
Animal welfare forms part of a greater whole .
The regionalisation of production chains has been the topic of the day and a theme for the future , and it is against this specific background that the aid for transportation of animals for slaughter must be ended .
This will further regionalisation , and the implementation and development of regional chains .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again , we are handling the subject of ' Protection of animals during transport ' .
This is a long-running issue , and I unreservedly support the report Mr Maat has presented .
We all know that there are already several directives on this in the European Union , and legislation to transpose it in the Member States .
We are all in favour of comprehensive animal protection and opposed to methods of transport which inflict needless suffering , particularly on animals destined for slaughter .
Were all these positive laws to be transposed and followed up everywhere , this debate would not be necessary .
That is , however , not the case .
Pictures of unacceptable transport conditions provide repeated evidence of this .
We should , though , not lose sight of the fact that there are a few good things to report on this area .
There are some examples of the transportation of animals which already meet the requirements of animal protection .
The idea of slaughter in the immediate vicinity of the place of origin is also widely being put into practice .
Slaughter as close to the farm as possible is something I greatly support .
Modern methods of preservation make the export of meat even to distant areas thoroughly feasible .
We are right to demand feeding and watering breaks during the transportation of animals .
We will also have to give future consideration to how to minimise stress to the animals when being unloaded or reloaded before and after these breaks .
We could certainly aim to have the vehicles transporting animals to slaughter equipped in such a way that the animals could remain on board the vehicle during short breaks and be provided for there .
Transport , space , the way in which the vehicles are driven , ventilated and heated , loading and unloading procedures have , if they are made suitable , the greatest effect on improving the protection of animals .
This report makes its contribution to that and I ask for it to be supported across this House .
Mr President , during animal transport , animals are merely considered commodities and not living creatures with an intrinsic value .
The Member States should hang their heads in shame for the fact that the supervision of compliance with legislation is so deficient .
I therefore welcome the proposals to step up the supervisory procedures considerably and to tighten the sanctions .
Furthermore , a general time and distance limit should be imposed and far stricter requirements should be prescribed for all trucks .
Improved facilities should not be an alibi for extending driving times under the guise that it is acceptable for transport in ' business class ' to take longer .
The use of ' business class ' is quite ludicrous considering the sixth-rate treatment animals still receive before they are killed .
Live animals should only have to endure very short spells of transport .
Eight hours is indeed an improvement , but four hours should , in fact , be the absolute maximum .
We must move towards regionalisation of the production chain with small , clean slaughterhouses .
The recent foot-and-mouth crisis has illustrated once again that the stopping and collection places entail irresponsible animal-health risks , and these must therefore be abolished .
Reforms need to be carried out promptly with a view to enlargement .
Across Europe , animals should no longer simply be viewed as objects which are financially lucrative instead of as part of creation .
Mr Maat , many thanks for the sound report .
Mr President , it is a rare occurrence but , this time , I am forced to speak on behalf of my nation .
In fact , the entire Italian beef industry is extremely concerned by the proposal , and not just because of the maximum limits it imposes on travelling time .
Of even more concern to us is the fact that the proposal stipulates that animals for further fattening , which is a completely natural stage of the livestock rearing process , should be subject to the more restrictive measures laid down for animals for slaughter instead of the less restrictive measures laid down for breeding animals , even though the further fattening stage is a natural continuation of the livestock rearing process lasting a few months .
We fully understand the report ' s objective , which is to replace the transportation of live animals with that of dead meat as far as possible .
However , our situation is quite out of the ordinary , involving 120 thousand farms and a flourishing processing industry with business activities ranging from slaughter to packing , which would be greatly compromised by such a measure .
Here are some statistics , Mr President , Commissioner : France has a cattle stock of over 20 million head and an annual slaughter rate of 5 million head ; Italy has a cattle stock of 7 million head and an annual slaughter rate of 4.5 million head .
Clearly , this consolidated production cycle , which is vital for the economy of our country ' s livestock sector , would be completely disrupted by the introduction of a maximum journey time or distance limit .
Moreover , there are no scientific grounds for such a limit and it would serve purely exploitative purposes and have consequences which , as I said , would be extremely difficult for the sector as a whole to bear .
It can be seen from this that the sole motive behind any proposal to place an absolute limit on travelling time is actually other countries ' desire to strip Italy of a substantial part of its slaughter trade and to take the place of our producers in supplying beef and veal to the Italian market .
This is not the kind of Europe we want !
Mr President , I am pleased to outline to you the Commission 's position on Mr Maat ' s excellent report .
The subject matter of this report is animal welfare and animal transport in particular .
We all know that this is a very sensitive issue .
I made clear when I presented the original Commission proposal that the views of the Council and Parliament would help shape the proposals which I intend to present early next year .
The report under discussion here today shares most of the objectives of the Commission .
However , there is one key building block missing in the construction of the Commission ' s final proposals and that is the opinion of the Scientific Committee on Animal Health and Animal Welfare , which is expected shortly .
This opinion will provide the Commission with the necessary scientific advice on key issues such as travelling times and loading densities .
On such issues , our actions must be guided by good scientific advice on animal transport conditions .
Let me nonetheless indicate some general impressions on some of the key issues raised in your report .
First of all on travelling time , I was very glad to note that some of the more extreme suggestions , such as a four-hour limit on animal transport , have not been supported in Mr Maat ' s report .
The consistent advice to the Commission is that the stress and risk to animals in transport arises primarily from three factors : travelling time , loading and unloading of animals and the conditions in which they are transported - ventilation , humidity , density and so on .
The Commission has already presented proposals for improvements in these areas or will be presenting them shortly .
However there is too much emphasis in some quarters on travelling time .
I consider that a reduction to four hours is simplistic and takes no account of the wider interests involved .
We cannot ignore the interests of the farmers and the meat and livestock industry .
Such a reduction would be viewed as an attack on their livelihoods rather than a genuine contribution to animal welfare .
If we wish to retain their support for improved animal welfare then we must also respect their interests .
I wish to work with them rather than against them and hope that you share this view .
I would now like to turn to the issue of resources .
Your report calls for the number of inspectors in the Food and Veterinary Office engaged on animal welfare to be increased to fourteen , compared with the current figure of four .
The reality is that such an increase could only be achieved at the expense of other priorities , including BSE , foot-and-mouth disease , meat hygiene , residue levels and food safety generally , where the Commission is already over-stretched .
I have consistently refused to make promises on which I cannot deliver .
It would be dishonest to do so , both to this House and to the European public .
You stress the lack of enforcement of the current legislation in Member States .
I fully agree .
Member States must make the effort and provide the resources to ensure better implementation .
It is a point which I have made repeatedly to the Member States in the Agriculture Council .
Judging from the correspondence I receive from Members of Parliament , the best way to achieve better enforcement is through legal proceedings against the Member States .
However it should be pointed out that sometimes it is more effective to work with Member States than against them , so proceedings should be the last resort .
They are , after all , responsible for the on-the-ground implementation of Community legislation .
But let me be clear : where efforts to find solutions through dialogue do not succeed , the Commission will initiate infringement proceedings against the Member States concerned .
In fact , proceedings are under way against several Member States and are under consideration for several more .
Finally , in this respect , I would call on the House to assist the Commission ' s efforts in encouraging Member States to take animal welfare more seriously .
In particular I would call on Members to remind your political colleagues in your own Member States of the need to put more efforts and resources into ensuring that the Community provisions on animal welfare are complied with .
Mr Maat , ladies and gentlemen , I will be returning to you shortly with the Commission ' s formal proposals .
This will provide you with the opportunity to shape the hard legislation on animal welfare .
I can assure you that Mr Maat ' s report will be a major influence on this legislation .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 9.40 p.m. )
Decision on urgent procedure
The next item is the vote on requests for urgent procedure pursuant to Rule 112 .
Proposal for a Council regulation aiming to promote the conversion of vessels and fishermen that were , up to 1999 , dependent on the fishing agreement with Maroc [ COM ( 2001 ) 384 - C5-0407 / 2001 - 2001 / 0163 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last night the Committee on Fisheries approved the report by our colleague , Mrs Miguélez Ramos , on the restructuring of the Community fisheries sector affected by the non-renewal of the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
I would like to say to the House that this report is restricted to regulating the technical aspects relating to the social measures aimed at the many people affected ; it is a very sensitive issue from a social , and therefore political , point of view , in the Member States affected by this restructuring .
Therefore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in a position to ask the House to vote in favour of this request for an urgent procedure presented by the Council , so that this proposal can be debated in Council by the Fisheries Ministers at their meeting called for the 27 November .
Mr President , the Committee on Budgets is sympathetic to the needs of our friends in the Committee on Fisheries .
However , a conciliation meeting will be taking place on 21 November and it is not yet agreed between the different institutions how the agreement will be finalised , or indeed in what category it will be finalised .
In the light of a decision by the Budgets Council last week , there is a great deal of confusion on our side as to how we are going to deal with this .
I would ask that we do not treat this as urgent and that it be held over until after the conciliation meeting of 21 November .
Mr President , I wish to support Mr Wynn .
I am glad to see that the Committee on Budgets is taking a responsible approach to this issue because the idea of pushing it through as urgent procedure without debate is unacceptable .
We have to be very careful about how we use European taxpayers ' money and we need to look to the future .
A number of years ago in this Parliament it was already being said that Morocco would not agree to another agreement with the EU .
We knew that then and we should have prepared for it .
This situation is not unique , it is going to happen again .
At the moment we are discussing a major agreement with Mauritania .
The day will come when Mauritania will say to the EU that it no longer wants such an agreement .
What are we going to do then ?
We really need to address this issue , firstly , in relation to how we arrange our common fisheries policy and , secondly , in relation to how we use public money .
The way this has been rushed through is unacceptable .
This is not a matter for urgent procedure because we have known for many years that this problem was coming .
We need to be extremely careful about how we use European taxpayers ' money .
I understand the problems the fishing community has , but we need to be more responsible .
Mr President , I would simply like to say that the Committee on Budgets has taken no decision in this field .
There are plenty of Members , particularly from my group , in the Committee on Budgets who believe that the urgent procedure is perfectly appropriate .
We understand the reasons that the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries has been able to give .
We believe that , in this case , a legal basis is necessary and , in any event , from the budgetary point of view , if it is necessary to amend that basis as a result of the negotiation with the Council on the 21 November , it could be done without any problem .
I therefore do not believe that this Parliament ' s position would be damaged by accepting the urgent procedure today and voting on the Miguélez Ramos report , which , furthermore , relates much more to the technical issues in the Commission ' s proposal with regard to the restructuring of the fleet than to actual budgetary motivations , which will be the subject of another report .
Mr President , I oppose urgency on a matter of principle , not on a matter of substance .
I am sure we all support a global health fund and President Prodi guaranteed EUR 120 million at the G8 meeting in July .
However , I and many others are extremely disappointed that the Commission has taken until November to come forward with any effective suggestions and now it is asking for urgency , effectively denying the Council and Parliament any time to debate or amend this proposal .
It looks as if we are just going to hand over a cheque and that will be the end of it .
The Commission is also suggesting the funding should be found by taking EUR 60 million from a fishing agreement and EUR 60 million from the EDF .
In its resolution in this House on 25 October this House emphasised that contributions should be new and additional funding , and this is not so .
At the moment it looks as if it is a one-off payment .
I would like to hear the Commission guarantee that a legal base will be found for the sustainable funding of the global health fund after 2000 and submitted as quickly as possible .
I would like an assurance that it will be new money and that Parliament and the Council will be kept fully informed and involved , so that we play a legislative part in this process .
We , as parliamentarians , cannot be treated in this way .
Mr President , there is no point in talking about old money or new money when there is no money !
If we do not get agreement on this matter this year with urgent procedure , there will be no money next year for the Global Health Fund .
I know there are problems about getting EUR 60 million from the EDF but , quite frankly , that is another argument .
If we want EUR 60 million from the general budget , we have to agree to using urgent procedure on this or there will be no money for the Global Health Fund .
This financing issue is indeed directly linked with the subject we were discussing just now .
EUR 50 million will be made available from appropriations that were previously earmarked for fishing agreements .
It is quite evident that this is additional money that was not available beforehand for other external actions .
A further EUR 10 million will be made available from two budget lines with which there have also been implementation difficulties up to now , that is to say the budget lines for Latin America and for Asia .
The money will be implemented here in a concrete way , and there are promising signs that the extra EUR 60 million can be provided from the EDF .
I believe that it really would be a good sign if the European Union could make an early decision on implementing these financial appropriations .
As you know , the donors to the global health fund have promised over USD 1.8 billion , but so far those are just promises .
The European Union would be the first to make a concrete decision on financing .
I therefore ask you to vote for this request for urgent procedure .
We need a legal basis for making a transfer to the global health fund .
This House will naturally be kept informed at all stages .
We will , of course , come back to this several times during the overall budget process .
But if the legal basis could be rapidly decided upon now , and it would be a good legal basis that would enable us to make the transfer , then we would not need to explore any other avenues , because the budget situation would be very clear .
So I ask you to vote for the request for urgent procedure .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , I would like to say that we are against recourse to the urgent procedure , for fundamental and for procedural reasons .
The facts are as follows : the Commission has proposed a contribution of EUR 60 million to the Global Fund to fight AIDS / HIV , tuberculosis and malaria .
We are not against this proposal , but we do not believe that this can be a single contribution , made just once , if this objective is to be fulfilled .
We are arguing for a solid and sustained contribution , not just for one year .
This is why we do not agree with the urgent procedure ; we intend to present amendments , which is our right in accordance with the codecision procedure applicable in this field .
The Commission , in asking for the urgent procedure , is doing so in a way which is unacceptable to Parliament , since it deprives us of this essential and irrevocable right .
The Commission announced its contribution to this fund in July ; it told us about it some months ago and it announced it publicly in Genoa more than three months ago ; and now it wants Parliament to express its opinion on this important issue in just one week .
Presentation of the Court of Auditors ' annual report - 2000
The next item is the presentation of the Court of Auditors ' annual report for the year 2000 .
Mr President , on behalf of the Members of the European Court of Auditors , I would like to thank you for inviting me to present the 24th Annual Report of the Court for the 2000 financial year .
As in previous years , this presentation marks the start of the discharge procedure .
The report follows the format used for the past three years , with chapters covering revenue and each of the expenditure areas under the headings of the financial perspectives .
There is an additional chapter this year which marks the development of the Union , which deals with pre-accession aid for which a separate financial perspective heading exists from 2000 onwards .
You will also - as usual - find a chapter dedicated to the Statement of Assurance and , attached to the report , you will find the Court ' s observations on the implementation of the sixth , seventh and eight European Development Funds .
The different chapters of the Annual Report address four main concerns .
First , there is an analysis of the budgetary implementation and of the budgetary management practices for each specific financial perspective heading .
Then , you will find the follow-up of observations of the Court in previous Annual and Special Reports .
Thirdly , the specific appraisal in the context of the Statement of Assurance with information per financial perspective heading .
Finally , a new element this year is that the principal findings and recommendations in the Special Reports adopted by the Court since the last discharge are summarised in the chapters according to the wishes of this Parliament .
This means that the Annual Report this year contains all the principal findings and recommendations concerning the implementation of the general budget and the European Development Funds that the Court has published since the last discharge .
You will also find , for the first time - not in the copy of annual report that you have in your hands today , but in the Official Journal version that will come when the official version has been printed , something that Parliament has asked for many years - the text of the Court in one column and the answers of the Commission on the same page so as to make the report , at least in this respect , more user-friendly .
Concerning the budget management for 2000 , one particular feature of budget implementation was the emergence of a very large surplus of revenue over expenditure , amounting to EUR 11.6 billion , equivalent to more than 14 % of final payment expenditure .
The main factors which led to this situation were a higher revenue yield than budgeted and - perhaps even more important - lower payments on Structural Measures , in particular those for the 2000-2006 programming period .
The Court recommends that the Commission examine how it can better use the supplementary and amending budget procedure to avoid excessive budget surpluses , in order to avoid distorted revenue positions for the following year caused by the carrying over of surpluses .
The Court , responding to the wishes of the discharge authority , has continued to follow up the observations in previous Annual and Special Reports .
The main purpose of this is to review what action has been taken , principally by the Commission , in response to the observations of the Court , the recommendations of the Council and the resolutions of the European Parliament .
In all of the subjects examined , some action has been taken .
The extent and effectiveness of this action , however , vary considerably .
In general , the Commission , in particular where it agreed with the earlier observations and propositions , has adopted measures designed to respond to them and to improve the situation .
In some cases corrective action has been slow , in others , staff and financial resources allocated have been insufficient to achieve the desired level of improvement .
Effecting improvements in the management and control of complex programmes involving many organisations at different levels is difficult and takes time .
Structural rigidities have often to be overcome , and in the areas of shared or decentralised management , which account for more than 80 % of the general budget , the Commission requires action from others , such as Member States .
Notwithstanding that achieving change can be difficult , the Commission should ensure that it takes all the measures within its power to implement the recommendations of the Court and of this Parliament .
In early 2001 , as part of its follow-up work , the Court reviewed progress in the replacement of the former anti-fraud unit ( UCLAF ) with the European Anti-fraud Office ( OLAF ) .
The new arrangements for OLAF provide a more appropriate administrative framework , with greater independence for the Office than its predecessor .
The Court continues to work closely with OLAF .
It has established formal procedures to ensure that the relations between the two organisations are efficient and effective .
It has also established a constructive dialogue with the committee established to supervise the work of OLAF , under the chairmanship of Prof. Delmas-Marty .
The Court has recently prepared an opinion , soon to be published , on a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and the Council on the protection of the Community 's financial interests .
This directive is an important step forward in the fight against fraud .
I would like to thank the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Theato , on behalf of the Court of Auditors for her impressive work and dedication over the years to make this important directive possible .
With regard to the Statement of Assurance , the Court is of the opinion that the revised accounts for the financial year ended 31 December 2000 reflect reliably the Community ' s revenue and expenditure for the year and the financial situation at the end of the year .
As far as the legality and regularity of underlying transactions are concerned , the audit of the principal management and control systems applicable to Agriculture and Structural Measures revealed weaknesses in the functioning of control procedures aiming to secure the legality and regularity of the transactions .
The audit of operational expenditure revealed an unacceptable incidence of error affecting the amount of the payments or the reality or the eligibility of the underlying transactions .
In view of the results of its audit work taken together , the Court is of the opinion that the transactions underlying the financial statements are , taken as a whole , legal and regular in respect of revenue , commitments and administrative expenditure but declines to provide this assurance in respect of payments in operational expenditure .
Since the last Annual Report the Court has adopted eighteen Special Reports to be taken into account in the discharge procedure , containing the results of audits which focus on a wide range of specific areas in which the Community ' s financial management can be improved .
The results of the Court ' s audits indicate significant positive findings .
In the agricultural area the reformed clearance of accounts system and the Integrated Administrative and Control System have contributed to improved management of large amounts of European Union funds .
The Commission ' s strategy for dealing with BSE is basically sound .
With regard to Structural Measures , the URBAN Community Initiative has helped the implementation of many urban development projects and has enabled local authorities to access Union funds .
In the external actions area , the work of the agency charged with the reconstruction of Kosovo , was found to be both efficient and economical .
The TACIS cross-border co-operation programme is an instrument which has the potential to play a useful role in addressing issues relating to the new eastern border following the next accession .
However , it was also found that major objectives have either not been achieved , or only limited progress had been made .
Further , it was frequently found that there was either insufficient or no evaluation by the Commission of the achievement of the objectives .
The Commission ' s reform programme is increasing the focus on results and performance measurement , within a resource allocation framework reflecting predetermined priorities and defined objectives .
The Court ' s findings on recent programmes show that the Commission still faces major challenges in this area .
One of the most important issues in the discussion that we had last year here in Parliament , when I presented the Annual Report for 1999 , concerned the situation in the Member States .
The results are striking .
The Court has concentrated a large share of its resources on the audit of control systems in Member States as a follow up to this debate .
Persistent weaknesses were found in Member States ' checking of community operations concerning programmes where management is shared between the Commission and the Member States .
This was the case for the Integrated Administrative and Control System ( IACS ) .
It was also the case for export refunds , and concerning the control regulation for Structural Measures .
Improving the control arrangements in the Member States is central to ensuring the correct use of Union funds .
It is also important if the Court is to place some reliance for its own audit purposes on the checks carried out by the various audit and supervisory services in the Commission , and in the Member States .
I will come back to this specific problem at the end of my speech .
The recast of the Financial Regulation , which is an important element of the Commission reform programme , maybe the first step that was taken , now seeks to clarify and strengthen the provisions relating to methods of implementation of the budget , advance payments , procurement , presentation of the accounts , and the offices .
The introduction of new provisions intended to contribute to the establishment of a coherent legal framework in the field of budgetary execution , based on the primacy of the Financial Regulation , is another important improvement within the recast .
However , as you will see from our Annual Report , some important matters of principle stated in the Court ' s opinion on the proposed changes have not been followed , which may lead to serious complexity in financial management .
Regarding enlargement , this year ' s Annual Report has a new chapter dealing with pre-accession aid for which a separate financial perspective heading exists from 2000 onwards .
In accordance with Parliament recommendations in its 1999 discharge resolution , the Court has been improving and intensifying the co-operation with the Supreme Audit Institutions of the candidate countries during the past few years .
Furthermore , in liaison with the Supreme Audit Institutions the Court has been intensifying the exchange of information at different levels of national administrations .
The setting-up of national systems of internal control and the external audit of EU funds made available to the candidate countries require closer co-operation between the institutions even before accession .
Enlargement will bring about changes in the way the Council , the Commission and the Court of Justice will work .
This is also true for the Court of Auditors and for Parliament .
Today , no one questions the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty to make the Court of Auditors one of the five independent institutions of the Union .
The Nice Treaty will mean substantial organisational changes in the near future , also for the European Court of Auditors , where the Court will have the possibility of establishing an organisational structure in chambers with a more effective decision making , even if we will then consist of 25 Member States .
The Court is actively preparing itself for this challenging reform .
The Court is developing its relations with the Commission ' s new Internal Audit Service , with discussions covering a number of areas where we can work together .
The Court is giving high priority to assessing how it will be able to use the work of the Internal Audit Service and the audit capabilities in the Directorates General .
One very promising sign of progress in this field was the conference , under the challenging heading of " Verstehen " held at the initiative of the Internal Auditor , Mr Muis , on Thursday and Friday which Mrs Schreyer and Mrs Theato attended .
I should like to say , as the President of the Court of Auditors , that this initiative might mean an extremely fruitful , concrete and promising step forward in the idea of a single audit system concerning European funds .
The Treaty states clearly that the European Court of Auditors assists the European Parliament and the Council in exercising their powers of control over the implementation of the budget .
Ladies and Gentleman , I am soon to retire as President and Member of the European Court of Auditors .
During my seven years in the Court I have been privileged to contribute to the Court 's growing importance , and to the continuous efforts it makes , in collaborating with Parliament and meeting its needs in optimising the assistance it provides .
The Court is addressing the need in its statement of assurance methodology for more information on the nature and causes of the problems affecting the management of Community funds by broadening the range of evidence in support of its conclusions .
The recent reforms in the area of financial management and internal audit will enable the Court to make greater use of the Commission ' s work , not least for its work on the Statement of Assurance .
The Court intends to continue to develop specific appraisals for each major area of Community activity as a complement to its Statement of Assurance .
The specific appraisals are now envisaged in the Nice Treaty and are an important tool to help the discharge authority to make appropriate recommendations with a view to improving management .
One of the major tasks of the enlarged European Union will be the collaboration between European and National Supreme Audit Institutions .
This has long been a key preoccupation of this Parliament .
But , as we all know , this co-operation has advanced slowly and Parliament has repeatedly urged the Court to improve the situation .
After having followed progress for a number of years I have arrived at the conclusion that a good result in this respect requires initiatives at a higher level than purely technical co-operation between the Supreme Audit Institutions of the Member States and the European Court of Auditors .
I would like to quote a Member of this Parliament , Mr Jacques Santer who pointed out , when he was President of the Commission , the importance of collaboration between the national parliaments and the European Parliament . It would also be a key factor in the field of Financial Control .
The Supreme Audit Institutions act independently and have a strong collaboration with their respective national parliaments . So , collaboration between national parliaments and the European Parliament could have a major influence on national audit bodies and the European Court of Auditors , in particular in the matter of financial control .
The way of intergovernmental collaboration in this field is not the most practical route to take since the Supreme Audit Institutions of the Member States are , with the exception of my own country , independent of governments , as they are controlling them .
But maybe the solution can be found in increased cooperation between this Parliament and the national parliaments of the Member States .
Let me finally add one little word .
As parliamentarians in the European Parliament , as Commissioners in the European Commission , also as Auditors in the European Court of Auditors , we have a double role .
We have to fulfil our tasks according to the Treaty ; to fulfil them as Commissioners , as Parliamentarians and as Members of the Court of Auditors .
But we also have another role in common .
That is always to defend the idea of Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr Karlsson , ladies , gentlemen , and members of the Court of Auditors , this report from the Court of Auditors on the 2000 budget year gives the Commission both encouragement and support ; it is particularly supportive of the Commissioner for the Budget .
Let me thank the Court of Auditors , you , Mr Karlsson and the Court 's members and staff for the 2000 Report and give especial additional thanks for the special reports , whose very practical recommendations make them very valuable to the Commission in its work .
I would most especially like to express my satisfaction with the Court 's practical observations , and with the Court 's support for two measures which are of particular concern to me .
One , in the area of foreign policy , has to do with the reconstruction of Kosovo .
The Court of Auditors has examined the accounting procedures and the profitability of the agency charged with the reconstruction of Kosovo and has come to a highly favourable conclusion , reporting that the agency has succeeded in achieving most of the high targets set for it , and that its administration and budget management were highly efficient economically .
I had strongly urged that the 2000 Budget should make available sufficient funds for the reconstruction of Kosovo .
Parliament and , in particular , Mr Bourlanges , whom I would like to mention particularly in his capacity as principal rapporteur on the 2000 Budget , were also very much behind the idea that sufficient funds should be allocated for this purpose .
The good work that was done meant that funds for the agency charged with the reconstruction of Kosovo could even be increased in the course of the 2000 budget year .
I am sure that Mr Bourlanges will feel , as I do , that it is quite simply very heartening when measures that one has been especially committed to get such a good report from the Court of Auditors .
It goes without saying that this sends an important message to the taxpayers , that money is being invested well in Kosovo , and in an economically efficient way .
I emphasise this for the additional reason that there is a very intense debate going on in the media about the common foreign and security policy , with people asking : where is the European Union ? where is the Commission ?
Here we have a quite tangible example of a common foreign policy measure and a tangible demonstration of what a good result can be achieved if we all pull together .
The second point about which I would like to speak personally , and on which I wish to express my thanks for the Court 's support , is the Financial Regulation .
The recast of the Financial Regulation is a highly comprehensive undertaking , on which the Court of Auditors gave its opinion in quick order and was of great help to the Commission , not only with the adoption of a formal position , but also with the many meetings on technical and administrative matters .
That may perhaps sound a bit arid , but the fact is that the Financial Regulation lays down Budget procedures in exact terms , stipulating who plays what role , who possesses which supervisory powers and whether , for example , there can be rapid redeployments in the Budget , and where they can be made , in order to take account of changes during the budget year .
I am very grateful to the Court of Auditors for making clear how important it is that all financial arrangements in specified sectors conform to Budget principles , or principles of sound budgeting .
I am very grateful to you in this Parliament for the amendments you have proposed even before the summer recess .
I can say quite unequivocally and definitely that the recast proposal gained a great deal in terms of quality as a result .
For its part , the Commission has now done its homework ; so too , on this point , has the Court of Auditors ; and so too , to a quite broad extent in this area , has Parliament ; I therefore believe it is actually high time for Parliament to formally take up its position , so that then the Council , too , can get its homework over and done with in a similarly short time .
Now I also want to consider some areas in which the Court made some highly critical comments .
One case in point is the way in which the Monitoring Regulation for the Structural Funds has been implemented .
It is the Member States who have primary responsibility for monitoring the legality of the use to which Structural Fund resources are put .
It is , however , equally true that the Commission bears overall responsibility for the implementation of the Budget and thus for checking that monitoring regulations are clearly framed and enforceable and that the state of affairs does not come to pass in which more or less any Member State can come up with its own interpretation of the monitoring regulations and act accordingly .
The complaint most frequently levelled at the Structural Funds by the Member States is that the monitoring procedures are so complicated .
This sometimes reaches the point where the conclusion is to say : ' In future , we will have the Structural Funds only as a sort of lump sum transfer . '
The Commission , though , does not , of course , support this as the way forward , and I assume that Parliament does not support it either .
For when funds go out of the European Budget , they do so in order to achieve definite objectives and not as a general settlement .
It is , of course , true that , if we want things to be that way in future , we will have to work at simplifying the regulation in question .
I join with the Court of Auditors in calling for a simpler scheme which , being more easily monitored , would lessen the likelihood of error .
' Complicated procedure ' was also the criticism the Court of Auditors laid at the door of the Sapard programme of agricultural aid for the acceding countries .
This afternoon the Commission will be debating the progress reports on the enlargement process as a whole , of which financial control is a very important part , as is the assessment of what progress has been made in the acceding states and of what problems remain to be overcome .
Sapard , though , presents us with the problem of the over EUR 1 billion allocated for 2000 and 2001 , of which in fact only EUR 16 million have so far been paid out .
I must accept the Court of Auditors ' criticism of what is , of course , a very poor result .
This will also have to be discussed in the Commission , for the complicated procedure must not result in the funds ceasing to be used at all .
When dealing with precise controls in the acceding states , we must , then , find a balance , but not to the detriment of implementation .
Turning to the massive EUR 11.6 billion surplus in the 2000 Budget , the Court of Auditors has explained that a surplus should not be entered in the accounts for the following year , but should , if at all possible in the current budget year , allow the Member States to make reduced payments , which means that the Budget would then be adjusted downwards in the course of the year .
I work on the assumption that the Council and the Finance Ministers would surely give this a favourable reception , but that there has to be more careful consideration of what is the right way forward here .
Of last year 's Budget surplus , over EUR 3 billion was the result of increased income , which itself was a consequence of last year 's growth figures in fact turning out better than had at first been assumed .
It was , though , only in November that the official figures became available .
Of the surplus , several hundred million euro represent real savings in agriculture as a result of favourable market developments .
I see it as a very positive thing if we do not have to spend money , but whether that is actually the case will not be definitely known until the end of the year .
Those who legislated for the Structural Funds had indeed already foreseen the possible difficulties in implementing the programme in its first year , and it is for that reason that the Interinstitutional Agreement provides for the option of transferring funds to subsequent years .
Let me again make it clear that I do not see it in a negative light if , at the end of the year , or , as the Court has proposed , possibly during the current year , funds can be returned to the Member States due to the money not being required .
I am probably agreeing with certain comments made in this Parliament when I say that the distinction has to be drawn between the money not being needed in order to achieve a given objective , and the money not having been able to be used because of faulty budget management or shortcomings in administration .
That can be properly assessed only when we are no longer talking in the Budget procedure about how much money is being invested , but rather about what objectives we want to achieve .
In this context , I take on board the Court of Auditors ' remarks on evaluation and on how important it is in a good Budget procedure .
The Court of Auditors has confirmed the regularity of the accounts , in other words , that the books are in good order , and also of the revenue side of the Budget .
It has also certified the reliability of the commitments and of the administrative outgoings .
It has , however , criticised the excessive incidence of errors in cash movements .
Has the Commission , then , made too few changes in 2000 in order to improve financial management ?
Let me , on this point , refer to the Court of Auditors ' statement that , in 2000 , many steps towards reform had only just started to be taken , and that they will only gradually meet with success .
I cannot , at this juncture , list all the steps we have taken since then , but I will all the same highlight a few of them .
One example is in the personnel field .
Additions have been made to the total personnel complement for financial management , among other things by redeployment within the Commission to reinforce the financial units in the various Directorates-General , and Parliament has made additional posts available for 2001 .
The selection procedure for these is at present in progress , and it will result in 250 candidates being put on a list to strengthen the financial and personnel management sectors .
I would like , in addition , to mention the steps we are taking in training and development .
The Commission 's reforms as a whole have meant that there is definitely a greater need for training .
A total of 2 800 officials have already been trained in financial management by the Budget Directorate-General and another 1 700 will take part in courses of this sort in the next few months .
The technical assistance offices have also come in for a lot of criticism from us in the past .
There are 126 of them , and 93 will have had their contracts with us cancelled by the end of 2001 .
I see this as an important point ; it is something that has been achieved through pressure exerted by Parliament , and we will , for example , be continuing with decentralisation in the field of foreign affairs , in order to make greater use of local knowledge in implementing budget decisions .
This afternoon the Commission will be taking decisions about further new management systems and about the networking of national agencies .
A few weeks ago , we adopted a comprehensive package to improve personnel policy .
In the summer , I presented the report on the steps the Commission had either taken , or proposed to the legislature , to combat fraud , ranging from regulations on money laundering via customs measures through to the proposal for a European public prosecutor for financial offences .
There is much to do , but much has already been achieved .
The Commission is not only active in well over 100 States .
It also gives aid following natural catastrophes and gives humanitarian aid in crisis areas and war zones . It is active in many traditional fields , for example in aspects of agriculture , but it also makes funds available for many innovative projects suggested by Parliament .
This may sometimes involve large amounts totalling millions , but sometimes , too , relatively small sums of money .
We link up researchers and the results of their investigations , share in the financing of high-speed railway lines and of student exchange schemes .
This represents a truly broad spectrum of areas of expenditure , and there is nothing rigid about it .
The programmes change , the tasks change and the world changes , so we are all constantly being faced with new challenges , and all the European Union 's institutions have to be open to them .
We want to create good European policies , which means learning from mistakes in order to make good measures even better .
The reports of the Court of Auditors are a fundamental support to us in doing this .
So I thank the Court , those of its members who are leaving , those who are continuing to be members of it , and most especially its President .
Mr Karlsson , your presidency has seen the further development of the method for the statement of assurance , and the compilation of a very large number of special reports containing very definite and valuable recommendations .
The understanding of financial management has improved under your presidency and so , I believe , has the institutions ' understanding of each other .
For that you have my most especial thanks .
chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control . ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Karlsson , today you are presenting your annual report as President of the Court of Auditors , together with those Members of the Court still in office .
This is the last time you will present the report , as you are leaving office , as are a number of other Members of the Court . I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and the retiring Members of the Court both personally and on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control for the years of excellent and effective cooperation and mutual trust under your presidency , and also under the previous presidency of Professor Friedmann , who is also retiring .
There have occasionally been differences of opinion , but I believe that we have always managed to cooperate well , and we have , above all , performed a control function that has ultimately benefited the taxpayer .
So once again , many thanks .
The Annual Report of the Court before us today also demonstrates that we have made some further progress .
I only want to highlight a couple of points .
The most striking point is the large surplus of own resources : EUR 11.6 million or over 14 % of the budget has not been spent .
The finance ministers are , of course , delighted , as this means that they will have to pay less to the EU next year , but we in the Committee on Budgetary Control are concerned to know which of the objectives that we have set ourselves have not been achieved .
I believe that the Commission would be well advised - and I understand from the press that there will be surpluses again this year - to get to work on supplementary and rectifying budgets so that the money available is really spent on achieving objectives .
The complex and cumbersome nature of the legal framework and the extent of the controls therefore involved are also a matter of concern both for the Parliament and for the Court of Auditors , and , as Commissioner Schreyer has just said , for the Commission too .
We need to work to simplify things as a matter of urgency , so that the public can also obtain funding , rather than say , ' It is so complicated . I do not want any money from the European Union ' .
Controls need to be proportionate but also to be effective , to lead to positive outcomes and to have a preventive effect .
My last point is the positive statement of assurance , the SOA .
Anyone looking for concrete figures or percentages in relation to payments will be disappointed .
Once again , the Court has not mentioned any concrete figures .
This House had actually pressed for that .
The Court now wants to bring forward a refined method of producing this positive statement of assurance .
We are more than happy to cooperate on this , but we also have to look and analyse where errors are due to the Member States and where they are the Commission 's responsibility .
The Commission is ultimately responsible , and it must accept this responsibility .
I would like to thank you once again , Mr Karlsson , for your excellent cooperation , and I would like to wish all the retiring Members and you personally all the best for the future .
Mr President , I would also like to pass on my best regards to Mr Karlsson , thank him for his presentation and all the work he has done over the past few years .
I hope he will pass on our thanks to his other colleagues who are also leaving .
We must remember that this report is the first report which assesses the first full year of the Prodi Commission - a Commission which , let us remind ourselves , was appointed with the specific remit of radical overhaul and reform of the European Union .
The question we will be asking in our discharge procedure this year is : " Is the Commission delivering on that promise ? " .
Let us be clear .
If it is not , then the credibility of both the Prodi Commission and of this Parliament is on the line .
It is much too early to assess the success or failure of the Prodi Commission and of Commission reform .
The only question we can ask at this point is whether we are headed in the right direction .
Mr Karlsson , I noted your words last night .
There are a number of hopeful signs in this report .
So , where the Commission has specific responsibility , we do seem to be seeing some positive developments .
As you say , the strategy on BSE is basically sound .
The work of the Agency charged with the reconstruction of Kosovo was efficient and economical .
The reform programme is heading in the right direction .
You have approved the recasting of the financial regulation and the Commission 's proposals on financial incentives for top grade officials , although I note that you have some concerns about the Commission 's accounting mechanisms .
Perhaps Mrs Schreyer could comment on that .
We are not going to let the Commission off the hook .
There is a large area where the Commission has joint responsibility with the Member States , particularly in the agricultural sector and the structural funds .
The primary responsibility must lie with the Member States .
They are responsible for 85 % of the budget .
Here we see some serious structural weaknesses .
In the structural funds , we see problems in the application of regulations at every level .
The CAP accounts for over 40 % of the budget and where Member States are responsible there is no improvement .
Heads of stock continue be overstated .
We know that Belgium , Denmark , Ireland and the Netherlands have not signed the Convention on the Protection of Financial Interests .
We are disappointed , Mr Karlsson , that you did not mention them by name in the report .
Again the Court has failed to give a statement of assurance to the Commission .
As I said last night , this is a complicated and ever-changing procedure and I do not believe the Commission will ever get a statement of assurance .
So the main message , as far as I can see , is that the Commission should keep going .
It is on the right track .
Member States must stop hiding behind the Commission and assume their proper responsibility of protecting EU taxpayers ' money .
I too should like to express my appreciation for all the Members of the Court of Auditors who are departing .
It is noticeable again that this year , as the Court of Auditors has already expressed in rather vague terms , there is no Statement of Assurance .
The question arises as to how long this situation can continue like this .
2001 is the first year for which the current Commission shoulders all responsibility .
In my opinion , there should come a day when a positive Statement of Assurance can be made .
I should like to suggest that the Commission sets the year 2000 as a target date .
For each year , an action plan should be drafted in which the Commission outlines its objectives .
We must ensure that the necessary arrangements are then in place for certain Directorates-General , with a margin of error of , say , less than 1 % .
As far as the Member States are concerned , we all know that that is where the money is spent .
In my view , the system we are currently using for the agricultural funds is workable : if a Member State spends certain amounts inappropriately , the Commission will need to introduce capping .
I should like to see the Commission make proposals for extending this system to include other sectors of the budget , notably the Structural Funds .
Honourable Members of the Court of Auditors , Mr Karlsson , Mrs Schreyer , on behalf of my group , I should naturally like to echo the words of thanks which my fellow MEPs have already expressed .
I have started to wade through this tome .
I have to admit that this 24th Annual Report seems superior and that more names are included than before .
In other words , this Annual Report is simply a better read , it has to be said .
It also becomes clear that you are sending out a message , namely an urgent request for simplifying legislation .
Indeed , if legislation were simplified , fewer mistakes would be made , fewer irregularities would occur and this would probably result in less fraud .
When I read what was happening with the own resources and when I saw the results of the database , which gives an overview of all cases of fraud and irregularities established since 1996 , amounting to EUR 1.5 billion , I appreciated the significance of what we are doing .
On the basis of the Court of Auditors report , the OLAF reports , the work carried out by the rapporteurs and also our own studies , we will need to explain to the European taxpayers how their money is being spent .
I am delighted with the fact that the Annual Report devotes much attention to the role of the Member States .
Indeed , they do not sufficiently inspect the Community programmes which they manage in conjunction with the Commission .
Neither do they fight fraud satisfactorily when they collect their revenue .
The VAT carrousels are a prime example of this .
Finally , as Mrs Morgan has already stated , the Member States fail to implement legislation adequately .
In this connection , I should once again like to haul my own country over the coals .
In the Blak report , Belgium was attacked for not yet having ratified the 1995 agreement .
I have exchanged correspondence in this respect with the President of the Belgian Parliament , and four months ago , I was promised that this agreement would be ratified during the Belgian Presidency .
That has not been done to date .
That is an outright scandal , and I am grateful to the Court of Auditors for once again giving us the necessary ammunition today to ensure that the Belgian government and the Belgian Parliament carry out their tasks at long last .
It is a disgrace which we must continue to denounce in public .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although money is not everything , the way money is handled shows if a policy is successful or not .
Those were the words of a former President of the Court of Auditors , Bernhard Friedmann , and if we take those words as a yardstick for this year 's report , then we really have to ask just how successful the Union 's policies are in practice .
The report before us summarises what we already know from many other reports : there is still a need for reform in financial management and the way funds are implemented .
There are dramatic shortcomings in many areas , which suggests that financial errors are endemic .
The Commission 's tendency to blame irregularities and deficits the Court discovers chiefly on the Member States is unacceptable .
Of course the Member States cannot shake off their own responsibilities , if there are irregularities or fraud in the Member States , the Commission must act accordingly .
The recovery rate , that is the reimbursement of funds that have been lost , is not satisfactory .
It is not acceptable if Member States underperform in the fight against fraud because of lax controls and are then slow to get funds reimbursed as well .
Politically speaking , the Commission has final responsibility for the EU budget and it is accordingly also responsible for efficient implementation of funds and checks .
One of the things mentioned in the Commission 's responses on last year 's report is that new systems are being introduced which primarily aim to make it easier to check the efficiency of VAT collection in the individual Member States .
Given that significant shortcomings have also been identified in this area , we also have to ask how effective these control mechanisms are .
I would like to thank the Court of Auditors for its successful investigative work and I call on the Commission to take further structural reform actions so that mismanagement and financial errors become a thing of the past .
Mr President , what can I say in two minutes ?
Well , first of all and very simply , I shall say goodbye and thank you to President Karlsson .
I shall say goodbye , now that you are leaving us , after giving many years of loyal service , and thank you for the excellent cooperation that you developed with this House and for the quality of this report , which now seems like an impressive aircraft carrier , surrounded by a squadron of special reports .
I shall make three brief comments , as I have very little time .
First of all , I believe that you are right to emphasise that the major problem with the 2000 budget is the massive under-implementation of a number of funds .
Admittedly , Mrs Schreyer is right to say that there are sometimes good reasons for this under-implementation , but generally the budgetary authority feels a sense of frustration and is aware that there are problems related to this under-implementation .
I shall give four examples . The first is the overly complex regulations , the difficulties in managing the project cycle , the poor interaction in execution and control between the Commission and the Member States , and , lastly , the often pernickety control which has the effect of taking away responsibility .
These are the areas we will be focusing on in the discharge .
I have one comment to make on the DAS .
I am pleased to see that the Court of Auditors is keeping a good distance and we must do the same thing with the error rate .
The overall error rate is merely the scientifically dubious aggregation of spot checks , which , whilst interesting , are random .
I do not want everything to hinge on the error rate , which will determine everything .
The Court of Auditors is reassessing this issue .
Parliament must monitor and support this .
My third and final comment relates to the management of surpluses .
In my view , it is a shame that surpluses are systematically reimbursed to Member States .
In fact , economically speaking , this management strategy has a pro-cyclical effect , which is absurd .
We support growth when it is strong , and then , since there is a lack of money , we penalise growth when it is weak .
We should consider other forms of multi-annual regulation from a statutory point of view .
Mr President , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to focus , in this debate , on the Court of Auditors ' special report on export refunds .
This is yet another important contribution to our understanding of the vital need to promote a thorough reform of the CAP in areas such as the funding of exports of agricultural products .
Until today , I had never read , in one publication , such a devastating set of facts on the misuse of public funds by the European institutions , some of which are worth highlighting . EUR 80 million from the Community budget were used to fund supplies to Iraq , in breach of the embargo imposed by the United Nations .
Little or none of this money has to date been recovered . According to statements made by the Russian customs authorities themselves in August 2000 , almost 80 % of Community subsidies for exports to that country , currently being examined by OLAF , have proved to be fraudulent .
It should be remembered that Russia is the main destination for subsidised European exports .
The Community has set up free import agreements with candidate countries , but is still subsidising the export of dairy products to these countries .
As a result , we have the classic roundabout scenario already seen in Estonia , in which the Community subsidised butter exports , which were then imported free from customs duties .
The number of supposedly pure-bred cattle whose export the Community has already funded would be enough to give some importer countries , with Mediterranean or desert climates , huge reserves of pure-bred European cattle .
The system of control and monitoring bodies , designed to ensure the veracity of export statements has proved to be a complete fiasco .
The Commission assured us , even in the context of the last budgetary discharge and on the Fléchard procedure , that exports to Russia in particular , were now being properly monitored .
This report by the Court of Auditors categorically disproves the Commission ' s words .
Mr President , this is the first time that we have received a report that pertains to a period for which the Prodi Commission is entirely responsible .
Can we draw clear conclusions from it ?
No , not really .
That is why my group hopes that the discharge procedure will eventually give us the answer to the following questions : which countries cause most problems , which areas of policy are most problematic and what can be done about this , where does the Commission carry out its tasks and where does it fail to do so , but also where have improvements been made and where has that not been the case ?
We can already detect some improvement .
That is partly thanks to the commitment by this European Parliament , but also the Court of Auditors , for which we are very grateful .
However , this is still not enough .
Moreover , it is still not possible to issue a general Statement of Assurance , and the budget surplus is currently at an all-time high .
Progress has thus been made in small ways , but that is not enough to really gain the confidence of the people in Europe .
In the final analysis , that is what we all need to work towards .
Mr President , when I read the Never-Ending Story to my grandchild , Niklas , I think of the Court of Auditors ' annual report .
There are an incredible number of problems which crop up again and again , year after year . Lamentable control systems in the Member States , lost income from VAT , bureaucratic and complicated export refund arrangements , farmers who overstate how much land they have , misappropriation of structural funds , fraud involving research funds in the form of over-payment , and long-winded and bureaucratic procedures concerning the EU ' s external aid .
It is the same old story every single year .
However , it is now the Member States that are the biggest culprits .
It cannot be said often enough .
The agricultural and structural funds are what cause us problems .
There is a very tough approach this year to the management of the structural funds .
I proposed last year in my discharge report that the Commission should impose fines upon those Member States which offend again and again , and I am extremely pleased that Mrs Schreyer and the Commission have promised to look constructively at this possibility .
Denmark is also mentioned a couple of times in the annual report , and that is a couple of times too many .
There are problems with farmers ' overstating how much land they have , and pathetic control systems at quite a few custom houses .
The Danish practice of collecting users ' fees for the issue of export refunds has also been found to be illegal .
It is thanks to the Court of Auditors that the Commission has finally realised what is unlawful about this practice .
I am also pleased that we are working on the problems caused through the pile of work involving guarantee payments in Denmark , which are a disaster .
In this area , too , the Commission has been a good and effective partner .
I would also say to Mr Karlsson that I should never in my life have believed that a Dane would end up missing a Swede .
That is , however , the case and , since I , myself , am also leaving Parliament after this parliamentary term , we must set up a club for former Scandinavian MEPs in which we can rhapsodise about the old days .
I think that the children ' s book , ' Karlsson-on-the-Roof ' was written with you in mind .
Thank you for your fruitful cooperation over seven years .
Mr President , I have a couple of observations to make .
First , we need to recognise that , once again , the Court of Auditors has been unable to give a positive statement of assurance in respect of Commission expenditure .
I want to resist our gradually starting to regard the abnormal as being the norm .
We can perhaps do that in this case , but certainly not outside this area .
If this statement of assurance is procedurally weak , then I expect the Court of Auditors to make a statement to that effect .
Otherwise we must note that there is a weakness in Commission expenditure that needs to be criticised politically speaking .
My second point is that I am very grateful to you , Commissioner , for having highlighted the link between today 's debate on progress reports in connection with enlargement and the report of the Court of Auditors .
The Court of Auditors has told us that in respect of the new pre-accession instruments there was actually a zero expenditure policy in 2000 .
That means that in practice - and the Commission is talking about the first candidate countries acceding in 2004 - we have already wasted 20 % of the time available in the financial area .
And that means of course that we will have to work even harder in the coming years in order to implement the pre-accession instruments properly .
My third point is a comment about OLAF .
I was surprised , Mr Karlsson , that your report more or less suggested that by adding a reserve for setting up OLAF , Parliament had affected the independence of that body .
We felt obliged to do this when the Commission - as you know - simply transferred all UCLAF 's staff to OLAF , and apparently thought the job was done . And all the more so when we discovered from the OLAF Monitoring Committee for which you have such high regard that OLAF 's independence genuinely was at risk .
Now that we have been able to deal with the Commission , and I would specifically like to thank Mrs Schreyer for that , we have a new problem .
This is an area where I believe the Commission should step in , Mrs Schreyer .
The new Berlusconi government is now blocking one of the central posts in the new OLAF .
I would be grateful if we could all pull together on this one .
Mr President , the report of the Court of Auditors is always rather like the starting pistol for the discharge procedure , which we then hope to conclude in the April of the following year , although we do not always succeed .
Now that we have been working off the inherited liabilities for several years , something that has consistently attracted media attention , it now seems to me that we are tackling more systemic problems where it is not so much spectacular individual cases that are at stake , but rather whether systems are flawed in some way .
I would like to address once again three points that arose most often in the debate .
The first one is the high level of unimplemented appropriations .
In the course of the discharge procedure , we will have to ask ourselves whether this is attributable to the caution officials exercise before they will sign something off and spend money , or whether it is to do with overcomplicated rules .
For example , given the many complaints I hear from my constituents and others about all the red tape you have to cope with in dealing with Brussels if you want to get support for something , I fear that I know the answer already .
Although I am willing to accept it if this is clearly refuted , this is still an issue we need to sort out .
The second point is the statement of assurance , which has just been mentioned , and Mr Bösch has pointed out the dilemma we face .
We need to ask ourselves if there are more reliable instruments or if we are treating this statement of assurance in the same way that the Council does year after year , that is as a kind of weather report that is not binding in any way .
My final point is this : we need to establish whether the Member States ' handling of EU money has got worse or whether it is just being scrutinised more carefully now .
If the latter is the case , that would represent some progress and the Commission could be given some credit for that .
But it is the Commission 's job to step up pressure on the Member States , and we will be glad to help out .
Before giving the floor back to Mr Karlsson I should like to say to him on behalf of Parliament that we appreciate the fruitful cooperation we have had over the years of his presidency .
We wish you all the very best for the future .
Mr Blak has probably paid you the ultimate compliment by talking about a Dane missing a Swede .
That is like a Scot saying we want England to win at football .
That was a real compliment .
Thank you for your cooperation .
Mr President , on behalf of my outgoing colleagues and myself I would like to assure you that I have never regretted my resignation as much as at this moment .
I wish I could resign every time we met in order to listen to this lovely music .
So thank you very much for all the nice words .
Not least , when I go home to Sweden I shall tell them of these kind words from Denmark .
Thank you , Mr. Blak .
I realise there is a heavy agenda , but I would like to take this opportunity to say a few words .
I shall start with what Mr Kuhne has just said .
It seems that a number of issues have been put behind us and there is a feeling - which I also had yesterday in a meeting of the Committee on Budgetary Control - that we are now able to address some major issues for the future .
The first is one which underlies the budget surplus problem .
It is not so much the revenue I am thinking of , as the under-utilisation and the under-implementation of funds , which , in turn , has a lot to do with our problems in achieving good management and fighting fraud - namely the over-complexity of Union funds and administration and regulations .
I have had a long discussion on that with the discharge rapporteur , Mr Bourlanges , and I feel confident that this problem will be addressed now .
My personal advice to Parliament is to do everything in its power , together with other institutions , to simplify things .
On all the major issues , such as the pre-accession funds , structural funds and export refunds and on the market regulations in agriculture , we have built a mountain of complexity which , if I may for once step into the realm of political judgment , raises the major question of the European citizens ' confidence in this Union .
I would say that if I had to choose one of the tasks that Mr Kuhne mentioned as being the most important , it would be : simplify , for heaven 's sake !
I wish you every success in that .
I think that this Parliament , together with the Court of Auditors and the other institutions , will in the future manage to increase confidence among European citizens in our great project , which , of course , is the primary goal for all of our institutions .
With that , I thank you once again , on behalf of myself and my colleagues , for your kind words and for this most stimulating and interesting exchange of views .
That concludes this item .
Money laundering
The next item is the report ( A5-380 / 2001 ) by Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 91 / 308 / EEC of 10 June 1991 on prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering ( PE-CONS 3654 / 2001 - C5-0496 / 2001 - 1999 / 0152 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this second directive on money laundering in Europe has a long history .
You know that legislation on money laundering in the Member States of the European Union has its roots not so much in the will of the national legislatures but rather in the fact that back in 1991 the European Union brought in the first money-laundering directive , which acted as a catalyst for a string of national money-laundering laws being adopted .
However , the 1991 directive only set a minimum standard .
This minimum standard provided that drug-related offences should be included in the list of predicate offences , and with regard to professions that were obliged to take part in the fight against money laundering , only banks and providers of financial services were covered by compulsory provisions .
This led to major differences in transposal in Europe .
There were Member States that went well beyond this minimum standard , and other Member States that only implemented the minimum standard .
Back in 1995 , the European Parliament 's then Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs organised a major hearing on this .
The outcome of that hearing was that the differences in transposal were leading to major problems in combating money laundering in Europe , as cooperation between the Member States was not functioning adequately either .
For us in this House , the result - and there were two reports on this , one in 1996 and the other in 1998 - was that we called on the Commission to bring forward a second directive in order to raise standards in Europe , and in particular to extend the list of predicate offences and the list of professions covered .
At that time we suggested that the professions covered should include dealers in luxury items , casinos , auctioneers and also solicitors , notaries and other providers of legal advice .
The Commission then brought forward its proposal in 1999 , but we considered that at least as far as providers of legal advice were concerned , it was not sufficiently sensitive .
As you know , since the Charter of Nice at least , citizens have the right to legal advice and representation , and this is also rooted in various national constitutions .
This can only be effectively guaranteed if those citizens are also in a position to give their legal adviser any information safe in the knowledge that this will be kept confidential and that their legal adviser will not phone the public prosecutor the next day and pass on this information .
That is why Parliament was concerned to preserve this right at first reading , while at the same time effectively combating money laundering in Europe .
This then went into the conciliation procedure , and I believe that the compromise which emerged was a good one .
The Council gave ground on the Member States being allowed , in accordance with their own legal traditions , to let legal advice continue to be covered by the obligation of professional secrecy .
On the other hand , Parliament also gave some ground , by not demanding that this arrangement should be made compulsory , but that it should instead be at the discretion of national legislatures .
Article 6 ( 3 ) therefore gives all Member States the option , depending on their own national legal traditions , of providing for the obligation of professional secrecy to be observed in the area of legal advice .
Exactly the same procedure was followed for other contentious points , and some excellent compromises were reached on those too .
The subject of tipping off , in other words a ban on information given to one 's legal adviser being passed on to others , has also been solved by means of a compromise under Article 6 ( 3 ) , that is to say by means of a discretionary arrangement .
The issue of what should be done with information received in this way and which is in the hands of the public prosecutor 's office has been left at the discretion of national legislatures .
To put it simply , all the parties involved finally said that they were not 100 % satisfied with this compromise , nor was it ideal , but they could live with it .
That is exactly what a good compromise is about , and I would therefore like to recommend to this House that it should accept the proposal that has emerged from the Conciliation Committee , thus making a substantial contribution to strengthening the fight against money laundering in Europe .
Against the background of the present situation , and the need to combat terrorism , this is an important factor .
On the other hand , we have accordingly also managed to ensure that our citizens ' fundamental rights have been preserved without any need to interfere with mature national legal traditions which in some cases are of a constitutional nature .
All in all , a good compromise then , please vote for it .
Mr President , I represent a minority .
The new Recital 16 says that there is an obligation to report suspicions " if the legal counsellor is taking part in money laundering activities , the legal advice is provided for money laundering purposes , or the lawyer knows that the client is seeking legal advice for money laundering purposes " .
That is going too far .
That is why I am voting against this .
It would destroy the integrity of advice .
It also has a second implication which has not up to now been the case under our existing legislation : in all three cases the legal counsellor or lawyer would be committing a criminal offence .
He would therefore also have to denounce himself .
That is totally unheard of anywhere in the world .
I am fairly sure that even in the Stone Age there was no law saying that .
For some inexplicable reason , the Commission has felt moved for the first time ever in law to adopt a legal provision whereby one must denounce oneself .
I certainly cannot vote for that .
Lessing comes to mind , who said that if enlightenment is only a small light glimmering in the darkness , there is at least still some hope in the world .
You have made the same mistake as with the OLAF legislation , which in the end has even penetrated into Members ' offices .
You will be stopped there .
This could not stand up to constitutional scrutiny .
When we were debating the OLAF legislation , I said that the European Union as a whole had had a rush of regulatory blood to the head .
We seem to have a similar phenomenon again here .
I also regard it as a matter for great regret that the legal profession has shown so little backbone on this issue .
Mr President , one of the biggest gaps in the anti-money laundering regime has been that it only applied to financial institutions .
As successive international reports have made clear , lawyers and other professionals become vulnerable to exploitation as unwitting accomplices in the washing of dirty money from criminals and terrorists as banks tighten up , which , I am glad to say , they are at last having to do .
I regard the outcome of the conciliation on this directive as satisfactory if it is interpreted in a common sense way .
That means that lawyers , accountants and tax advisers must , outside a strict definition of legal privilege , report transactions that are suspicious , in other words , that they have reason to believe their client is involved in money laundering .
This is the only feasible interpretation .
There has been a huge amount of hype on this directive aimed at protecting lawyers ' vested interests and not , I am afraid to say , individual rights .
This has delayed the finalisation of the directive for an unnecessary six months .
Parliament has not exactly covered itself with glory .
I hope all Member States will declare that they have no intention of invoking the option to exempt lawyers from the ban on tipping off clients that the authorities have been alerted .
We need to make sure that our legal and financial systems are not exploited , rather than concentrating on the position of the lawyers themselves and their own self-interest .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on succeeding in achieving a sensible joint proposal on the more important points of this report in codecision .
However , the Radical Members of the Bonino List will not be able to vote for this report because it has two shortcomings : the first concerns the joint text itself which gives the Member States ' the right to use information obtained through proceedings combating money laundering for other types of investigations as well .
This point introduces the danger that , in actual fact , the investigating authorities might use investigations into money laundering to obtain special powers as a way to get round the rules , so to speak , a way to get round the normal protection rights governing information obtained during proceedings on other issues .
The second point on which we have reservations is more general : it is the recommendation that the fight against money laundering should be seen as the priority .
In our opinion , if we are to win the battle , if we are to strike at the profits of criminal organisations , our most urgent priority should be to legalise drugs .
This text was adopted on the wave of events following the attacks of 11 September .
We must not forget that Afghanistan , which we are currently attacking with military force , is responsible for 80 % of the world ' s opium production .
Well then , maybe a policy of legalising drugs would be a more effective way of reducing the power of the drug barons than pursuing their capital throughout the world .
Mr President , the thorny problem in the text before us is , of course , the balance between the legally recognised obligation of professional secrecy , on the one hand , and , on the other , the duty to pass information which assists the fight against money laundering to the appropriate authorities .
The money-laundering directive imposes a string of obligations on credit and financial institutions , with the result that money launderers have simply switched to other sectors , hence the need to extend the scope of the directive to other professions .
Whilst we of course welcome more stringent measures , they should not lead to a watering down of the obligation of professional secrecy for various professions , and above all for lawyers , notaries and tax consultants .
Mr Rothley is right in saying that the text before us is chipping away at the principle of nemo tenetur se ipsum accusare , no one is bound to incriminate himself .
However , that is the very compromise that we think is workable , and we believe that the need to balance professional secrecy on the one hand and the need to bring criminals to book on the other has been solved in an acceptable way , and we shall therefore be voting in favour of this .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate and thank the rapporteur .
Because of your commitment , we have been able to see off the attack the Council and Commission were making on the fundamental rights and rights to defence of Europe 's citizens .
It is not acceptable for defence counsel , solicitors , tax consultants and notaries simply to be turned into part of the public prosecution service .
It is also evident that the battle to maintain rights to defence is not over yet .
The directive still has to be transposed into national legislation , and we must continue to argue that it should not be subject to an excessively narrow interpretation at national level , thus restricting citizens ' fundamental rights and rights to defence .
However , I can also assure you that I will be making representations to the appropriate Austrian authorities to make sure that precisely this does not happen .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission , I welcome very much the agreement which has been reached by Parliament and the Council .
Delegations in the conciliation procedure on the proposal for a second money laundering directive have given their support to this compromise proposal , and the Commission is duly appreciative .

I should like in particular to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , and also vice-president Provan for co-chairing the conciliation meeting , for their determined efforts to reach an agreement which , as I have said , is very much welcomed by the Commission .
The Commission proposal to update and extend the 1991 anti-money-laundering directive - which Parliament called for as early as 1995 , as was mentioned quite rightly this morning - has raised difficult and sensitive issues of which the Commission is fully aware .
Not least , the involvement of the professions in the anti-money-laundering defences has attracted the attention of many people interested in this subject and , in particular , Members of this Parliament .
The Commission believes that the joint text agreed in the conciliation procedure constitutes a good compromise , taking account of the legitimate concerns of both Parliament and the Council .
The fight against money laundering is an essential aspect of the fight against serious and organised crime .
Since the tragic events of 11 September , it has also become an integral part of the fight against the financing of terrorism .
The proposal before us now , to strengthen the European Union 's anti-money-laundering defences , has aroused great interest in the world outside the European Union , not least in the so-called financial action task force which is in the process of updating its 40 recommendations .
So to sum up , I commend the joint text to Parliament and I look forward to the earliest possible adoption and implementation of this important new directive .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Approximation of civil and commercial law
The next item is the report ( A5-384 / 2001 ) by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the approximation of the civil and commercial law of the Member States [ COM ( 2001 ) 398 - C5-0471 / 2001 - 2001 / 2187 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this too is a very important report .
What is it about ?
It is about the fact that although the internal market in Europe is becoming ever more integrated , there are also various deficits , as we all know .
The Commission , the Parliament and the Council have been trying for many years to achieve joint legislation , particularly in the field of consumer protection .
In the communication on contract law which the Commission has brought forward , and which is also referred to in this report , the Commission covered in detail the position on the common body of law which already exists in the European Union , and also referred to all the directives already in existence in this field .
However , if you take a closer look at these directives , you will see that they are not always necessarily consistent .
It is quite conceivable for there to be a contract entered into between a purchaser and a vendor in which the purchaser may have to sign three different cancellation statements with different cancellation deadlines , because totally different deadlines are found in different directives , such as the distance-selling directive and other directives .
It is pretty obvious that this does little for consumer protection and is sheer nonsense .
That is why it is necessary for this common body of law to be consolidated and summarised to achieve a common result .
There are many reasons why this situation has come about .
It can be explained , in part , simply by the fact that within the European institutions totally different directorates-general , committees and Councils were responsible for individual aspects , and of course they always looked at things from their own isolated point of view , which then led to quite different end results .
So up to now there has not been an integrated approach , an integrated view of the approximation of civil rights .
I think it is a very good thing that following the decisions taken at the Tampere Council , the Commission now intends , just like this House , to adopt an integrated approach in future .
This is a matter of urgent necessity , as the volume of cross-border trade is on the increase in Europe .
There are two key factors which explain this .
The first is , of course , the introduction of the euro next year .
A second factor is the impact of modern technology , and I only have to mention electronic commerce .
If , in the future , you order goods or other commodities via electronic commerce , you will have no idea , or , at least , you frequently will not have , of where the company you are dealing with is based .
This is leading to an inevitable growth in cross-border trade .
That is why I believe that it is also necessary for us to develop more common definitions of offences and a broader common body of Community law .
The present electronic commerce directive , which we in this House supported , is not therefore , as we already know , an ideal solution .
As the country of origin principle applies here , whereas in the case of consumer rights law the country of destination principle applies , this can lead in practice to situations such as a district court judge in Cologne having to apply Irish law in parallel with German law .
I would not mind betting that this will lead to considerable problems when only trifling amounts are at stake and with bread-and-butter legal cases .
This demonstrates that we need to develop a broader common body of law in future .
My report now envisages , with the support of many expert groups who have been calling for this for a long time , that the Commission should continue its work by means of an action plan covering several years .
At the end of that process , and this is my belief at least , the result should be a common body of law within the European Union , for cross-border transactions at least , which is as extensive as possible .
With regard to transparency , I believe that this is necessary , not only for consumers , but also for businesspeople , and this also applies to legal certainty , legal practicality and the application of the law .
I therefore wish to ask the House to give its approval to the proposal emanating from the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on this report regarding the approximation of the civil and commercial law of the Member States .
This is , as it were , the starting pistol for the Commission 's work .
I know that the Council is currently considering this matter in parallel with ourselves , and that it is intended to deal with this subject at the Laeken Summit .
I believe that everyone in Europe has recognised that this issue is of a very high priority , and that progress needs to be made with this work .
In order to exert a little bit of pressure , I think that we should approve this action plan .
Mr President , this is a rather peculiar cooperation procedure between Parliament and the Commission , at an initial phase of the Commission ' s work .
The communication presented to us by the Commission referred to a limited aspect of the harmonisation of private law , specifically contract law , and the report presented by Mr Lehne deals which a much wider scope , because it refers to the harmonisation of private law in general .
We , in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , considered that contract law was probably too narrow a scope and that it would not be sufficient to produce harmonisation of private law in general , which is necessary , as Mr Lehne pointed out , above all within the framework of the introduction of the euro and of the generalisation of European contracts .
The Commission ' s communication is very broad , given the aspects it deals with and the questions it poses .
We , in Parliament , clearly cannot work intensely and on time , as we would have liked , but we can make some observations .
I will focus on one : the possibility that , in relation to harmonisation , more reference should be made to the regulation and less to the directive .
Because we are seeing that every time a Community directive is adopted , it gives rise to fifteen different national legislations , which leads us to think that we are possibly not achieving the objective of harmonisation , but quite the opposite , because the Community directive paradoxically leads to discrepancies in the development of each national legislation .
I know that this is a difficult issue , because there is still legislative zeal of a national nature , but it is one of the possibilities for development by means of Community legislation , instead of merely indirect harmonisation via a directive .
I must stop here through lack of time , but not without congratulating the Commission on its initiative and the rapporteur on his report .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate our rapporteur on taking this important issue forward and also to congratulate the Commission on a very good consultation document on contract law .
We have made a good start in what is a very politically sensitive area .
Although we might see the practical arguments for moving forward because of the advent of the euro and because of e-commerce , we have to ensure that our citizens are also comfortable with this .
Every time we talk about approximation of core civil law subjects , I see scare stories in the English press that English common law is about to be replaced by the Code Napoléon , complete with a small picture of Napoleon .
Last week English contract law was supposed to be under threat .
However misguided some of this comment might be , we have to respect the concerns and deal with them .
The process outlined in this report will allow us to do so .
The Commission has made some very pragmatic suggestions about contract law , which I hope the Council will act on .
It was , after all , the Council that brought forward this idea of convergence in the Tampere agenda .
We must insist that the area of freedom and justice referred to there is as much about civil law as about criminal law .
The Tampere conclusions foresaw convergence in civil law .
Convergence is a long process , not an abrupt event .
It is not about imposing a European civil code .
It is about channelling and guiding developments in Community law to give us a more coherent and less piecemeal approach , ultimately allowing more knowledge of the law and greater access to justice across Europe 's internal market .
In considering these matters , we would do much better to concentrate on what draws us together in Europe 's common legal heritage .
All our legal traditions owe something to the early modern fusion of feudal , Roman and canon law called ius commune .
We now have the chance to guide and structure the modern reconvergence of our legal systems .
We should welcome that opportunity .
Mr President , there was a time when Europeans travelled all over the universities of Europe and studied what was still a common law based on the Roman law .
Indeed , in my own country , Scotland , that lasted until the 17th century , during which 6000 members of the Faculty of Advocates of Scotland at various times studied in the universities of Utrecht and Leiden .
That kind of interaction of lawyers is one of the things which contributed most to our civilisation and from which our legal civilisation has grown .
So this is a very good project and the time-tabling suggested by Mr Lehne and the Commission is feasible and worthwhile .
Nevertheless , as Mrs Wallis has said , legal traditions are valued objects .
People concern themselves greatly about the coherence and integrity of a legal order .
Therefore it must be with great sensitivity that we move forward in bringing back together again legal systems and legal traditions through the kinds of common definition that Mr Lehne is suggesting .
With that in mind , I have one doubt and it involves a difference with what Mr Medina Ortega has just said .
Clause 14 of the report suggests that a regulation is really the best way to take this forward .
The difficulty relates to subsidiarity .
If these things are to be done well , common definitions will have to be sensitively adapted and grafted into what are very deep and organic legal traditions .
You cannot do that by thrusting a regulation down the throats of the legal community .
We in the United Kingdom have two legal systems , rather distinct , and it is going to be absolutely vital for this development that both are adequately and properly represented in further discussions , as they have been on bodies like the Lando Commission in the past .
Mr President , I would first like to strike a critical note , because although the rapporteur explained the need for haste to the committee and I also understand that , I believe that there should not be fast-track procedures of this kind , because they can lead to botch-ups .
However , I would like to specifically exclude the rapporteur 's report from that comment .
I am totally in agreement with the content of the report , because approximation of Community law as it applies to SMEs is also absolutely necessary if we are to increase legal certainty for cross-border contracts , especially in view of the forthcoming enlargement of the Union .
It would be irresponsible to create free trade areas without making provision for the necessary instruments to keep commercial trade on track .
However , it is my belief , and this is something that Mr MacCormick just touched upon , that the mature traditions underpinning the legal systems of the Member States impose certain limitations on the approximation of civil and commercial law , and that a failure to respect those traditions would inevitably lead to the opposite of what we are trying to achieve .
However , I believe that these problems have been adequately addressed and that it is also possible to achieve this objective , which we will therefore be supporting .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lehne , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to know how many legal transactions have taken place in the European Union during the last 15 minutes , while we have been debating .
Would it be a million , 10 million or even 100 million ?
Whatever , I believe that it must be a large figure .
We are in a world of what in German we call " Massengeschäfte " a term that is not perhaps particularly easy to translate into other languages - bread-and-butter transactions , perhaps .
I am sure that only a fraction of these legal transactions will have been cross-border , and I am equally sure that these transactions , ranging from Lapland to Sicily , from Scotland to Bavaria , will have been conducted according to totally different traditions and customs .
That is why we need to be clear that this is a very sensitive area and however ambitious we may be , we still need to proceed very carefully and prudently .
Mrs Wallis has already referred to the reaction in the United Kingdom , for example .
So I think it is reasonable for the Commission to propose in its Option II that we should initially work out some general legal principles .
One expert very appositely said that the problem with legal convergence is not so much the rules as the exceptions .
We have discovered precisely that through our own work , in the case of warranty periods on purchases , interest on arrears , money laundering and also the takeover directive .
General principles can be agreed quickly , but in contrast it is very difficult to harmonise which groups should be given special treatment and who qualifies for special protection .
That is why we also need to set reasonable priorities for our work .
The cross-border aspects should be prioritised in the first place .
We need to achieve compatibility between European legislation and national legislation , but national legislative provisions also need to be made compatible with each other .
Courts need to cooperate more effectively and mutual legal assistance needs to be guaranteed .
I believe that these are concrete , practical steps that we can implement from one day to the next , which would assist legal transactions between our citizens within the single market .
I think that in considering these matters , we should also deal with the concept of working towards a European law as an option for parties entering into contracts .
They could therefore choose either to opt for a legal system created in Europe or else continue to use national law .
As I see it , this would be a kind of soft harmonisation , setting in train a process of convergence which , Mr MacCormick , would be better than regulations adopted as an abrupt event , as Mrs Wallis put it .
Against this background I would also like to say that Mr Lehne 's draft does not , of course , reiterate the demands that we made in 1989 and 1994 .
At that time we demanded that a European Civil Code should be drawn up , but as far as I can see , that proposal has not been incorporated in the texts adopted in committee nor in the amendments .
We have adopted a good , reasonable and cautious approach here .
I would like to thank both the rapporteur and all those who helped with the hearing for their assistance .
Mr President , by and large I agree with the rapporteur , and in the limited time I have available I can only mention one or two rather unrelated points .
What we need to start with at EU level is coherent and homogeneous legislation .
That is very often not the case , because terms are used which have a different meaning in other legal texts .
Scarcely any academic research has been done into this aspect of Community law .
So the first thing we should do is to ensure coherence and homogeneity in our own legal texts , and I would urge you to set up an expert committee to do this .
That is one point .
The other point that I would like to address is how this relates to international civil law .
It seems to me that Mr Lehne has rather neglected this aspect in his report .
International civil law can make an important contribution to overcoming the difficulties involved in cross-border legal disputes , and as a rule , and I am choosing my words very carefully now , international civil law is certainly not inferior to Community law , certainly as far as legal culture and the quality of legal texts are concerned .
So if , as in the case of the directive on electronic commerce , you take issue with international civil law , the situation becomes very difficult indeed .
We therefore need to examine once more to what extent we can retain international civil law .
My final point concerns national regulations .
I think this is an area where we should not overreach ourselves .
That will be very difficult .
I believe that it would be best for us to have convincing law making in the European Union .
Mr President , I welcome this opportunity to congratulate Parliament and especially the Committee on Legal Affairs and its rapporteur , Mr Lehne , on its timely report on the approximation of the civil and commercial laws of the Member States .
Given the forthcoming European Council in December in Laeken , for which this report will be of relevance , I am particularly pleased that the European Parliament is discussing this report here today .
The European Council will therefore have at its disposal not only the Commission 's communication and the Council 's report , but also the report by the European Parliament , which handles this important issue in the necessary depth .
The Commission also very much welcomes the report as Parliament 's response to the Commission 's consultation process , launched by the communication on European contract law .
It is absolutely essential that the Commission should get as much feedback and input as possible from the other EC institutions so that it can establish its future approach in the area of contract law .
One fundamental question confronts the Commission , as well as Parliament and the Council as the two branches of the European legislature .
Should we continue with the existing piecemeal approach of harmonising European contract law in a very sector-specific way , as has been done for the past 20 years , or should we adopt a new approach ?
It is obvious that if the existing approach corresponds to the needs of the European Union then we should continue it .
If , however , there are problems despite , or possibly even because of , the existing approach , then we should be brave enough to change it .
It was in order to get a reply to this fundamental question that the Commission adopted its communication on European contract law .
The choice of our future approach is highly important for the smooth functioning of the internal market and the participation of consumers , small- and medium-sized enterprises and all other economic operators , as well as for the uniform application of Community law .
We have already received a large number of constructive comments and reactions which confirm that the Commission 's initiative is of great interest to all stakeholders .
Of course not all the reactions point in the same direction , but this is inevitable with such a complex subject where so many issues are raised and different options need to be considered .
The reactions will be examined in depth by the Commission .
Obviously the Commission will attach great importance to Parliament 's response to our communication which , once you have adopted it , will be very carefully analysed .
The Commission will decide what suggestions it will make in the light of the reports from Parliament and the Council , the possible reaction from the European Council and the responses to our consultation process .
I understand that the Council may ask the Commission to report to the Community institutions and the public on the consultation process , together with any observations and recommendations if necessary in the form of a Green or White Paper , not later than 31 December 2002 .
The European Parliament 's proposal for an action plan is particularly relevant in this context .
The Commission has taken due note of the ambitious deadlines for specific steps to be taken .
In conclusion , I would like to express the Commission 's thanks for the careful analysis that has gone into this report .
If there are problems for the internal market and the uniform application of Community law which need to be tackled , it is obvious that whatever line we take this will be a longer term project of considerable importance .
So , this is certainly not the last time that we will debate questions of European contract law in this House .
I submitted the Commission communication to the college , together with my colleagues Mr Vitorino , Mr Bolkestein and Mr Liikanen .

At the last Council meeting on the internal market and consumer affairs , I emphasised my strong personal interest in this matter , not only because I am convinced of its value but also because of my own professional background as a practising barrister and as international commercial arbitrator .
For those who have expressed concern about the survival of the common law system : that is the system that I have worked in myself for 27 years and I have some attachment to it .
Perhaps with that background it will be able to make sure that these issues and sensitivities are taken fully into account .
This is an ambitious project but it is a feasible project .
When I worked on contracts where arbitration was needed or on dispute had to be resolved , the " applicable law " was - lex mercatoria .
What is that ?
Those who have to enter into contracts with a term like that will feel perfectly comfortable with something a bit more rigid and rigorous , which is what all of us in this House are aiming at .
My colleagues and I are therefore looking forward to constructive dialogue with Parliament and the other EC institutions in the future .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Byrne .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Arbitrary arrests and the political situation in Laos
The next item is the Commission statement on arbitrary arrests and the political situation in Laos .
Mr President , I am honoured to make this declaration on behalf of the Commission on the arrests in Laos PDR .
The Commission welcomes the release of the five members of the Transnational Radical Party who had been arrested on 26 October in Vientiane , Laos PDR , after staging a peaceful demonstration .
We are particularly happy to see Mr Dupuis back .
Their release followed 14 days of detention , during which the Commission and EU Member States made frequent contacts with the Laotian authorities to ensure a rapid resolution of the situation .
At a public trial on 9 November , the detainees were found guilty of violating Laotian law .
They were given suspended sentences before being released and expelled from the country .
In relation to this incident , the Commission notes that the human rights situation in Laos PDR , including the case of the Laotian students who organised a demonstration for freedom and democracy in Laos PDR in October 1999 , continues to give cause for concern .
The Commission , together with the diplomatic missions of the EU Member States , is following the human rights situation in the country closely and participating in all EU démarches to the government of Laos PDR on these issues .
Included in these issues are deficiencies in the rule of law .
There are still a number of flaws in the administration of justice , notably cases of arbitrary arrest , lengthy pre-trial detention and lack of guarantees of due process .
Many of these problems are exacerbated by the poor training of people working in the judicial system and the Commission has therefore offered assistance to the government of Laos PDR , both in reforming the system and in developing its human resources .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the arbitrary arrest of a Member of the European Parliament and a number of his fellow campaigners in Vientiane has put a severe strain on relations between the European Union and Laos .
In the intervening period both the institutions of the European Union and also the Member States concerned have done everything in their power to secure the release of those arrested .
In this context I would like to thank both the Commission and also the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , under the leadership of Elmar Brok , and also all those colleagues who have become involved in this issue .
Those arrested have now been released again .
The Italian government was particularly helpful in that it sent a government representative to Vientiane .
This action was ultimately successful .
I would also specifically like to thank the Ambassador of the Lao People 's Democratic Republic , who made himself available for discussions with us both here and in Brussels and who obviously also had a very positive influence on events .
Laos has been a single-party state since 1975 , that is to say that it is not a democracy as we understand it .
Places where there is no democracy and no freedom of choice usually do not have any constitutional checks either , and Laos is no exception to this .
Despite this , the European Union has a cooperation agreement with Laos , and in this framework the European Union is assisting not only the development of that country but is also helping to encourage democracy and constitutionality .
The ASEAN delegation accepted only this year that this assistance was indeed useful .
There are some very good projects in which the European Union is involved .
I would like to make it clear at this point that regardless of the unacceptable behaviour of the powers that be in Laos , we stand by our cooperation agreement and our willingness to provide assistance .
I also concede that our concept of democracy and constitutionality does not necessarily have to be accepted by every country on this planet .
In fact we need to ask ourselves every now and again if the European Parliament is really in a position to wave its finger at every country in the world and lecture them about democracy and constitutionality .
Nevertheless , we do have our principles and they have been infringed in this case .
We also intend to make sure that they are respected in future .
But we are willing to carry on helping Laos , whose people are amongst the poorest in the world , and to contribute to ensuring that this country has a chance of achieving a degree of prosperity .
However , we also want democracy and constitutionality to occupy their rightful place in Laos .
Mr President , we are now feeling relieved as our fellow Member , Olivier Dupuis , is fortunately back with us .
We should , however , revisit the problems that we were discussing last week so that we are somewhat less hesitant , should we have the misfortune to be in this situation again in the future .
First of all , we were facing some serious human rights issues .
Can a country detain individuals , without any form of trial , particularly foreign nationals who publicly campaign for democracy and human rights and condemn the breaches committed by the host country ?
Even if Laotian law permitted this type of ban on demonstrations , it goes without saying that the immediate arrest of peaceful demonstrators was completely disproportionate .
Furthermore , it is natural for the European Union to be vigilant about whether or not a country like Laos observes the clause on human rights enshrined in the cooperation agreement that it signed .
Secondly , we were facing an institutional challenge that directly concerned the European Parliament , since one of the detainees was an MEP .
Of course , Mr Dupuis never asked for preferential treatment .
The European Parliament cannot , however , remain indifferent to how one of its members is treated .
The credibility and the honour of our institution , and even that of the European Union as a whole , depend on this .
This must be clear to everyone so that if we ever have the misfortune to be in this situation again , everyone has a role : the Commission , the Council , the High Representative , the Member States , Parliament , particularly the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy will react quickly and know exactly what to do and how to do it .
In fact , everyone did take the appropriate action , and we should welcome this .
We now need to do everything we can in order to encourage Laos to move forward , which is the purpose of the resolution that we shall be voting on this week .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to welcome the Prince Regent and the members of the Laotian royal family , the leaders and those in charge of the Laotian human rights organisations , my friends , Massimo Lensi and Bruno Mellano , who were my companions-in-arms during the demonstration and over the following days in Laos .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would once again like to thank you and President Fontaine , and all of you who supported the purpose of our action , which was and still is to free the five student leaders who were arrested in 1999 and about whom we still have no news today .
I think that the issue that we raised is , of course , much wider , it concerns democracy , and the globalisation of democracy .
At the beginning of the 1990s , Laos launched a process to bring about democratic change that , during the first five years , took the form of a number of openings in the economic sector .
Since 1995 , however , we have witnessed an extremely serious drift , a transformation of the Communist regime into an utterly ' clepto-Communist ' regime , or rather into a hybrid of clepto-Communism and narco-Communism .
This is extremely serious .
The people of Laos face this every day , and they are dying in their thousands at the hands of this regime .
Tens of thousands of Laotians , starting with the royal family of Laos , have quite simply been murdered in dribs and drabs .
The European Union , and also the Member States , must therefore understand the tragic nature of the situation in Laos .
We should first of all understand that the Stalinists and the drug traffickers who are running this country are preventing the democrats , both inside and outside Laos , and also those in favour of reform within the regime , from promoting reforms .
Instead of continuing to support politically correct projects , such as the promotion of women , the promotion of rural development , the protection of the environment , which , albeit worthwhile , do not tackle the root of the problem , the European Union should specifically attack the root of the problem which is democratic change , penal code reform , constitutional reform and guarantees of fundamental rights .
And I do not believe that the Commission and the Member States are doing what they should be doing in this area .
We must therefore change our policy , re-focus on law and on the promotion of law , and this is what we are attempting to do with the text of this resolution .
Mr President , I welcome the release of Mr Dupuis and our other four Radical friends from prison , but , at the same time , I am extremely concerned for the other five political detainees who are still being detained under arbitrary arrest .
We are concerned for their fate but what concerns us most is the fact that there has been no news of them at all for two years .
I am appalled by the unnecessary delay with which this institution reacted to the violence suffered by Mr Dupuis and the other Radical activists .
Lastly , Mr President , I would like to express my concern at a complex case of hypocrisy which Parliament and the European institutions have failed to address : on the one hand , they regularly , emotionally , bring up the issue of human rights , for the protection of human rights is a symbol of our political prowess and pride , yet , on the other , they are reluctant to apply the clause providing for the suspension of economic and commercial relations with those countries which systematically violate these rights , and not just in the case of Laos .
We should not be asking Parliament to teach the world democracy : rather , we should be demanding the greatest possible consistency from our institutions .
Thank you very much , Mr Fava .
I have received a motion for resolution pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Services of general interest in Europe
The next item is the report ( A5-0361 / 2001 ) by Mr Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication ' Services of General Interest in Europe ' [ COM ( 2000 ) 580 - C5-0399 / 2001 - 2001 / 2157 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , general interest services are services of both an economic and non-economic nature which are geared towards the public interest and in whose provision both the public at large and the state have a special interest .
In the various Member States of the European Union , this includes supplying the public with services in the fields of energy , water , waste disposal , transport , telecommunications , post , media , finance and insurance , a basic social , educational and training system , social services , external and internal security , a judiciary and a system of registration .
You will see from this broad span of services how wide-ranging this subject is .
Why are we concerned with this area ?
Because some Member States , and , in particular , Germany , have questioned the power of the Commission to take decisions under Article 86 of the EC Treaty , and have also challenged the enactment of secondary Community law such as the transparency directive .
I believe that there is no justification for the fears of the Länder and municipalities that competition law will greatly undermine their powers and destroy the existing network of mature , tried and tested general interest structures .
Today we wish Parliament to adopt an opinion on the decisions to be taken by the Heads of State and Government in Laeken , and I would like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues very sincerely for their cooperation on this issue .
We have been trying for over a year , by means of hearings and a great many debates , to identify a common line .
The Commission 's behaviour on this issue has been objective and I think I can say successful .
I would therefore like to thank the Commission , which I see is still represented here .
The Commission has comprehensively described the Community law framework .
It has presented the principles of neutrality , freedom of definition and proportionality , which we support , and in response to the question of how more legal certainty is to be achieved , it has proposed the use of exempting regulations and case-by-case decisions .
This is one of the questions that have to be resolved .
Whereas a good many Members favour an amendment to Article 16 , we have agreed to propose a framework directive on the basis of Article 95 , the internal market article , which will allow all unresolved issues to be settled , and using the codecision procedure , this is not to be a Council regulation or a Commission instrument , but a directive under the codecision procedure , so that we will be able to fully participate in decision making on these marginal issues under competition law .
There were two pivotal points in the debate : to what extent can we maintain structures that have developed along traditional lines or need to be opened up with regard to free markets and competition ?
Secondly , to what extent is it permissible for the state to subsidise general interest services ?
And if so , is there a difference between public and private companies ?
What general interest services come under EU law ?
Activities not included are all those of a non-economic nature and those that are purely national .
What does this cover ?
EU competition law assumes that companies are involved and in this case we have the controls on state aid under Articles 87 to 89 .
The internal market rules refer to economic activities , and in particular the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services .
In addition , there are activities relating to sovereignty which the state has effectively reserved to itself , and there are institutions which do not fall into this category , which are neither companies nor state institutions , the " independent charitable associations " or not-for-profit organisations which the Commission refers to in its observations on Article 30 , as do we .
The EU 's competition rules and the internal market rules are not applicable to purely internal national matters .
This is particularly relevant to general interest services at regional and local level .
If they are applicable , then there are exemption arrangements , such as the de minimis rule , such as aids for culture and such as the exempting regulations for small and medium-sized enterprises and other bodies .
For this reason , the Commission has given us a head start by means of this framework , and one with which we basically agree , in cases where we want to establish legal certainty on issues that we have openly debated and in cases where we want to declare the free market , competition in the market , to be a fundamental principle .
I would like to ask honourable Members to actively support the compromise that we worked out in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to heartily congratulate Mr Langen and will limit myself to just one aspect of a special public provision situation , that is , the cultural dimension in the audio-visual field , in other words public television and radio .
I was in favour of the introduction of private-sector television from the very outset , as I still am , whilst being convinced , in the final analysis , that we must work on the assumption that a public-service broadcasting remit is necessary .
Two particular aspects must be highlighted here : on the one hand the obligation to provide a service to all , that is , overall popular provision under appropriate conditions , and on the other the obligation to reflect the pluralistic nature of our society .
The dual broadcasting system has proved itself .
There would be no sense in constantly requiring the public broadcasters to justify every single programme .
A balanced programme needs leeway .
What is also certain is that we cannot allow taxes and licence fees to finance the creation of a public-service copy of the private-sector service providers .
The public media need leeway , but also clarification of their role and standards for fulfilling it .
It is in this respect that the communication from the Commission is particularly to be welcomed .
It also needs to be made clear , however , that , in the case of services with social welfare in mind , the type of transmission - be it terrestrial or videostreaming - cannot be crucial .
What matters are the objectives to be safeguarded , our democratic foundational principles , pluralism and free access to culture and to technological progress .
We must of course guarantee the protection of the users , especially of the young .
In terms of competition law , the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , must restrict itself to watching out for misuse .
It must continue to respect and defend the competence of Member States as regards the content of programmes .
Regulatory authority must then remain with the Member States , and it is therefore incumbent on them too to determine financial and organisational structures .
I welcome the fact the Commission and the Council are endeavouring to come to an arrangement with the Member States about this .
Mr President , Mr Philippe Herzog , who is the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee , is currently in Qatar as a member of the Parliamentary WTO Delegation and has , therefore , asked me to present the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on his behalf .
This was adopted by the Committee almost unanimously , with only one member casting a blank vote .
The draftsman does not share the Commission ' s view that compliance with the rules governing competition and the internal market is fully compatible with safeguarding the supply of services of general interest .
The problem arising is how to safeguard the supply of such services .
The draftsman proposes the creation of a European joint responsibility framework to cover services of general interest .
He considers that more open and more democratic regulation is a necessity , also in the conditions that will prevail following the potential enlargement of the EU .
The draftsman wishes to make the tasks clearer and at the same time to strengthen the communities ' and states ' freedom of choice regarding the selection of a model for safeguarding these services and the type of administration to be set up for this purpose .
While the current market philosophy and rules of competition encourage privatisation , the EU should retain the principle of diversity , or in other words , there should be a number of options to choose from .
On the basis of these arguments the committee has adopted an opinion according to which the gradual process of freeing service industries must be implemented in parallel with retaining general services .
The principle according to which it is up to the Member States , within their own territories , to retain their cultural habits and political views has also been adopted .
The Member States should have the right to ensure that services of general interest are also provided to the less advantaged of their citizens .
In paying particular attention to the problems presented by the financing and its safeguarding , the committee in its opinion shares the draftsman ' s concern about the necessity to safeguard general services .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Langen , ladies and gentlemen , in a changing world in which global competition is growing and , indeed , becoming ever tougher , public services are among the essential cornerstones of the European social model .
Citizens , and indeed enterprises , of today , work on the assumption that a broad spectrum of such services will be generally available , with high quality and at affordable prices .
By ' services of general interest ' is understood activities engaged in for the general good and therefore linked by the authorities with specific social welfare obligations and benefits .
Such services make a significant contribution to improving citizens ' quality of life and thus play a significant part in maintaining the social , human and geographical cohesion of the European Union .
The subsidiarity principle clarifies responsibilities at regional and national level .
The meaning of ' social welfare interest ' is laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It has therefore been important for me as President of the Austrian Welfare Service to clarify my position with respect to the major social institutions and health organisations , with the Red Cross , Caritas , the Welfare Service , the sports clubs , the fire brigades , the parishes and towns .
It was also important for me to observe that the specifically rural areas are involved , that the candidate countries through which the EU is to be enlarged are involved and that the significance of ' non profit organisations ' in the service of the public is clearly expressed .
Today 's report contributes to greater humanity in everyday life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I think it is useful for Parliament to issue an opinion today on the report by Mr Langen , since the report is rather topical .
I think it is useful for us to issue an opinion prior to the Laeken European Council , as we are expecting this Council to give a great impetus to the redrafting of the notorious framework directive , the principle of which the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is proposing that you adopt .
Furthermore , as regards the case law of the Court of Justice of the European Communities , day after day I see judgments being passed , which show just how far ahead case law is on this issue , in comparison to our legislation .
In a judgment dated 25 October 2001 , this case law again justified certain restrictions on competition where these are necessary for carrying out the task in question in order to achieve economic and social balance .
So , when you consider the timeliness of this framework directive , you must also consider the organisation of services of general interest .
And , from that point of view , this would mean knowing which authority is responsible for services of general interest .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , we are calling for all levels of the European Union to be involved , whether at European or local level , both in defining the scope of services of general interest as well as in the ways that they are organised .
Our concern relates to consistency between the general approach towards services of general interest and the sectoral approach .
This is because there is no point defining the framework if there is a lack of cohesion between one sector and another .
Our group will therefore oppose a number of paragraphs which fall within a sectoral approach that we will not support .
I would lastly like to touch on the issue of funding .
The Commission recently proposed a new text which deals with an exemption regime in the sector of services of general interest .
We shall support this proposal which we believe must be supplemented by an approach that enables cross-funding , without which adjustments are not possible , and that threatens , over the long term , the functioning of general interest services .
Mr President , it is , of course , vital to assess the phenomenon of services of general interest and the implications thereof for the European citizen .
In our view , the basic objective in this connection should be to step up competition in favour of the citizen and to determine the pre-conditions on that basis .
The concept of services of general interest should be a matter to be decided upon by the Member States , and subsidiarity should be a keyword in this connection .
It is essential to accomplish the internal market in the way it was agreed in Lisbon .
That is why , in the interest of the citizen , swift progress should be made with the ongoing liberalisation of postal services , transport , electricity and gas - and water as well , as far as I am concerned .
Current liberalisation has contributed greatly to the competitiveness of European businesses and has also benefited the European citizen .
Citizens should have a choice , particularly in the case of products which are so important in everyday life .
Citizens must be regarded as consumers rather than objects .
That is why services of general interest must be provided in a competitive manner everywhere .
It is important for a sufficient number of market operators to enter the market , and that is why the same conditions of access must apply to public and private businesses alike .
The citizen also benefits from clarity in the field of prices , bills and supplies .
In addition , high quality must be delivered .
This should , of course , go hand in hand with the correct and prompt handling of complaints .
Efficiency , for example with a view to an improved guarantee of supply , should also be on the agenda .
Furthermore , the market for other products , such as water , must be opened up so that the citizen can reap the benefits there too .
With regard to the drafting of a framework directive , I would prefer to await the Commission position in Laeken .
At the moment , we are actually opposed to a framework directive .
We must carefully consider whether such a directive is in fact necessary , and we should only draft legislation if it is required .
We should not make it more opaque than it already is .
On a final note , I should like to thank the rapporteur , including for the consultation he has entered into with all of us .
In all honesty , I thought his original proposal was the best and the Commission has since then made every effort to tone things down .
Our voting behaviour will therefore be able to hit quite a critical note in that respect .
Mr President , Commissioner , with regard to the decisions taken in recent years by the Council and the European Parliament on the opening up to competition of hitherto protected sectors , in other words , monopolies , it has become clear that we must have solid legal bases in order to guarantee and develop services of general interest that are economically accessible to everyone and which therefore give substance to the status of citizens of the European Union .
In our view , the current economic situation and the numerous job losses that have been announced in recent weeks , coupled with the fact that , even during a period of strong growth , we have had an average unemployment rate of 8 % in recent years , highlight the absolute need to develop services of general interest .
This is why our group fully supports the voluntarist guidelines drawn up , in the main , by the European Confederation of Trade Unions and by the European Liaison Committee on services of general interest .
Article 16 of the Treaty of Amsterdam was a major step forward for Europe .
It is now deemed to be insufficient , and that is why we are supporting the draft framework directive and the amendments tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
We expect the Laeken European Council , part of which will be dedicated to the European Union ' s objectives , to clearly set forth this objective on services of general interest and the framework directive as well as a timetable .
What is at stake is of crucial importance .
As in the case of procedures for public procurement contracts , which the Zappala report tackled , and as in the case of a particular sector such as public transport , which the Meijer report dealt with , we are required to adopt a framework for the policy on European competition , to develop a policy on regulated competition , to enable national , regional or local public authorities , in line with the principle of subsidiarity , to determine the missions of general interest services , the management contract that is to be fulfilled by the operators and the funding of these missions .
This is the purpose of Amendment Nos 52 and 55 that we have tabled .
We also think that we must insist on carrying out a much more in-depth evaluation on the liberalisation of sectors , taking into consideration the interests of consumers and workers and the compatibility of market guidelines with the objectives of sustainable development - I am thinking of the water sector , for example - and not only from a technical point of view , but equally through dialogue with all the actors involved .
This is the purpose of Amendment Nos 44 and 46 .
The fact that it was necessary to present the various amendments to the House once again obviously indicates that what I have just said about objectives , and above all , about the resources to be implemented , has not received unanimous support .
Once again , in this field as in others , it is greater European integration that we need , whilst respecting the Community method and guaranteeing that public figures at all levels take the proper action to ensure the provision of general interest services .
Mr President , faced with the process of liberalisation and deregulation currently underway in the European Union , moves for proposals to be put forward and action to be taken in the field of public services have built up .
The contribution of these has led to the fact that Article 16 of the Treaty of Amsterdam recognises the essential role of services of general interest in ensuring social and territorial cohesion .
The Commission ' s proposals , however , contain the usual double language .
On the one hand , there is reference to the interests of citizens , and therefore to the need for services of general interest , whilst on the other , several of the Commission ' s directives accentuate liberalisation and deregulation of public services .
The Langen report supports the spirit of the Commission ' s communication of September 2000 on services of general interest in Europe .
The Commission acknowledges that competition cannot meet all the requirements of citizens and that Member States have good reason to set up and implement services of general interest .
At the same time , however , the Commission states that the progress of liberalisation is positive and relies on the content of the Lisbon meeting of the Council of Ministers to step up this process .
The report has been improved by the debate and the amendments .
It has made a real effort to adopt a balanced position between liberalisation and public services , it also stresses that services of general interest must ensure equal access , security of supply and continuity .
It also proposes to assess the actual impact of liberalisation before embarking on any new phases , as my group suggested on many occasions .
However , we still have a long way to go before we meet the required demands for services of general interest that are worthy of the name .
The Langen report claims to relentlessly pursue liberalisation in sectors such as transport , electricity and gas and the postal services . Furthermore , it believes that it is necessary to privatise the water industry .
I think that services of general interest , as their name suggests , must be subject to the rights and obligations that the general interest demands .
In other words , this means providing transparency , continuity and equality .
We need a new European model of services of general interest that meets citizens ' aspirations , and we must stop approaching this issue solely from the point of view of competition , as advocated in the report .
That is why I do not think it is wise , and I think it could even be dangerous , to envisage a framework directive where we stick to this approach .
Yes , I believe that we need safeguards .
I am in favour of a framework directive on services of general interest on the condition that it maintains the social benefits that these provide in terms of employment , security and sustainable regional development .
This directive should also ensure the respect of service obligations in terms of quality , equality , access for all users , and also by maintaining reserved areas allowing price offsetting on a geographical basis and on social grounds .
I also think that all levels of the European Union must be involved .
Our position will be related to whether or not a number of amendments are accepted .
Mr President , this report on services of general interest in Europe deals with a field of tension between two significant blocs .
It is about the issue of a unitary competitive order in Europe , and about the self-government of communities or , in other words , about subsidiarity .
The focus of all this must always be the citizen , the consumer , and what services he receives , under what conditions and , above all , of what quality .
There are two points I find important in the communication from the Commission .
It always speaks of an economic activity , with ' an economic activity ' being very hard to define exactly .
If we in this House discuss what an economic activity is , the thinking of a very large number of Members is shaped by their national origin .
Is an economic activity to be affirmed when an enterprise works in a particular line of business for profit ?
Let me mention only ambulance services .
The second is the issue of checking for misuse .
The question here is not whether the Commission can check on this , but in what detail it should , so that over-restrictive requirements do not result in a definition of general interest by the back door .
What is important is that we should be given communal responsibility and that we use it to choose one or other type of competition by means of public tender .
I would like , finally , to re-emphasise one thing that is mentioned in the report , but not in the communication from the Commission , namely the market in water .
For us in Germany and Austria , water is an extraordinarily important area .
I believe that as a matter of urgency we should reject the opening of the market in water , brought about by means of a decision on an individual case in the European Union - and the Commission has already requested an assessment on the subject .
We reject this decisively .
Examination of the sector-specific situation is in any case needed first .
I can therefore only warn the Commission not to take these steps .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the consequences of the internal market is that many things that were regulated in a quite specific way in the Member States are now subject to new and different rules .
Services of general interest are now an outstanding example of this , an example made more problematic by the additional factor that the objectives of services of general interest are similar in the Member States .
The instruments , however , sometimes differ significantly as a consequence not only of different cultural developments , but also of the Member States ' differing administrative structures .
The drawing-up of shared rules is not exactly made easier by this .
The Member States must , however , continue in future to be able to decide what services they will categorise as being of general interest .
On the other hand , the rules must be as similar as possible in a common internal market .
Competition law , as laid down in the Treaty , provides on its own insufficient legal certainty when it comes to framing them .
On the other hand , the objective should not be to empty European competition law of its meaning .
It must therefore be interpreted in a binding way for the purposes of services of public interest .
We accordingly call for a framework directive to determine the Community principles on which services of general interest are to be founded .
This directive should lay down rules for the Member States .
Above all , though , it should provide legal security for those who provide services of general interest .
Thirdly , it should limit the space available for the Commission to exercise its discretion .
Its executive monopoly should not be infringed , but as far as its decisions in individual cases and its block exemption regulations are concerned , I would like to see it laid down what , for example , are ' economic activities ' and what are not .
What falls at this arbitrary threshold ?
When is intra-Community trade affected ?
Above all , the many sectoral directives and regulations on which we are working at present must give direction to the legislative work in various sectors done by those of us in the European Parliament ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the report is called ' Services of General Interest ' in order to improve ways of handing over public services to private interests , and it calls for us to pursue liberalisation with unflinching determination .
Contrary to the misleading assertions made in the report , privatisation brings about poorer services and social discrimination that affects those on the lowest incomes . Activities are reduced or withdrawn in order to avoid making private profit , and these are still just as essential to the population .
And there can be no other approach .
The private companies that benefit from the erosion of public services are motivated by making maximum profits for their shareholders and not by the need to satisfy the general interest as best they can .
The policy to hand over public services to private interests is a policy pursued by the European institutions and the national governments , and represents a major social step backwards .
Education , health , public transport , postal services , telecommunications , water and energy supply , and refuse collection must remain public services which must not generate profits ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the EU is trusting in liberalisation to ensure that services of general interest are sufficiently available .
If that means increased and fairer competition in postal services , transport , water supply , social services and so on , this can only be agreed to .
If , though , simple considerations of cost mean that the quality of service drops , with ever fewer service providers being available and ever fewer people being employed , this proposal merits political resistance .
State monopolies must not be replaced by private monopolies .
Mr Langen , the rapporteur , has taken on board my suggestion that tasks of general interest should be acknowledged to be common European values .
They contribute to the European social model and to the sustainable development of the EU 's regions .
The aim is to guarantee high standards of quality and safety , range of provision and continuity in a healthy price / service ratio .
As before , the Member States ' offers for tender will independently determine which yardstick to apply as regards environmental friendliness , availability and social standards .
It is for the good of all citizens if these services are unambiguously defined in the context of a European law on the placing of contracts .
Exceptions from the internal market 's competition and market regulations should include local , social and charitable services which do not work with their eye on profit and are committed to meeting the needs of the weak and those on the margins of society .
Citizens and service users are to be comprehensively involved in the Member States ' and the Commission 's efforts to make this agreement reality .
New regulations on services of general interest in the EU will only be accepted if transparency and involvement are ensured .
As a member not only of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs but also of that on Employment and Social Affairs , I recommend that this House approve this report , which is excellent because it is balanced .
Mr President , I am concerned about a number of aspects in the Langen report .
Initially we have to address this question of services of general interest from the point of view of the rights of citizens , for the rights of consumers are a subset of those rights .
Citizenship confers rights which entitle one to various essential needs such as water , which is essential to human life .
Water cannot be treated within the European Union simply as a commodity to be bought and sold .
Europe is committed to the idea of a distinct social model based on solidarity .
It is therefore essential that we have a legal framework , a regulatory framework , within which the Commission and Member States can address the question of competition as it affects social services , public services , and services of general interest .
It is part of a democratic agenda for the European Union to ensure that we are accountable , that the services we provide are accountable , and that we have a Europe which is developed as a socially inclusive Europe .
The economy has to be an instrument to serve the people , not simply to serve the market .
Rights of the consumer being defined on the basis of purchasing power is not an adequate way to develop a cohesive social Europe .
It is a Europe where politics is denigrated because it is simply based on people 's capacity to buy or not to buy .
Mr President , it is a particular pleasure to welcome the Langen report and the excellent work of the rapporteur in presenting a measured and forward-looking approach to the future provision of a category of services essential to our economy and to the wellbeing of all European citizens .
The Commission has played its part by presenting two communications on this subject and most recently a report to the Laeken European Council .
Essentially we are all inspired by the same will to ensure that every citizen in Europe has access to high-quality services of general interest .
The European Union has direct responsibilities with regard to those sectors for which internal market legislation has been introduced , essentially for network industries .
In each case , specific provisions have been devoted to public service obligations .
All this legislation has been adopted under codecision and is continuing to evolve .
The package of proposals on energy adopted by the Commission this spring comprises greatly strengthened elements relating to public service obligations .
Member States have a duty to specify and implement those obligations .
Elsewhere , in sectors not covered by specific Community legislation , Member States and their constituted authorities have the main role to play , for instance in the organisation and provision of local and social services .
Here the Commission limits itself to ensuring compatibility with competition and internal market rules in general .
Those rules , as emphasised by the Langen report , are quite flexible .
In particular they provide for adequate financing of services of general interests .
The Commission has repeatedly been requested to provide greater legal security with regard to the general competition and internal market rules applicable to services of general interest .
By explaining and developing its approach , it has attempted to put the fears expressed by operators and others involved to rest .
The Commission proposes to continue to use examples , guidelines and communications , together with proposals for regulations on exemptions , to provide further clarification , as called for in the Langen report .
In its report to Laeken , the Commission has undertaken to establish a Community framework for state aid granted for services of general economic interest .
That framework could , in particular , specify the conditions for the authorisation of state aid schemes by the Commission , thus alleviating the notification obligation for individual aid .
This may lead to the adoption of a regulation exempting certain categories of aid from the obligation of prior notification .
On the issue of a proposed framework directive , the Commission is not opposed in principle and has already agreed to assess the value and feasibility of such an instrument .
Our doubts concern mainly the articulation between such a directive and legislation at sectoral level .
In the light of the European Parliament 's resolution , the Commission will look at the subject again .
Another major issue concerns evaluation .
I repeat that the Commission has every interest in rigorous , complete and honest evaluation of the results of Community legislation .
That is good practice ; it is also good governance and it should not be neglected , either at Member State or at European level .
We propose to improve on existing sectoral evaluations and we have agreed to present an annual horizontal report in the context of the Cardiff process .
The Commission welcomes the European Parliament 's proposal to organise a debate in the existing forums in order to ensure a pluralist assessment and the debate ought to take place before the preparation of the Cardiff report in order to take full account of its results and recommendations .
In conclusion , I stress that services of general interest are an area of ongoing concern which will require new initiatives in future and further development of Community legislation .
The Commission looks forward to involving the European Parliament as a partner in this process .
Thank you Commissioner Bolkestein .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Vote
Thank you Mr Caveri .
We will , of course , take your comment , which would appear well-founded , into consideration .
Mr President , I too have had a mistake in the Spanish version brought to my attention by my Spanish colleagues , and I would like it to be corrected .
The word in question is determinar in the second part of Article 6 ( 3 ) , which should by rights be replaced by the word evaluar , that apparently being the correct translation .
I ask that this should be checked and , if necessary , corrected .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0349 / 2001 ) by Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the adaptation of the Rules of Procedure to the Regulation ( EC ) No.1049 / 2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council regarding public access to documents [ 2001 / 2135 ( REG ) ]
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Report ( A5-0346 / 2000 ) by Mr Carnero González , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure with regard to the setting-up of interparliamentary delegations and joint parliamentary committees [ 1999 / 2196 ( REG ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Second report ( A5-0374 / 2001 ) by Mr Cappato , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector [ COM ( 2000 ) 385 - C5-0439 / 2000 - 2000 / 0189 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0370 / 2001 ) by Mr Turco , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on :
1. the initiative of the Kingdom of Belgium and the Kingdom of Sweden with a view to adopting a Council decision extending Europol 's mandate to deal with the serious forms of international crime listed in the Annex to the Europol Convention ( 9093 / 01 - C5-0266 / 2001 - 2001 / 0817 ( CNS ) ) and
2. on the initiative of the Kingdom of Sweden with a view to the adoption of a Council Act amending the Council Act of 12 March 1999 adopting the rules governing the transmission of personal data by Europol to third States and third bodies ( 8785 / 01 - C5-0218 / 2001 - 2001 / 0807 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the two legislative resolutions with successive votes )
Report ( A5-0369 / 2001 ) by Mr Kirkhope , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Initiative of the Kingdom of Belgium , the French Republic , the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom for the adoption by the Council of a draft Framework Decision on joint investigation teams [ 12442 / 2001 - C5-0507 / 2001 - 2001 / 0821 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0371 / 2001 ) by Mr Marinho , on an Initiative of the Kingdom of Sweden with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision determining which provisions of the 1995 Convention on simplified extradition procedure between the Member States of the European Union and of the 1996 Convention relating to extradition between the Member States of the European Union constitute developments of the Schengen acquis in accordance with the Agreement concerning the Republic of Iceland 's and the Kingdom of Norway 's association with the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis [ 9946 / 2001 - C5-0321 / 2001 - 2001 / 0820 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0351 / 2001 ) by Mr Vander Taelen , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on achieving better circulation of European films in the internal market and the candidate countries [ 2001 / 2342 ( INI ) ]
I have to table a minor oral amendment at this stage , because I have noticed that there has been some misunderstanding as to the true intent of this text .
Certain Members of this House suspected me of wanting to weigh down Europe ' s bureaucracy , while , in fact , I wish to achieve the opposite .
To clarify this , I will read out the text of the second part in English : " and for the same purpose , to foresee the creation of a specific European executive agency ( agency with lower case ) for cinema and audiovisual matters " .
The rest is therefore omitted .
I simply mean by this that the efficiency of the existing organisation in Europe is enhanced , and certainly not encumbered .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0347 / 2001 ) by Mrs Maat , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Commission report on the experience acquired by Member States since the implementation of Council Directive 95 / 29 / EC amending Directive 91 / 628 / EEC concerning the protection of animals during transport [ COM ( 2000 ) 809 - C5-0189 / 2001 - 2001 / 2085 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , I would like to point out two mistakes that need to be corrected in the French language version .
In Paragraph 10 of the French version , it says ' Treaty infringement procedures against Member States ' , which is a misinterpretation .
What is meant is ' Treaty infringement proceedings against Member States ' .
In Paragraph 16 of the French version , it says ' calls on the Commission to examine ways of promoting small-scale , local culling ' .
Mr President , in order to avoid more serious culling , I propose - this sounds like a film called ' Petits meurtres entre amis ' - I propose therefore that we put ' small , local abattoirs ' .
Thank you for your suggestions , Mrs Auroi .
I am sure our services will welcome them .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0361 / 2001 ) Mr Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication ' Services of General Interest in Europe ' [ COM ( 2000 ) 580 - C5-0399 / 2001 - 2001 / 2157 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I would like to refer again to the vote , in which , alas , we lost the chance to vote on item 62 .
I have again consulted the documents : item 62 is an addition to item 58 , and we should in fact have voted on it by roll call .
Both my points of order were , unfortunately , ignored by your two assistants .
What is at issue here is that we make it simply and convincingly clear that the opening-up of competition in the water market cannot be achieved by means of general competition law .
I therefore want to reiterate this .
I stated in my opening statements that we reject this , and I ask that this be noted in the Minutes and that , if possible , Members ' requests to speak should not be ignored in future .
I was not told about your request , Mr Radwan .
Mr President , you can ask your two comrades-in-arms .
The official sitting your left looked in my direction but did not inform you .
I cannot do anything about it either .
The risk of manufacturing and circulating false euro notes and coins is a serious threat overshadowing the launch of the single currency , which will be present for several years following the physical changeover to notes and coins taking place on 1 January 2002 .
During this critical period , the confidence of our citizens is a vital factor .
It appears , however , that the danger was under-estimated , and then it was too late to deal with it .
The Commission only published its main communication on the subject on 22 July 1998 , and it was in 1999 and 2000 that the first , but still incomplete , provisions were adopted on extending Europol ' s mandate and the criminal penalties against counterfeiting of the euro .
The draft decision that we are examining today adds to these measures by establishing a Community training and assistance programme by the key players involved in combating counterfeiting .
Although there have been no major objections to the text itself , we can only stress , however , that it has arrived too late and that it contains some ambiguities , which arise from the design faults in the single currency .
First of all , the text before us constantly wavers between providing ' training ' , and ' assistance ' , and does not dare to state too clearly that , 48 days before the physical changeover to using coins and notes , cooperation in this vital area has still not been finalised .
Secondly , one of the objectives of the training and assistance programme is to protect the euro outside the euro zone , which is not actually an area of the Community competence .
From this particular perspective , we can see how shaky the single currency system is , one that is shared between Community competences and other competences that remain national , and both sides are poor at organising coordination .
But how could things be any different , as at Maastricht , the aim was to seduce the electorate into believing that the single currency was possible without having an absolute super State ?
Lehne report ( A5-0380 / 2001 )
Mr President , I speak on behalf of the my group on the Lehne report .
Since the Tampere summit EU governments have been working more closely with each other on justice and home affairs and since 11 September this has become even more apparent .
Since we live in an internal market it is only right and proper that there should be some cooperation and coordination between the Member States .
International crime involves very sophisticated structures , but such operations centre on funding of criminal activities .
That is why it is important that we enact this legislation , to ensure money laundering does not take place within the EU financial systems .
We must ensure that international criminals cannot use existing financial structures in Europe , or indeed elsewhere , to launder their unlawful gains .
The implementation of this directive on prevention of the use of financial systems for the purpose of money laundering is an important element in the battle against international crime .
I have always believed that EU legislation in this area should be broadened to include offences other than drug offences .
This is exactly what has been achieved here through the agreement between the EU governments and the European Parliament .
The directive extends the prohibition of money laundering to organised crime as well as drug offences .
Member States will remain free to extend their national anti-money laundering legislation to other forms of criminal activity .
As a result of the conciliation agreement , lawyers ' professional secrecy will be safeguarded unless the lawyer knows that the legal advice sought is for money laundering purposes .
In a wider context there is agreement at European level to implement the framework directive on permitting the freezing of criminal assets within the EU .
The protocol relating to the convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters will also help EU governments when criminal proceedings take place in different Member States .
I support closer cooperation and coordination on justice within the EU , although I would caution governments to look very carefully at any conditions attached to future initiatives .
There must be proper procedures to safeguard civil liberties and rights and to maintain the presumption of innocence until proven guilty .
Mr President , I voted for the Lehne report on combating money laundering .
The French term used for money laundering is ' blanchiment des capitaux ' , which literally means ' bleaching or washing capital ' , that is , making something white which was not white before , cleaning something which is dirty , making an ugly thing beautiful .
Well then , I thought : why can we too not manage to be as clever as criminals , who do succeed in making ugly things beautiful ?
Why can we not manage to make ugly things beautiful too ?
I refer , Mr President , not to myself , who some people might consider ugly , but to the pension laws throughout Europe .
Will we manage to make those ugly laws - and there are a great many of them - beautiful ?
The European Parliament and the Council have therefore reached agreement on a conciliation package that has the value of appearing to do something against money laundering related to drugs offences , whilst doing nothing at all .
Who can tell the difference between the proceeds from organised crime and those from normal economic transactions ?
Especially because the banking system itself does not want to make this distinction , as it believes that it is not the job of the banks to determine where the proceeds come from , only what the proceeds make .
And it is public knowledge that laundering of the proceeds from crime is not only carried out in tax havens ; laundering also , and more importantly , goes on in the largest banks in the financial world .
If adopted , this resolution will certainly not prevent the proceeds from organised crime from passing through the financial system and from being invested in so-called normal activities , which are , in many cases , just as criminal as mafia money , if considered from a humane point of view .
It is absolutely scandalous to create one ' s wealth out of drug money .
It is equally scandalous to make a fortune from manufacturing and trafficking weapons .
And it is even more scandalous to allow pharmaceutical corporations and their shareholders to become rich from having a monopoly on trademarks of some medicines , when this monopoly increases the price of some essential medicines by ten times or more , condemning to death all those who do not have the means to pay these prices .
This is all legal however .
The European institutions may have the power to decide what constitutes a legal or illegal way to use the proceeds .
They do not have the power to ' exonerate ' the proceeds .
The directive on the fight against money laundering is a step in the right direction and is a response , at least in part , to the aspirations of the citizens ' movements and to the proposals made by the judges who are the most involved in this issue .
The events of 11 September should , in fact , give us more reason to intensify the fight against money laundering .
The Lehne report does the opposite , however .
It welcomes a new paragraph , which is drafted in an absurd manner , since it states that ' Member States are not forced to impose the obligations , stipulated in the directive , on the professions concerned ( members of the legal professions , independent or otherwise ) ' .
The sacrosanct professional secrecy is preserved , unless the legal advisor is himself involved in financial misdealing .
It is not enough for him to have ' specific reasons for believing ' that ' his client wishes to obtain legal advice for the purpose of money laundering ' . It is only if the lawyer ' knows ' that this is the situation that professional secrecy can be lifted .
These delicate points clash horribly with recent , brutal decisions made by this very Parliament , which follows the example of the CIA and does not hesitate in wanting to make any individual demonstrating against financial crimes into a criminal .
In spite of these shortcomings , we did not vote against the Lehne report .
Maij-Weggen report ( A5-0349 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for this regulation on public access to European Parliament documents as well .
I have to say that , last Sunday , a pensioner from Bergamo , Mrs Erminia Santinelli , a young , active lady of 60 , said to me : ' What good regulations you adopt at the European Parliament !
That might mean , then , that I will at last be able to see the documents as well ! '
' What documents ? ' I asked her .
' The documents showing the way my pension is calculated , ' she replied , ' for I still cannot understand how that figure was reached .
At last I will find out how my pension has been calculated , from the documents given to me to read . '
' Next time round ' I told her .
' For the moment , we must be satisfied with reading the documents of the European Parliament . '
Mrs Maij-Weggen ' s report on public access to Parliament documents is an advance we cannot but support .
We have , then , all voted in favour of ' the lesser evil ' whereby a small advance towards more openness is better than nothing .
The problem is everything that is not included .
The main problem is that the Commission and the Council do not supply Parliament with documents from the phase during which legislation is prepared .
That is unfortunate in as much as it is this phase in which people have an interest in participating so as to be able to influence the content of the legislation .
A second problem is the division of MEPs into first and second class Members according to whether or not they have access to confidential information .
Moreover , it is completely insane and contrary to every parliamentary tradition that Parliament ' s Committee on Budgetary Control , the ombudsman and the EU ' s own Court of Auditors are never in a position to check all the documents concerning the Commission ' s discharge of its office .
We voted against the report on ' Public access to Parliament ' s documents ' because this is a misleading title and the report aims not so much to widen the possibilities of access as to regulate them and , in doing so , grants the European Parliament the right to restrict public access .
On the one hand , we hypocritically acknowledge the right of the public to have access to documents , and , on the other , we admit that some of these documents are ' confidential ' .
In actual fact , there is no reason why any document of the European Parliament or any other European institution , should be kept from the public .
We are in favour of the complete publication of all documents , all agreements , all treaties , as well as the details of all the speeches that are currently hidden , all the dealings that are kept secret , all the lobbying activities that have led Parliament , the Council or the European Commission to take a decision or to issue a directive .
. ( NL ) In days gone by , the interest of the state was protected from the citizen by secrecy .
These days , the impression is created that all government information is public in a democracy .
Despite this , there are quite a few exceptions on the basis of military or economic interests , and the extent of public access differs from Member State to Member State in the EU .
There are now two completely opposing views with regard to future public access to information in preparations for Community decision-making .
The first opinion , expressed by the rapporteurs Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Cashman , is that we have made great progress this year which will lead to optimal public access by 2002 , with which everyone should be happy .
The second opinion , formulated by Messrs Martin and Bonde , and included in the amendments tabled by the Greens , is that the EP has , in fact , created unnecessary , self-imposed restrictions by striking deals with the Commission and the Council and that we have sadly not yet seen a majority in favour of total public access in this Parliament .
People may view the proposal as a step forward , but the most striking thing about it is what it is not saying .
Some of the documents of the Council and the Commission are still hidden from the public and Parliament .
I support the amendments which aim to further enhance public access .
Carnero González report ( A5-0346 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for the Carnero González report as well .
It would appear right that the same procedure applied when electing the members of permanent committees should be followed when electing the members of joint interparliamentary committees .
In any case , seeing as we are discussing how joint interparliamentary committees are elected , Mr President , I would stress the importance to the European Parliament of the joint committees including members of the parliaments of the candidate countries or including members of the countries with which we have close relations .
I call upon the European Parliament to confer increasing power upon these committees , for in that way we will see the fruit of the existence of the European Union and the European Parliament .
Cappato report ( A-0374 / 2001 )
Mr President , when , on 4 November , at the end of an important meeting I had held , in which I talked at length about Mr Cappato ' s report - as you can see , Mr Cappato , like all the Members , is here in the Chamber to hear why I voted for his document , but I know that he usually watches me on the monitor in his office - I displayed his photograph , many young pensioners , instead of coming to ask for my autograph , which is what usually happens in large , important meetings held by important politicians , asked me to introduce them to Mr Cappato .
' We want to meet him !
He is a very good looking , extremely clever young man , and we congratulate him on this report !
Does this mean , then , that , at last , no one will know how old we are ?
This is the sort of privacy we want ! '
' Of course , ' I told them .
This document will mean that no one will know how old a lady is .
. The British Labour Members of the Socialist Group have voted in favour of national choice as to whether Member States will " opt-in " or " opt-out " on the reception of unsolicited commercial e-mails ( UCEs ) .
This was the compromise reached in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
The revision of the e-commerce directive in 2003 will offer an opportunity to bring forward measures based on the experience of Member States which have opted in or opted out .
It is essential that any new measures in the area of e-commerce are based on direct experience of all those involved within the industry including consumers .
In the area of retention of traffic data , we believe that at second reading further amendments need to be considered .
We are all agreed that a certain level of protection of private life and of personal data is one of the foundations of a functioning democracy .
Modern means of communication and a recklessly expanding information society make this more important today than ever .
A wrongly-conceived protection of personal data can , however , have unwanted side-effects .
The Commission 's text thus envisages a ban on advertising e-mails previously not expressly allowed by the consumer .
This so-called ' opt-in ' principle flatly contradicts the principle , found elsewhere in the directive on e-commerce , that advertising is permitted unless the consumer has explicitly expressed a desire not to receive it .
This ' opt-out ' of course costs nothing and requires no effort other than a simple click of the mouse , which is often sufficient for you to delete yourself from a database you do not want to be in .
Moreover , the e-commerce directive provides for several transparency conditions , so that , for example , advertising e-mails are recognisable as such by their titles and the recipient knows the sender before he even opens them .
An uninteresting e-mail can thus be deleted in seconds by the click of a mouse without the consumer having to waste further time , money or energy .
The unrestricted sending of advertising e-mails is , moreover , a boon particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises , which cannot afford to make use of expensive advertising campaigns on television or in other media .
Cutting them off from this opportunity to introduce themselves to a wide public at reasonable cost would quite clearly mean giving an even greater competitive advantage to the big national and multinational enterprises .
These considerations mean that I will be voting in favour of the text adopted in Committee on ' unwanted information ' .
As in the vote on this report on 6 September 2001 , I now choose to oppose the position adopted by my political group when it comes to the rules for sending unsolicited advertising material out to consumers via e-mail .
Generally speaking , e-mail advertisements involve inconvenience for the consumer , partly because it takes time to open and delete advertising communications .
Moreover , it is the consumer who has to bear the costs of receiving and reading the advertisements The division proposed in the report between , on the one hand , e-mail advertisements and , on the other hand , advertisements via text messaging , fax and automatic calling I also consider to be artificial .
Whichever of these methods is used , it causes just as much inconvenience for the consumer , and an opt-in solution is consequently to be preferred to all other methods since it constitutes the most effective protection against unsolicited advertisements .
In view of how important it is for this report to be adopted by Parliament as soon as possible , the compromise that is on the table must , however , be viewed as an acceptable , if ultimately less desirable , alternative .
In the final vote , I therefore choose to support the report , irrespective of what transpires with regard to the aforesaid issue .
Turco report ( A5-0370 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for Mr Turco ' s document because I am in favour of all situations in which there is cooperation and agreement between all the States of the European Union .
I talked about Mr Turco ' s document during my meeting on Sunday 4 November as well .
At the end , a lot of pensioners came up to me and asked : ' Does this mean , then , that we might have a European bobby on the beat at last ?
We welcome any improvement in police activities coming from the European Parliament because here , in our State , we only have policemen who impose fines or come and arrest us .
It would be so nice to have friendly policemen ! '
' This has not happened yet , ' I replied , ' but I am sure that Mr Turco will take us another step closer in his next report and we might manage to achieve this too ' .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have , today , voted in favour of this report .
We agree that the EU and Europol should combat international crime and are therefore satisfied with the report as a whole .
We are nonetheless alert to the fact that certain amendments call upon legal cooperation and police cooperation to fall within the Community ' s competence and that this is incompatible with Denmark ' s reservation , cf. the protocol concerning Denmark ' s position .
We do not support these amendments .
. ( PT ) On the pretext of fighting terrorism and the dangers inherent in deteriorating security , what we are seeing is the development and establishment of a huge , complex mechanism designed to limit freedoms , which could lead to the creation of a ' fortress Europe ' in which this and other initiatives will be used as the reference point for the processing of personal data .
In the case of Portugal , for example , the fact that Europol considers the territory of Portugal to be the main point of entry into Europe , combined with the extension of its mandate to fight terrorism and organised crime , would turn our country into an area in which this body would feel particularly free to persecute and monitor people , unconstrained by the national police , the Minister for Home Affairs or by any real democratic control over its actions by the Portuguese Parliament .
These projects are intended to ensure cooperation between police forces , the information services and data filing systems , without any democratic control , under a restrictive and xenophobic immigration policy that infringes individual freedoms .
As a matter of fact , if there is no democratic control over the Schengen Information System now , what would be the case with regard to the transmission of information to third countries and bodies , largely sponsored by Europol and the American agencies , on the pretext of fighting terrorism ?
Europol ' s mandate must not take precedence over national policies or the control of Ministers for Home Affairs .
Its activities with regard to each country must be listed in internal security reports .
Europol must be subject , in all cases , to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice and account for itself , in detailed reports , to the European Parliament .
Any extension of Europol ' s powers must , of course , be subject to prior debate by the European Parliament and by the national parliaments of the Member States .
.
I strongly support this excellent report by Maurizio Turco which calls for the extension of Europol 's mandate and the addition of other non-binding arrangements .
If Europol 's mandate is extended to cover serious forms of international crime , such as kidnapping , illegal immigrant smuggling and racism , this body will become an institution with real biting power and one which can be seen as working in the interests and for the safety of European citizens .
Moreover , the Swedish proposal to allow the onward transmission by third countries of personal data received from Europol is particularly important .
It is well known that crime in the twenty-first century is borderless , and as such the EU should not and cannot operate Europol in a vacuum .
This is why it is essential that Europol works in conjunction with third party states since only then will its full effectiveness be realised .
Kirkhope report ( A-0369 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for the Council ' s framework decision on joint investigation teams .
Forgive me , Mr President , for giving rein to my imagination , but while we were discussing European joint investigation teams , I imagined investigation teams which included women , dressed in the same uniform , a common uniform for policewomen .
I then wondered when we will vote on the type of uniform these women from the joint investigation teams are going to wear and who will model them so that we can give our opinions ?
And who will chair the panel which will have to watch the fashion show of policewomen ' s uniforms ?
Might it be you , Mr President ?
Or Mrs Theorin , who is chairperson of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities .
Anyway , joking aside , what I am trying to say is that I am in favour of joint investigation teams , of European policemen and women .
. I strongly support this excellent report by Timothy Kirkhope which calls for a framework decision on setting up joint investigation teams .
This decision opens the way for the full implementation of the EU convention which calls for mutual assistance in criminal matters .
Police cooperation at EU level is a relatively new and innovative idea .
Without cooperation in these kinds of matters , individual Member States cannot hope to solve and combat the new kinds of crime that presently face all Member State police forces .
In addition , the report calls for joint investigation teams which should be available not only to combat drugs trafficking and human beings , but also to ward off organised crime .
Once joint investigations really take off and Member States come to fully realise their effectiveness , their remit could and should widen to include these kinds of issues .
Finally , as the report indicates , there is a real and valid role for the European Parliament in matters pertaining to joint police initiatives .
The call for some kind of review mechanism , whereby the Council accounts for and reports to the European Parliament on the effectiveness of joint initiatives , will make this process more open and transparent and therefore more legitimate .
Marinho report ( A-0371 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the Marinho report because it provides for the mutual recognition of court sentences and decisions on the implementation of the Schengen acquis .
However , as a representative of the Pensioners ' Party , I am not in favour of the mutual recognition of decisions .
This is not something which furthers European integration : we need common rules in both civil and criminal law .
If we do not achieve this but are content just to implement mutual recognition of decisions , we will be taking a step backwards in the practical integration of Europe .
We will only have a Europe which is genuinely fully functional when we move on from the mutual recognition of decisions to common rules which are the same throughout the European Union .
Then there will be no need to recognise the decisions of other States because the decisions of each Member State will be the decisions of all the States .
Vander Taelen report ( A5-0351 / 2001 )
Mr President , as representative of the Pensioners ' Party , whose members include a large number of pensioners and elderly people who , having a lot of free time , watch the films and other products of world film-making either directly in cinemas or sitting comfortably at home in front of the television - a huge number of films are broadcast on television - I support Mr Vander Taelen ' s document , which , like the Commission , calls for more support for European film-making .
I would stress , Mr President , the importance , as this document points out , of deciding to promote the circulation of European films , not just in Europe as it is today but also in the Europe of the future , in the enlarged Europe which includes the candidate countries .
If we really want to create a greater European culture than the one we have today , which , I regret to say , leaves something to be desired , it is vital that we dedicate even more funds to the circulation of European films within Europe .
The author of this report condemns the fact that the European film industry has been gradually stifled by the major Hollywood productions .
We did not vote against this report as we support some of its proposals .
However , we did not approve of the report either , because the root of the problem is that , as in many other industries , in art and literature for example , the film industry is , in the current economic hierarchy , simply a marketable product and that the film industry , as all other industries , has to obey the law of profitability .
Contrary to what the text claims to be nationalist feelings , the problem is not that of the domination of American cinema , but that of the domination of the major corporations , over the cinema market in the United States - where independent film-makers have just as much difficulty in holding out against the production of large companies as European film-makers - and over the global market .
The author of the report , a supporter , surely , of the market economy , is sensitive , however , to the irrational and harmful effect of the law of profitability in the film industry .
But the law of profitability is not more rational where consumer products , such as food , clothing , medicines or even jobs are concerned - it is , undoubtedly , more harmful still .
The Vander Taelen report announces the European Parliament 's intention to promote the European film industry and reinforce it against the strength in the market of its American competition .
This concern also meets with the approval of the Group of Socialist MEPs , who have therefore voted in favour of the report , although they have substantial reservations about the statements made under item 8 .
This is an attempt , detached from the debate just beginning on revision of the ' television without frontiers ' directive , to force the amendment of one point in a particular direction , one highly dubious from the point of view of content and law .
Cultural , and therefore broadcasting , sovereignty belongs to the Member States alone .
Item 8 would in practice mean massive interference in the programming autonomy of both public-service and private-sector broadcasters .
It would , over and above that , offend against the authority of national public-service broadcasting organisations enshrined in the Protocol to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The success , or lack of it , of European audio-visual productions is not determined by extending protectionist measures , but by the marketability and competitiveness of such productions .
There is no doubt that a structural weakness is revealed by the fact that it is exceptional for European audio-visual works to cross the borders of their country of origin .
Consideration should therefore be given to systems of incentives for the distribution of non-national European films .
The restrictions described in Item 8 are , however , the wrong way to go about it .
The European film industry has problems distributing its films on the scale that we should perhaps wish .
The proposals put forward by the report do not however solve these problems .
They are based on the erroneous belief that increased State and EU aid can make an industry competitive .
They also show a lack of respect for free choice on the part of the consumer .
There is also a desire to impose a further item of expenditure on the European Investment Bank , parallel to the Bank ' s main responsibilities .
If TV companies were to be forced to adjust their programming in the interests of European cinema , this would constitute an infringement of their freedom .
It might also be asked whether it is reasonable for European schools to be required to support the film industry through their teaching .
For these reasons , I have chosen to vote against the report .
Maat report ( A5-0347 / 2001 )
Mr President , I would like to say that it was with conviction that I voted for this report , for I hope that it will enable us to respond adequately to the demands of the people , the producers and all the consumers too .
I feel that we have erred in the past in that we have failed to implement and monitor the existing directive adequately .
In my opinion , the transportation of animals is a major issue and that it is something which almost all of us feel to be important .
It is no longer just an economic issue ; it has taken on an ethical dimension .
Therefore , I welcome the increase both in regionalisation and controls , and I hope that , in the future , the contributions for the export of live animals will be abolished .
Mr President , how could I not vote for this document protecting animals , which , although certainly destined for a cruel fate , should at least be treated as beings that deserve our respect and our protection in matters of transportation , as Mr Ebner has just said .
However , I would ask you , Mr President , when we are going to do something for the dogs in Bucharest .
While we are on the subject of animals , Mr President , I cannot fail to take this opportunity to tell you about the stray dogs in the city of Bucharest . They have no owners and should be caught and sterilised , but , instead , they are the victims of indiscriminate hunting by the people of the city , who receive a reward for every dog they kill and whose body they take to the mayor as proof .
As I see it , the real villain is the mayor of Bucharest , not the poor dogs killed in the city .
I hope that we will soon do something to improve this situation as well .
Mr Fatuzzo , don ' t forget to tell us what the mayor of Bucharest says when he reads your explanation of vote .
. ( NL ) Animals are not products .
They are living creatures whose well-being we must aim to protect .
Given the many cases of abuse during the long-haul transport of animals for slaughter , this transport should be abolished .
We have not got there yet , although the Commission measures are heading in the right direction , with the restriction on distance of 500 km and a maximum duration of 8 hours .
This will also help reduce the risk of spreading animal diseases .
That is why we have approved the report .
To date , the Commission has actually promoted this long-haul transport with its subsidy policy .
Similarly , the policy that has led to the disappearance of small slaughterhouses , including in remote areas , has had pernicious effects .
This policy should therefore be reviewed as a matter of urgency .
A great deal will depend on the policy of the Member States that have so far been very negligent , among other things by inadequately monitoring compliance with the animal welfare directives .
. ( NL ) Over the years , transport by road has become increasingly cheap , relatively speaking .
That is why all kinds of goods are continuously being hauled back and forth to places where the raw materials or labour are cheap , or where the expected profits are the highest .
It is even worse if living creatures are involved .
For example , discarded work horses from Eastern Europe are transported en masse to Western Europe to be slaughtered there .
During this transport , they incur fractures , they do not get any water or feed , and animal diseases are quickly spread across Europe .
Since a political majority wishes to protect the interests of the traders and carriers involved , various petitions organised over the years have failed to improve the situation .
Nearly a year ago , the European Commission responded to me that the solution is to improve the ventilation of animal trucks .
I fear that this non-legislative advice based on experience gathered from applying existing directives will not really solve the problem either .
However , the proposals by Mr Maat to limit transport for slaughter or fattening to eight hours or 500 km , to increase the penalties for infringements , to re-open the smaller , regional slaughterhouses that were closed down by EU legislation , and to abolish export subsidies for live animals for slaughter constitute a necessary step forward .
The deficiencies of current agricultural policy are evident .
The existing system only serves to promote the transport of animals .
This trade is , at least in part , truly absurd .
For example , Spain imports sheep for slaughter from the United Kingdom , while at the same time exporting sheep to be slaughtered in Greece .
We must aim to abolish the promotion of the transport of live animals .
It is indefensible in the long term that EU funds are used for this purpose .
The only possibility of putting an end to the long-distance transport of livestock lies in the regionalisation of agriculture policy .
The watchword must be : production in the market , for the market .
This would also make it possible to effectively counteract the spread of diseases .
.
I strongly support this excellent report by Mr Maat which reviews the 1995 directive designed to ensure protection for animals enduring long journeys .
The report is balanced and fair in that it recognises the possible negative role initially played by EU legislation : this called for the closure of many small slaughterhouses in the first place and made animal transportation more necessary and prevalent .
It also exposes the present lamentable situation whereby the provisions of the 1995 directive are often flouted and where some Member States fail to implement existing legislation .
The call for increased protection of animals during transit is both necessary and worthwhile ; as the report indicates , this should be legally enforceable whereby those countries who fail to comply with the rules will be charged a fine .
This would act as a real and concrete disincentive for flouting the law .
In addition to the call for increased and harder legislation in this domain , practical measures are suggested , such as promoting the opening of small-scale abattoirs .
Lastly , this report calls for these tougher measures to be also applicable to third party countries .
This is both a positive and substantive move since EU Member States import livestock from outside the EU 's borders and it would be counter-productive to have these enhanced rules operating exclusively in the EU without any regard for the unfair practices that operate outside its borders .
Langen report ( A5-0361 / 2001 )
The Commission ' s communication of 20 September 2000 on services of general interest in Europe reviews its position in order to take into account recent developments in the case law of the Court of Justice , and also the will of Heads of State , expressed at various European Councils ( at Amsterdam and Nice in particular ) to show greater respect for the specific nature of the missions of public service .
This new communication , however , pushes us into a difficult position .
Apparently brimming with good intentions , the Commission is proposing to define the limits of public services and competition rules , to grant derogations for State aid to activities of general economic benefit , to put in place systems to evaluate the performance of public services and so on .
In fact , the Commission is behaving as if the articles of the treaty on competition were universally applicable , and as if it was up to the Commission to say , out of kindness , the extent to which they will be applied .
The Commission is giving itself the role of arbitrator .
The treaty , however , does not give it any right to do this .
Although the Treaty of Rome only mentioned public services in passing , this is because those who drafted the treaty thought it went without saying that public services did not fall under European competences .
Even Article 16 of the TEC , introduced under the Treaty of Amsterdam , does not amend this position .
We must , however , be very attentive to the Commission ' s attempts to wield imperialist powers .
We believe , in particular , that the memorandum issued by France on 27 July 2001 , despite being full of good intentions , falls into this trap , by proposing to draft a framework directive to set objectives for services of general economic interest and also the freedoms and obligations of Member States with regard to these .
This is another example of a European text that can be interpreted in many different ways and is subject to European arbitration .
In reality , all we need is a new article in the treaty to confirm the evidence , in other words , the sovereign right of Member States to define and organise their public services independently , whether these are general services or services of economic interest .
We were unable to support a report that places us in the position of observer .
Too many amendments , which could give a sign that a change is underway in tendency and approach , as we expressed in Amendment No 59 , were not adopted today .
To leave public services to the mercy of the rules of competition is to seriously threaten the regional development and the social cohesion of our States .
This represents a step backwards for users and is being taken with disregard for the principle of subsidiarity , which is , in fact , emphasised in all our texts .
This new move is a lost opportunity for the European Parliament to show that it is listening to its citizens .
As far as we are concerned , we will continue to fight so that the Laeken European Council becomes the opportunity to take a step forward for the good of citizens .
At the Lisbon European Council in March 2000 , European governments decided to ' increase the pace of liberalisation in sectors such as gas , electricity , postal services and transport ' .
The Commission and the European Parliament , by means of the Langen report , are supporting this process of ' selling off ' the methods we use to meet our citizens ' basic social needs , and are thus strengthening the domination of markets over our societies .
We all know , however , that in sectors that have already been liberalised , the expected gains in productivity have not been met ; that the erosion of public services has caused standards of quality of service and of safety to fall ; that , for employees , the ' gradual and controlled ' opening up to market forces has led to staff cuts and greater job insecurity , and has caused inequalities in regional development .
Is this the European model of society that the European Union desires ?
We believe that we must urgently block the liberalisation process and re-appropriate public services by freeing them from the markets .
Regarding the liberalisation of services of general interest , we are opposed to coordinating public services at European level , and even creating public Euro-services within the framework of common policies of general interest , through state-owned businesses , involving users and employees , over the long term , and making use of the most advanced techniques .
We reject the Langen report for this specific reason .
. The ELDR Group voted against in the final vote on the Langen report , because its members are not convinced that a framework directive on services of general interest ( SGI ) is a good idea .
At least we want to wait for the Commission 's reflections on the desirability and feasibility of a framework directive on SGIs before we insist on such a proposal .
Another reason for our vote against is the ambiguous wordings on the need to stick to the Lisbon agenda .
We found that the text was too watered down ( for example in the votes pertaining to par . 33 ) .
Liberals also find that the report , through amendments both in committee and in plenary , had become too long , inconsistent and incoherent and that it therefore , unfortunately , no longer presented any added value to the debate on SGIs .
Passenger transport by rail , road and inland waterway
The next item on the agenda is the Report ( A5-0364 / 2001 ) by Mr Meijer on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council [ COM ( 2000 ) 7 - C5-0326 / 2000 - 2000 / 0212 ( COD ) ] on action by Member States concerning public service requirements and the award of public service contracts in passenger transport by rail , road and inland waterway .
Mr President , many private companies have withdrawn from public transport since it became permanently loss-making as a result of the large-scale distribution of the car .
Public transport is necessary for access , the environment and for reducing the pressure on public space and cannot survive without extensive government funding .
Like education and welfare provisions , public transport is more a core task of the government than it is part of the market .
Unfortunately , this Regulation has been preceded for some years now by a rumour in a number of Member States that the EU is committed to privatisation and competition .
When I was appointed rapporteur a year ago , I was put under pressure to have the report ready for first reading in the first half of 2001 during the Swedish Presidency of the Council .
Had I succumbed to that pressure , it would have been impossible to have more than one hundred investigative interviews with organisations , including national associations of municipalities , trade unions and different types of transport companies .
I gleaned very opposing interests and views from these conversations .
Public transport is regulated very differently in each Member State and in each of its regions .
Much community funding has gone into buying up old private companies that failed to offer adequate public transport , particularly in densely populated urban areas and for rail connections .
This is in contrast to many small bus companies operating a few bus services in thinly populated areas that have now been bought by large , fast-growing bus companies operating in different States .
If the European Commission is of the opinion that the award of contracts for transport areas to such companies should not be based on nepotism or judicial verdicts but rather , on objective standards and openness , then this Parliament shares this point of view , and so does the rapporteur .
In this way , the Commission helps those areas where the municipal or regional governments would like to contract out their public transport apply useful rules so as to be able to choose between a few large companies , such Arriva , Vivendi or Deutsche Bahn .
Unfortunately , the Commission proposal applies the same obligation to contract out to areas which , based on practical experience , prefer the sustainable existence of one of the country ' s own public companies or the continuation of a long-term contract with a small , private company .
Precisely this restriction of freedom of choice makes the Commission proposal extremely controversial .
It particularly affects countries such as Belgium , Luxembourg , France , Germany and Austria .
But also in the Netherlands , which led the way in privatisation and liberalisation , the disadvantages of a disorganised rail company and of delayed growth in public transport in densely populated areas are now emerging .
The rule that applies to every government is that it is appreciated by the people if it helps solve problems and maligned if it creates unnecessary problems .
European legislation can be useful if it makes a vital contribution to solving our joint and cross-border problems .
Far-reaching , centralistic intervention in municipal and regional policy certainly forms no part of this .
No one will be satisfied if such intervention soon appears to result in fewer public services , higher consumer prices , worse working conditions , fewer new tram lines , the termination of free urban transport , the supremacy of a monopoly and the erosion of democratic participation .
The compulsory introduction of competition in this case does not mean the emergence of an ordinary market ; instead it means promoting a battle for securing government subsidies for permanently loss-making businesses that want to take over government tasks .
According to many experts , the introduction of an obligation to tender for passenger transport by rail , road and inland waterways goes beyond the powers of the European Union .
On account of this obligation , the importance of providing public services and the well being of the user are being subordinated to attempts to cut down on labour costs .
If this proposal for a regulation were to be accepted unamended , it would spell doom for small companies , including virtually all public companies .
Although the municipal tram company or the local bus company can also take part in the tender , these companies will go under as soon as they lose the tender at some point in the future .
Only large , cash-rich companies with many diverse transport areas can survive such a system in a sustainable manner .
It is exactly this crucial aspect of the tender obligation pertaining to all public transport that attracts criticism .
On 10 October , it appeared that the majority of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism had accepted the gist of what I had proposed or what Mr Piecyk and others had developed by way of alternatives on the back of my proposal .
Tram , underground and short bus services remain outside the obligation , while employment and the environment are better protected .
If the plenary follows the same line of thinking , we could save ourselves a great deal of upheaval and bother .
Mr President , it is with particular pleasure that I contribute to the debate on a very important report dealing with the opening of the market to competition in key parts of our public sector .
The Committee on Legal Affairs considered that the key elements of the proposals were sound , but differed in its opinion on a number of key issues .
Firstly , some of the amendments proposed gave exemptions to what are known as integrated transport systems , yet we all know that transport , and particularly integrated transport , is a matter of organisation and not ownership .
This would merely be protectionism by the back door .
Secondly , there was concern that some of the proposals would allow for predatory bidding by exempted sectors for those parts of the transport industry which , in the case of my own country for example , are already liberalised .
Thirdly , the de minimis provisions failed to meet realistic levels to allow competition to take place in the open market .
Finally , there was concern that the level of public subsidy taken into account in drawing up contracts would not allow the continuation of socially needed routes nor provide adequate recognition of contribution towards fares , for example for the less fortunate , such as the elderly or disabled .
The report which finally emerged goes some way to addressing these issues .
However , I fear that some of the amendments included in the final report would also introduce extraneous non-commercial considerations into what should be a completely open and transparent competitive system within the EU .
For example , the issues already mentioned relating to environment and social policy are not in themselves relevant to the contract tendering process but should be dealt with under separate legislation .
That is why I draw your attention to these matters and why this report should be seen as merely the first step towards the liberalisation of the market in this sector and not as an end in itself .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
( FR ) Mr President , I can say that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which has been asked for its opinion , widely supported the proposals put forward by the European Commission .
In a series of amendments which were passed on to the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , the Commission was careful to extend the length of contracts , for which operators apply in response to calls for tender .
The Commission also tabled a number of amendments to increase the content of management contracts set out in the Commission regulation , particularly under the social chapter .
Lastly , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs supports the idea that we must ensure that the objectives of sustainable transport are taken into consideration in the management contracts and this is duly taken into account by the competent authorities , particularly with regard to the integration and interoperability between bus transport , which is precisely the subject of our debate , and other types of transport .
Nonetheless , the Committee regrets that this proposal for a regulation was presented before a discussion could be held . With regard to rail issues , the second railway package and also services of general interest , which we discussed this morning , it would clearly have been more logical to first adopt a framework directive on services of general interest before having to discuss the same services of general interest on a sector-by-sector , directive-by-directive basis .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Meijer , I would like to say in advance that I actually want to say a word of thanks to you , as I know with what commitment you have sought to introduce this subject and how many discussions you have had in order to produce some sort of proposal .
I must , though , say on this point that I cannot go along with broad areas of your proposal .
There is , in principle , nothing new about what we are discussing today .
When , in the summer of 2000 , the regulation at last emerged from the Commission , reached Parliament , and then the first discussions were held with trade unions and the representatives of local transport bodies and voluntary organisations , everything was clear : There was to be controlled competition .
This had been the aim for years , and now we only had to deal with the questions of how long future contracts should run for and when the regulation was to enter into force , in other words , when would the first tenders actually be invited and the first contracts awarded ?
There was the additional question of what exceptions there should be to the obligation to put contracts out to tender .
All that had its part to play , as did the recurrently raised issue of social dumping , that is , the danger that tenders would lead to the employment of especially cheap labour .
We came to a consensus .
We wanted controlled competition without privatisation .
The two are always confused with one another .
Privatisation is not automatically connected with it .
All that is involved is that local transport bodies no longer automatically come into the enjoyment of substantial subsidies from regional , national or local funds without having to compete for them , but contracts will now have to be put out to tender .
We all know that local transport bodies , who know this themselves , basically offer their product at too high a price .
The cause of this is to be found in the fact that it is in the public sector that trade unions have always been very successful in pay negotiations in recent decades .
It is a truism , to give just one example , that the personnel costs of private bus companies are some 35-40 % lower than in the public sector .
Competition also opens up the possibility of us being in a position , in the future , to buy in transport services more cheaply , without a local authority being able to evade its responsibilities in the process .
It is not the case that they are being privatised .
There will continue to be a State office with responsibility for ensuring that public transport carries on .
I can see the opportunity of using the resources saved by buying-in transport at more favourable rates to buy in more transport in the future , thereby making short-distance transport more attractive and achieving all that was said at the outset , namely making transport so attractive , that more people will use it in the future .
Let me say that , following these lengthy preliminaries , I think there has almost been a catastrophe , because Mr Meijer was evidently unsure which way he should go , and proposed that , in future , the responsible bodies , whether the regional or local government , should be entitled to decide whether or not to invite tenders .
I forecast that if this right to choose , which is to be introduced into the bill by means of Amendment No 61 and Article 7a , becomes reality , there will be no competition , because pressure from the transport companies , trade unions , and associations will be so great as to be irresistible , and contracts will continue to be awarded automatically .
Though we can disagree about many details , I therefore beg you , ladies and gentlemen , to seriously reconsider your decision tomorrow and not to vote in favour of Amendment No 61 , so that contracts will continue to have to be put out to tender , exceptions being made for rural areas where only small sums are involved , but let us march in the same direction .
Mr President , you will not be surprised to learn that I see things in quite the opposite way to Mr Schmitt .
What is true is that we need a European legal framework for public local transport , as there is legal uncertainty and the market has already been opened up .
The question is , though , how closely to the citizens Europe 's decisions must be taken on a given subject .
Local public transport is , in my view , primarily the responsibility of local authorities and that is how it should stay .
Towns and parishes should themselves decide whether they want to run their local public transport by their own enterprise , and then whether they are able to do so .
It is also clear that those who say they are going to do it themselves must not be allowed to compete elsewhere .
I wish to thank Mr Meijer , the rapporteur , for pursuing this basic idea with , if I may say so , a certain stubbornness , as this issue of community decision-making is an important point .
My second point is that where there is competition in local public transport provision , it can lead to minimal wages and social dumping .
My dear Mr Schmitt , a bus driver working on regular services does not earn a fortune - barely DM 200 above the social security rate in Germany .
It is for that reason that social minima must be maintained when there is a change of operator .
My third point is that local public transport is run in many Member States ' rural areas by small and medium-sized enterprises .
These must not be unnecessarily squeezed out of the market , quite the contrary .
I believe they must also have a chance in the market when routes or networks are awarded directly .
The situation prevails in any case , in many areas of Germany , that up to 90 % of local public transport is to and from schools , and here too , the direct awarding of contracts must be given more of a chance .
I think we can agree that the Commission 's time limits for contracts and handing-over are both too short , and we strove together for their extension .
As regards the other things , our opinions simply differ and , unlike Mr Schmitt , I believe that tomorrow will not see a catastrophe , but that we will be very close to the communities in deciding in their favour on public local transport .
Mr President , I wish , first of all , to thank the rapporteur , Mr Meijer , for preparing the report ; he has done a great deal of work on this complicated issue .
The interests of passengers must be borne in mind in the development of public transport .
It must be made into such an attractive alternative that more and more people will be happy to opt for public transportation .
This is highlighted particularly in towns where it is necessary to find ways of solving environmental problems and the difficulties caused by traffic jams .
Signing agreements when organising public transport services is the correct procedure in cases where such agreements enjoy public subsidy .
With a combination of open and controlled competition it is possible to achieve a higher degree of efficacy and a better level of service .
Competition is also really needed in this industry .
There should be some room for flexibility in the application to enable Member States to retain any proven procedures that they have applied previously .
In my own home country such successful solutions include the fixed route transport licensing system and the town and district ticket systems .
This is corroborated by an amendment relating to Article 3 , item c .
The aim of this is to prevent the formation of local and regional monopolies and to enable competition as far as possible .
Another objective is to safeguard public transport systems that function well in countries with sparse populations where distances are great .
Arguments relating to transport safety and to minimising the number of accidents are also in favour of the public transport option .
For these objectives to be achieved , legislative flexibility is called for .
It should be possible to opt for solutions that are best suited to various conditions and to each operating environment .
Such solutions should be practically oriented and they should be implemented in cooperation with local and regional operators .
Mr President , the main problem with the Commission 's proposal is that local public transport is subordinated to the objective of ' free competition ' alone .
Some in this House may well welcome this , but I consider it a fundamental error .
It is the objectives of transport policy that local public transport must primarily serve .
It is also a European issue , how can the local public transport service improve the mobility of all citizens , including those who , not being car-owners , have no alternative to it , schoolchildren , large families , pensioners , disabled people , people on limited incomes ?
Ensuring sustainable basic mobility in accordance with town and country planning is therefore the prime objective for local public transport .
Specific local situations mean that this can be achieved in a wide variety of ways .
So , to this day , I cannot understand why the Commission chose to do this by means of a regulation without considering the possibilities afforded by a directive , as this is a typical case where the subsidiarity principle applies .
I also wonder how it is that the Commission is also choosing the form of the regulation , at the same time as bringing out the White Paper on European governance .
According to this White Paper , it wants to reinforce local autonomy , and here it is interfering .
Hence the question as to how such a regulation can make real the principle of reinforced local autonomy in European governance ?
Let me finally return to the offering of contracts for tender .
Of course contracts must be put out to tender .
But the process must highlight firstly transport policy , secondly environmental policy and thirdly social policy , which should lead to optimised mobility for our electorate .
Mr President , my colleague Erik Meijer 's report is of the greatest interest , as it touches on a core issue in services of general interest , that is , the guaranteeing of citizens ' mobility within their immediate surroundings .
This fundamental citizens ' right was formerly predominantly guaranteed by local public services and their agents .
As local public transport is mainly unprofitable , services are subsidised by the local authorities , which of course makes the local transport market interesting for private-sector service providers .
The public local transport market in Germany alone is valued at some DM 30 billion .
The creation of the internal market and the rise of international companies offering public transport services has led to a conflict between the previous practice of awarding transport concessions directly to local service providers on the one hand , and the international firms on the other .
The Commission has therefore proposed to give competitive rules the edge over public interest and to create a new and binding obligation to put contracts out to tender .
The rapporteur is , in my view quite right to question this procedure .
He would give local authorities the right to decide for themselves how contracts are to be awarded .
That is democracy ; that is the subsidiarity principle .
There must be no interference by the European Union in the conditions applied at local and regional level .
I see this as a fundamental issue , as it is evidence of real subsidiarity .
I appeal to my fellow Members of this House , although I know that there is little point in doing so , to support this position .
We had many meetings and discussions with local , regional , national and international operating companies and interest groups , so of course highly detailed proposals were the result .
Now , you do not have to agree with all these suggestions , but the basic line taken by the Meijer report corresponds to the demands of local public transport as seen by local authorities and operators , does not , contrary to what you said , Mr Schmitt , exclude the possibility of introducing competition , and safeguards local and regional transport services accessible to all and which citizens can afford .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my serious concern regarding the first reading of this report that we are to debate today , even in spite of the remarkable work that Mr Meijer has done .
We also support most of the amendments that he has tabled .
However , on the deceptive pretext of seeking to make financial compensation from Member States to service providers compatible with Community legislation and to award public service transport contracts that are already open to private service providers , the Commission is once again attempting to work well outside its area of competence .
By encroaching on the Member States ' methods of public management , the Commission is making a direct attack on local authorities ' freedom of management , and it must be said that , in doing so , it is denouncing the direct rule method of management used in France , which has proved its worth for many years .
This shows that the aim is not to achieve better service for the benefit of the user , but to actually create , using liberal dogma , the internal market .
In other sectors , such as telecommunications , energy and the postal services , it is freedom of choice that is at stake and , therefore , the very concept of public service .
In addition to the attack on the constitutional principle of freedom of administrative choice for local authorities , this is , more broadly speaking , an attack on the public sovereignty of Member States .
Freedom of choice in public services and in its method of management , freedom of choice in terms of provider , partial freedom in sub-contracting , freedom to set prices and freedom of compensation are freedoms of Member States and their local authorities that have been withdrawn .
Beyond the State , it is the citizen / user who will be slain on the altar of Community liberalism , because this proposal is a direct attack on local authority , which is the closest to the citizen and therefore is in the best position to manage the difficulties experienced by citizens on the ground .
They already have the least power , in the less affluent areas which are even at risk of having no services at all .
The social partners made no mistake , when they warned their MEPs at the vote in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
This illustrates perfectly the danger that everyone has spotted , and we are not dealing with subsidiarity that has been reintroduced here and there , or the odd possibility of derogating from the procedure that has been put in place , which should be enough to stop us seeing the truth . The citizen will see through this .
To sum up , I have reason to doubt this European project that , faced with ignorance and , at times , the distrust of our citizens , responds in a technocratic and dogmatic fashion by trying to wrestle power from the States and from local authorities , which efficiently manage the daily lives of citizens .
We cannot accept these proposals and that is why we demand this report is rejected .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , we should begin by saying to those watching us , who have found their way here in greater numbers than we MEPs , that we do not differ as regards our objective .
We all want the best possible local public transport at the lowest cost to taxpayers and passengers .
That is our common objective .
We now have to deal with the question of how best to go in that direction .
If your proposal is propaganda from the left of this House for the right of communities and regions to exercise free choice , then I can only say that the past fourteen years have demonstrated that free choice is to the citizens ' disadvantage .
What , then , is the position ?
In most towns and communities , services by the communities are being reduced and the subsidies are on the up and up .
So the reality is that we cannot carry on with the present system if we want a good , efficient , public transport service at local and regional level .
So we say we must put them out to tender , so that citizens get the best modern buses at the best price , with the best quality , and arriving as often as possible .
That is the objective we have set .
I can tell the gentleman from the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities that , secondly , there is the Community Treaty , the Treaty on the European Community , in which it is stated that everyone shall have the right to provide services .
Freedom of services can be restricted only on the basis of a greater good .
The free will of a village community is not sufficient to say that one should limit the freedom of services under Community law in village A or village B. You need carefully-controlled legislation to be able to limit the freedom of services by reason of a higher good .
That is what we are doing .
If , though , you give communities back their free choice , you are suspending the justification for limiting the freedom of services , so , no matter what we agree on , be it journey times or whatever else , we need a proper framework for a controlled competitive order , and the free choice you propose undermines that , as we need sensible Community regulations to limit the freedom of services .
Mr President , I feel that it is perfectly legitimate for the European Union to equip itself with common rules whenever we introduce competition into local public services .
I feel that it is infinitely less legitimate to seek to withdraw a method of management and to introduce competition within the field of transport and to use case law to extend this to all the other fields in the future , through a regulation which is not transposed by the national parliaments .
I have several reasons for this view .
The first is that the private sector has not always performed better and I urge my fellow Members to come and see what is happening in France , in the water industry , which has been largely opened up to the private sector .
Cartels have sprung up , which are no longer controlled by the local authorities and which currently supply water at higher prices than the local authorities , which remain under direct management .
On the other hand , we must not consider direct management to be a better method , but simply that the two methods of management must co-exist .
Secondly , this goes against the principle of subsidiarity .
If subsidiarity means anything at all , then it most certainly means the freedom of administrative choice of local authoridies and the constitutional provisions of most Member States , under which decentralisation now gives freedom of choice to the mayors , regional leaders and heads of local authorities .
There is therefore a genuine political problem posed by this regulation .
I do not think anyone can deny this .
Lastly , we must also be very clear on this question .
Whenever a mayor chooses direct management , he cannot turn to external markets .
Who knows of a school bus service , in a rural area , managed by the local authority , that has to rely upon external markets ?
This is not a problem that exists in reality .
On the other hand , whenever public services are delegated or an exclusive choice is made by a business , which is , itself , competitive , this company can turn to the external markets .
That is why I believe that we must impose the principle of reciprocity .
In any case , however , we cannot give up direct rule as a method of management .
Mr President , to get legal clarity on tendering rules in the EU , unfortunately the committee voted to delete most of the specific exemptions in favour of one very wide one , Amendment No 61 .
But it is open to legal and political challenge to simply cite democratic decision-making as a justification for exemption from EU legal rules for the internal market .
I therefore commend the specific amendments from the ELDR Group - Amendments Nos 110 to 112 .
These would mean that authorities would be justified in not tendering metro and tram services if there were good reasons of cost , safety or risk of creating a permanent private monopoly rather than competition .
Any claim for exemption would have to be justified to the European Commission .
In addition , there are provisions for direct award of contracts in the absence of tenders or in emergencies .
I appeal in particular to the left of this House .
You take a big risk if you rely only on Amendments Nos 61 and 62 .
They may not survive the course and as an insurance policy we need specific provisions to protect large complex metro systems like London 's from being split up for tendering or risking becoming a private monopoly .
Mr President , European transport policy is not really a page of glory in the annals of the European Union .
Too little , too late , not really consistent , those are only some of the features criticised as being characteristic of European Union policy to date and justifications for criticising it .
The present Commission is investing a lot of commitment in attempting to counteract this .
The proposal for a regulation on local public transport belongs to the legislative package with which some past errors are , admittedly belatedly , to be repaired .
Some of the internal market philosophy is also to acquire significance in the transport sector .
Controlled competition , not total liberalisation and certainly not privatisation at any cost , was said to be on the way .
One unfortunately has to say ' was ' as what the competent Parliamentary Committee has produced as a compromise signals a return to the old and unsatisfactory situation .
In order that there may be no misunderstanding between us , let me say that there is consensus on all the points concerned with the quality of the transport offered to the consumer , consensus also on demands for high standards of safety , social provision and environmental protection .
All that , though , can be , and is to be , required and put into effect by the conditions on the offering of contracts for tender .
So we do not need the continuation of monopolies and quasi-monopolies .
Finally , I will say something about subsidiarity .
It is no help to local autonomy to declare local public transport to be a res extra commertium , whose watchword is that everyone is to do what they like in the way they like .
It is , unfortunately , no help to the citizens either , for it is they who , at the end of the day , have to pay for all that twice over , as consumers and as taxpayers .
So , then , controlled competition and high standards for local public transport as well .
Mr President , I believe that public transport is incredibly important for Europeans in both towns and sparsely populated areas .
In this vote , I am therefore going to support the basic ideas behind the committee ' s proposal , which I believe points in the direction of better public transport .
However , I oppose many of the simplistic statements made about tendering .
Our experience from Sweden shows that tendering can be very good .
Account can be taken of the environment and of social considerations , safety regulations can be established and a good relationship can be enjoyed with the social partners .
As a prerequisite , politicians must have responsibility for the tendering and establish these criteria openly .
That is possible , as is shown by experience from Sweden .
We should be able to get rid of many of the simplistic statements about tendering .
As I say , I am prepared to support the basic idea that regions and administrative districts should have freedom of choice .
I also believe that it will , in practice , emerge that tendering can be used because it saves money that can be used for other purposes within the framework of public expenditure .
Finally , I want to say that I do not believe that the rule of reciprocity referred to in the committee ' s report should operate at European level .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have as yet been unable to find a simple solution to the problem of liberalising public transport .
That does not mean to say that we should not continue with the liberalisation process .
Quite the reverse , in fact .
Nevertheless , this liberalisation process should not be forced .
It must be carried out in stages .
In principle , I am against exceptions to freedom of services , but it is clear , of course , that a very limited list of exceptions should be possible , particularly for less sizeable contracts .
Finally , I should like to say that it should also be made clear that it certainly cannot be the intention to replace the government monopoly by a private monopoly .
I therefore think that a compromise solution must be found , particularly in the interest of the user .
Many thanks , Mr President .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , the likely reason for the Commission 's proposal being such a centre of attention is that we are dealing here with employment , especially with mobility , and with issues of safety , environmental protection and economic development as well , and the opinions which are still being vigorously discussed today were also the basis for almost 500 proposed amendments .
I would like at this point to again make clear that , for us , it really is not about opening up local transport in such a way that it inevitably ends up in private hands .
Nor is it about local transport remaining in public hands unconditionally , and that is the subtle distinction that we want to make clear now .
National , regional and also local government are to be obliged to put local transport out to tender , a process to which conditions must be attached , conditions which we have clearly described in numerous proposed amendments .
For us , it is about safety .
It is also about certain exceptions , small markets in rural areas , for example .
We , of course , view these exceptions with sympathy , as we do the special aspects associated with rail transport .
As has just been said , though , our misgiving cannot be dispelled that many are more interested in the service provider than in the service itself , for the word ' voter ' was just used rather than ' citizen ' , something that we find symptomatic of the whole discussion we have been having .
We have brought in numerous amendments and can , I believe , say quite unambiguously that these amendments prevent social dumping and also guarantee social security , safety in general , and , I believe , can give local transport a better future .
One final observation , with which I know the Commission has difficulty .
Protected markets make it impossible , in our view , for businesses profiting from them to take part in tendering processes in other markets without , at least , some problematic aspects being created .
As we see it , that is , and cannot be other than , unfair competition , which must be combated by all means available .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my thanks to the Commission for showing that they have the courage to present , in the past year , a proposal for a regulation on the thorny topic of local public transport .
For we are not going to get away from the fact , as we see at this very moment in the case of an airline , that even in local public transport , profitability is making an entrance .
We cannot therefore have the situation in which - I am involved in local politics myself - year after year , questions about the losses sustained by local public transport are simply shrugged off without further ado and with the taxpayer being left to foot the bill , without the money actually being able to be invested in making local public transport more attractive .
We have to ask ourselves : why was local public transport created ?
It was not created in order to employ as many bus drivers as possible ; on the contrary , it was created so that attractive facilities can be offered in rural and more densely populated areas to ensure the mobility of all .
That is the task that is incumbent on local public transport .
I think that Mr Grosch 's point that we need a level playing field in a European single market is decisive .
We cannot have the situation in which we introduce freedom of choice that makes it possible for certain districts , because they are under financial pressure or because they want to invest their taxpayers ' money properly , to invite tenders , and then these are submitted by firms from protected monopolies .
It is therefore so important that this Amendment be voted down tomorrow , so that there may be a level playing field .
The Commission has laid down very tight deadlines for the duration of licences and for transitional regulations .
I think we , as a committee , reached a fair compromise between the various interested parties .
I would , in fact , like us to make a start on introducing time limits and licensing systems throughout Europe .
Commissioner , we will be able to talk about this at future stages , in order to make it even more competition-friendly .
However , let us take this first step together .
This is for the good of the people of Europe .
Mr President , as one of the previous speakers said , what we are all after is the best possible public transport at the lowest possible cost .
As another speaker said , we need appropriate solutions for each particular environment .
That is the main reason why the principle that local authorities can be free to decide how best to organise public transport within their own areas is such an important one .
I would like to make a few comments about running metro systems in large urban areas such as London , where there is a real danger that if we do not allow local authorities to make those decisions , the contracting out will lead to the creation of a monopoly and we will not be any further forward in what we are trying to achieve with this report .
The other thing that could happen in areas such as London and other large cities is that the system could be broken up , which could lead to quite severe chaos .
So I would urge you all to support Amendment No 61 .
Mr President , I strongly support the principle that high quality and reasonably priced public transport should be available in all areas .
However , this report is particularly important to my constituency , Wales , due to issues relating to concessionary travel .
The Welsh National Assembly has introduced a scheme , which will come into force next spring , whereby local bus travel will be free for all pensioners in all areas of Wales .
The scheme would offer free bus passes and free travel on local buses and would theoretically enable pensioners to travel throughout Wales if they wanted to without paying a penny .
Whilst I appreciate the importance of ensuring that groups such as disabled people , schoolchildren and trainees are also eligible for reduced cost public transport , it would be ridiculous to undo the good work the National Assembly has done for pensioners in Wales by preventing pensioners enjoying concessionary travel under this regulation .
I am pleased that the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has already voted to abolish the ceiling on concessionary fares that was proposed by the Commission , thereby protecting these pensioners in Wales .
Thank you , Commissioner De Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Market access to port services
The next item on the agenda is the report ( A5-0354 / 2001 ) by Mr Jarzembowski on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision [ COM ( 2001 ) 35 - C5-0078 / 2001 - 2001 / 0047 ( COD ) ] on market access to port services .
Mr President , the Commission proposal for a decision on market access to port services should be considered and appreciated as part of the comprehensive Commission communication on improved quality of services in ports .
This communication was to draw conclusions from the positions of Parliament and of the Council on the Commission 's 1997 Green Paper .
When we consider the past weeks , we must observe that , whilst the European Parliament was in 1999 still able to agree by a large majority on a position on the Green Paper , the present Commission proposal , which is only intended to regulate market access to services in individual ports , has aroused a great deal of controversy in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , as attested by the result of the vote on the report - 26 in favour , 21 against and 11 abstentions .
So I hope that today 's debate and tomorrow 's vote will produce a clear position from this House , something in which I intend to play my part .
For if we cannot work out a clear position at first reading stage , the Council then has the last word .
We do not want to trust the Council to that extent , but rather we want to pull our own weight .
In Committee , the majority supported the Commission 's desire to adopt only regulations on competition in individual ports and include in this all service providers .
The report is , though , ambiguous on one point , that is , on whether pilot services should fall within the scope of the decision .
On the one hand , Amendment No 14 in the Committee 's report states that pilot services are not to be affected by the provisions , but the application to delete pilot services from the appendix to the opinion , which alone defines the opinion 's scope , was not accepted .
That being the case , we , as Parliament , must give a clear lead tomorrow .
Among the other amendments in the Committee 's report , I would like in particular to highlight the fundamental extension of the scope of the proposal to include port access , be it by sea routes or canals , likewise a more restrictive definition of self-handling and the abandonment of the requirement for at least two service providers per category of cargo handling , likewise the requirement we have incorporated into the opinion , that , when tenders are invited , the new service provider should compensate its predecessor for the investments .
A minority in the Committee tried to highlight , above all , the Commission 's failure to comply with Parliament 's 1999 demand for conditions for fair competition between ports in the EU , and produce a proposal for a regulation to create them .
The Commission has produced neither a transparency study nor guidelines for the monitoring of aid .
A minority in the Committee therefore proposed the adoption of new regulations on transparency in financial relations between ports and State offices and also on permissible State aid measures for ports , the intention being to provide legal protection for ports and also to prevent excessive aid provision .
For me personally , this is very much about our need to agree tomorrow on this transparency issue , for the issue of transparency and fair conditions for competition between ports is crucial to the ports ' ability to function .
All of us have repeatedly emphasised that ports play a central role in European transport policy , with 70 % of foreign trade and 30 % of trade within the Community passing through them .
They are significant junctions , and they must work well .
I believe that nobody need fear transparency , which leads to fair conditions for competition .
That characteristic and criterion is , I believe , a good basis for a real increase in the efficiency of ports .
In that spirit , I hope we will have a good discussion this afternoon and that this House will vote wisely tomorrow .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , all of us who have participated in the work of the committee know that this has been a difficult and controversial debate which has even , at times , caused tension in Parliament .
I would like to make several things clear : firstly , this is a good proposed directive by the Commission .
I repeat : I believe that it is a good proposal , and this has been reflected in the vote in committee .
I believe that it is a positive regulation and is very important if the European Union is to have efficient maritime and port services .
We must not forget that 80 % of the European Union ' s trade is carried out by sea .
And this liberalisation proposed by the Commission will no doubt benefit short sea shipping .
Furthermore , there is clearly a need for Community regulation of these services in accordance with the liberalising approach established at the Lisbon Council and which has already been applied in other sectors of services .
The proposal we are dealing with today includes technical-nautical services ( pilotage and mooring ) and cargo-handling services .
There are no reasons , on the grounds of safety , training or anything else , to justify their exclusion from the scope of the directive .
We must clearly take account of the particular nature of ports and the fact that there are services whose provision begins or ends outside the physical area of the port .
Another essential element of the system proposed by the Commission is the concept of self-handling , which is already laid down in Directive 96 / 67 / EC on access to the groundhandling market at Community airports .
I would like to briefly mention certain other elements of the port package .
We are talking about public funding of ports and the need for great transparency in the financial relations between public authorities and ports and State aid .
I agree with certain amendments which try to describe this aspect .
But with regard to State aid , it seems clear that this directive is not the right place to discuss this issue .
Lastly , I would like to thank the rapporteur , although we have disagreed on certain points , for the enormous amount of work he has done and the huge effort he has made to try to reconcile all the proposals .
Mr President , ports , particularly seaports , are normally cosmopolitan systems and they are junctions in the TENs for traffic by ship and sea , which is in principle the most environmentally-friendly mode of transport .
The openness of seaports , though , bears no relation whatever to the system by which they are financed .
Far from it ; I think opacity , very often intentional , is the right word to use for it .
To put it in nautical language : when it comes to financing seaports , the bulkheads are closed .
The present financial structures could be described as hazy and must be changed .
I believe that tomorrow 's vote must be about transparency in financial relationships and in State finance , for that is the first requirement for fair competition between seaports .
Granted , that is not exactly easy .
Ports are under private , State , joint State and private , and public control , but all of them are enterprises in competition with each other , and so we need fair conditions .
Aid is unobjectionable , but it must be aid for all .
The problem is , I think , that competition between ports has to be organised .
In principle , it occurs within ports or should do so , if all the Community regulations are brought into play .
Pilot services are another issue .
We see them as a public duty , serving safety at sea and the safety of man and nature , and the Member States have essentially reasonable regulations on them .
I believe it would be possible to extend them in view of the recurrent accidents off the German Baltic coast .
One sometimes gets the impression that , when it comes to navigation , many ships use the Shell atlas and nothing else .
So , safety at sea with pilot services must not fall victim to the alleged pressure on costs exerted by competition .
I extend my warmest thanks to the rapporteur .
I know that he has had a difficult job , but his shadow does not always have an easy time of it either .
To start with , I agree with the previous speaker ' s last sentence .
I do not need to repeat that ports are important .
In my view , the Commission proposal helps us to enhance the efficiency of ports .
Like a few of my fellow MEPs , however , I have noticed one shortcoming : there are no proposals on state aid and transparency .
It would be best , and I have tabled an amendment to that effect , if these new proposals were to come from the Commission and not from the text which we as Parliament are now drafting .
Commissioner , I should like to ask you if you would be able to tell us more about possible plans in that direction during this debate .
In any event , I hope that my fellow MEPs will support this amendment and that we will therefore ask the Commission to submit new proposals concerning those two points .
For the rest , I back the Commission proposal .
We must increase competition at ports .
This must also include maritime access , not only for technical-nautical services , but also for the handling of cargo and passengers .
We should therefore not dispose of the handling of cargo .
I think that pilotage can also be retained in the directive .
As you rightly stated , it forms a significant link in the life of most ports .
However , if we prescribe a few requirements , impose a number of conditions in the social field , and give due consideration to economic aspects , the environment and public services , as is the case in the directive and in my amendment , we will have more guarantees than if we simply fall back on the Treaty .
For I believe that that is the choice : either we include a special rule for ports in a directive , or we fall back on the Treaty and simply apply to pilotage the general rules of the Treaty which provide for the free movement of services .
I think it would be preferable to adopt the Commission proposal in this respect .
In any case , I am of the opinion that we as Parliament need to cooperate with the Commission constructively , possibly allow for a conciliation procedure with the Council , and ensure that we reinforce the operation of ports and competition in and among ports in a constructive manner to encourage the vital aspect of transport by water as much as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Jarzembowski , thank you for all your work , but we have not reached our goal yet .
Particularly since the Green Paper actually asked for something else on behalf of Parliament and its handling than what we have now received , namely a consideration of the competition among ports instead of in ports .
Why ?
If we look at the various coastlines in Europe , and I can think of a few , there are two , maybe six , seven or eight major ports located within a few hundred kilometres of each other , where competition is mainly generated from that small distance between the ports .
Antwerp , Hamburg , Rotterdam , and so it goes on .
The same happens in the Mediterranean in the south .
However , this leads to distorted competition which does not really benefit us .
So that is the first problem .
It also leads to overcapacity and the funding of this overcapacity .
That too is a thorn in our side , and we should like to see common guidelines in this respect .
This , in turn , impacts on the environment , it results in an excessive use of space and generates all kinds of additional problems which we as Greens are also being faced with to a considerable extent .
In terms of competition among ports , we would therefore actually like to propose more transparency and that a reasonable amount of thought be given to state aid .
We would sooner call for coordination among ports , which we would like to add to the objectives of this study along with transparency , and not only the opening of competition in ports , which has been the subject of discussion thus far .
If we turn our attention to competition within ports , as is formulated here , we would particularly like to see the pilotage scrapped for safety and environmental reasons .
I believe that we can rely on majority backing for this .
We also believe it would be wise to delete the handling of cargo , since it does not in any way benefit competition .
Finally , following on from transparency , we call for autonomous research to be carried out . This research should be autonomous vis-à-vis , yet commissioned by , Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal for a directive on market access to port services was not acceptable .
The removal of constrictions on free movement of services within the Community does not in fact mean only liberalisation and privatisation , but also European harmonisation with due regard being given to Member States ' rights to provide public services in defence of the common interest .
It is noticeable that the rapporteur took account of data specific to ports and attempted to include in his report not only requirements for safety , environmental protection and social standards but also the economic needs of ports .
The vote in Committee is evidence of the fact that opinion was not divided on group lines but that there were differences of outlook specific to different countries .
Removal of pilot services , cargo handling and passenger services from the scope of the directive is something I can go along with , as is the retention of licences granted to previous service providers and the setting of minimum standards for new ones .
The Commission 's draft has also undergone radical amendment with regard to financial settlement for investments made and the transparency of the financial relationship between ports and State authorities .
Briefly , Mr Jarzembowski 's report changes the Commission 's document in the right direction .
As , though , I thoroughly share the view of many of my fellow Members , namely that port services should generally be left to the Member States , I intend to abstain in the vote .
Mr President , this report has had a rather odd journey .
Whereas initially , it was a very logical report which , in my view , contained a reasonably correct interpretation of the facts , we now have before us an incoherent document which spawns many comments .
I shall confine myself to the key points .
Firstly , the alleged state aid of Member States for their ports forms the root of the problem .
If government funding for ports does not become transparent , other measures can hardly take effect .
Closer examination of this funding should therefore be given the highest priority , followed by a clear , financial framework which distinguishes legal from illegal support .
Secondly , the inclusion of cargo handling in the proposal prejudices the port authorities ' sovereignty to pursue their own strategic policy .
It is reported to lead to the breach of existing , long-term contracts , which will have far-reaching financial implications for the relevant services .
Furthermore , the maintenance of existing contracts renders the present legislation superfluous .
When these contracts lapse , it is likely that economic insights will have changed yet again .
Thirdly , I am of the opinion that pilotage can also remain excluded from this legislation .
I would draw your attention to an amendment which aims to secure surety from governments to render the use of technical-nautical services , in particular , mandatory .
Without surety , considerable problems can arise in the smaller ports .
That cannot be the intention , if I have understood everyone correctly .
Let it be clear : without a number of essential changes , we will be unable to vote in favour of the present report . Thank you .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President , first I think we should all congratulate Mr Jarzembowski on his excellent work , the time he spent on it and , of course , his patience , because this is an exceptionally tricky issue .
We should also congratulate Commissioner de Palacio on the substance of the proposal which she submitted to us and which is based on the liberalisation of port services , which she wishes to push on with .
Not as an end in itself , but as a means of bringing about better , cheaper services and improving the competitiveness of the European economy .
And , of course , when we speak of competitiveness and liberalisation and apply them to telecommunications , energy , the railways , we cannot leave out port services .
This too is another brick in the wall of the single market .
There can be no doubt that ports are a rule unto themselves , as is every sector .
Obviously we need to look at the question of aid and how it can be reconciled with the rules of transparency .
We need to look at the specific problem of pilotage , which several Members have already mentioned , and see how pilotage relates to safety .
Consequently , we need to look at a whole host of other issues .
But this should not lead us into ignoring the material facts and the material facts are that liberalising port services will have a beneficial effect on competitiveness and our objective of providing better , cheaper services to those who use them .
So the message which we need to send out from this debate is clear : a dual message of liberalisation and transparency .
Of course there are groups which will be affected by these proposals .
Of course there are interests which do not like these proposals .
But the greater good is the objective of competitiveness , and the growth and jobs which it creates .
And I believe that the philosophy behind the proposal before us serves precisely this objective .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is one of the rare occasions when politics must swallow its pride and take into account geographical requirements .
Chairman Hatzidakis is right : we must have the courage to say ' no ' to those pressure groups which sometimes attempt to prevent the Commission and the institutions from tackling areas affecting them which Europe has never clearly addressed .
I therefore feel this proposal for a directive is appropriate in order to regulate and improve access to the port market and services .
The calls for safety , the protection of workers , quality of service and , of course , respect for the environment , are appropriate and vital .
I would like to make two points on this subject : we , like the Commission , believe that it is right and proper to include in the scope of this directive terminal cargo handling services , in particular , that is those services which represent over 90 % of the volume of business of ports .
In addition , we feel that , if an exception is to be laid down to the application of this directive on grounds of safety or environmental protection , it would thus make no sense to limit it just to pilots and exclude the other technical-nautical services .
Lastly , we do not feel that this directive is the most appropriate instrument to address the issue of the public financing system .
There are too many discrepancies between the systems of the 15 countries of the European Union and some extremely grey areas continue to remain .
Consider - and we must be quite honest about this - how , in some of the major ports of northern Europe , there is proof of commitment to State financing in the fact that representatives of public authorities sit on the managing bodies of the individual ports .
This must be made clear in the name of the transparency rightly advocated by Mr Jarzembowski .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree that this proposal is very significant for port services insofar as it affects one of the most important transport infrastructures of the European maritime regions and because of the process of liberalisation of access to the market in these services .
I would like to make several points :
Firstly , the philosophy of liberalisation must include making the process more flexible so that it does not lead to dangerous or inappropriate radicalism .
Secondly , we must take account of the geographical reality of the seaports in the various regions of the European Union .
Thirdly , the jobs of the port workers affected must be guaranteed , as well as their social protection .
And on transposing this directive in the various Member States , the principle of subsidiarity must be taken into account .
These are the reasons that have allowed me to support this directive with certain clarifications , and justify certain particular amendments , which are coherent amongst themselves , and which deal with the fact that certain regions of the Member States affected are of an insular or peripheral nature , where the port is paramount and , in many cases , quality services are already provided .
Despite everything , I thank the rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski .
Mr President , the aim of the directive proposed by the Commission is indeed to open up all port services to competition .
In my opinion , these proposals will address the living and working conditions of port staff but I do not feel that they will improve them .
We are told that improvements are taking place , but , as is all too often the case , there has been no prior study of the effects of this liberalisation , in particular with regard to such important issues as safety , the environment and employment .
Those affected have not been consulted , in particular , trade unions ( we can always call them ' lobbies ' if you prefer ) , even though they know the safety needs of people and the environment , and have unrivalled knowledge .
Although the amendments made to Mr Jarzembowski ' s report take into consideration certain problems that I have just raised , in my opinion they are far from adequate .
They do nothing to temper the line taken by the text as a whole .
Self-handling in the ports would therefore equate to allowing social dumping .
Given the current practices of commercial fleets , this measure will lead to inadequate safety levels and the deterioration of environmental safety , employment and working conditions .
I will support the amendments that seek to exclude dockers from the directive .
These staff carry out an important economic task under difficult conditions , while still ensuring safety .
Nautical services for piloting and mooring are universally recognised as services of general interest .
They should , in my opinion , be considered as partners in their own right , with a view to sustainable development .
Well then , the proposals of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , do take account of pilots but not of mooring service providers , which I personally regret .
I believe that the European Union should work towards harmonisation at the top end of working and employment conditions for employees in this sector , which is the only way to genuinely guarantee economic and social effectiveness while respecting the environment .
The proposals made to date will not , in my opinion , take us any further towards these essential objectives .
Mr President , in my constituency lie the ports of Felixstowe and Harwich , the largest privately owned port complex in Europe and a model of commercial success .
The owners tell me that this directive has been prepared without thorough consultation and that , if passed , it will be seriously damaging to the whole UK port industry .
They say that it would force many ports to restructure , yet would do nothing to improve efficiency in a cargo handling market characterised by competition between ports , not within ports .
Thus , if there are problems of restrictive practices in cargo handling and pilotage in some continental ports , they should be tackled by individual Member States .
As is so often the case , one size does not fit all .
I urge the Commission , even at this late stage , to rethink this damaging proposal .
Competition is one thing .
Destruction of a successful industry is quite another .
I ask you to take this directive back and consult properly with those who are affected by it .
Mr President , it is a real pity that the Commission completely ignored Parliament 's position on the 1997 Green Paper which stated : " No need for Community legislation on organisational structure and market access for port services " .
That was our position then and I hope it is going to be our position tomorrow , but so far the Commissioner has failed to explain why she has ignored that .
Secondly , so far the Commission has ignored the question of why there has been no regulatory impact assessment on this proposal .
Whether you are for it or against it , it is extraordinary that such a proposal as this is not subject to the assessment that President Prodi assured the House would apply to all new Commission proposals .
Why is Mr Prodi not honouring commitments given to this House ?
Thirdly and finally , why is this proposal so over-prescriptive ?
Why is it going to burden a successful industry with more red tape , with no justification whatsoever ?
Why does it seek to regulate in minute detail every aspect of a port 's operation ?
Why , for example , does it call for cargo handling to be provided by at least two service providers for each type of cargo ?
How can that make any sense when you are trying to organise the arrangements at ports ?
Bearing all that in mind and unwelcome as the proposal is , it is even more extraordinary that it does not address the issue of state aids or transparency of accounts .
The whole package is unbalanced and unworkable .
I hope the House rejects it tomorrow .
Mr President , I come from Sweden where we have quite a high degree of exposure to competition and privatisation of various services .
The lesson to be drawn from our experience is that the crucial issue is not really market competition or privatisation , as such , but quality , greater efficiency and good , cleverly designed organisation .
These are aspects to which the Commission has given insufficient consideration in its proposal .
I want to express my thanks to Mr Jarzembowski who , as rapporteur , has come up with many criticisms of the Commission ' s proposal .
I should like to make a number of important exceptions , and I shall point out a couple of these .
Quite a few speakers have referred to pilotage .
I believe that pilotage is quite clearly a service for the benefit of everyone .
Pilotage must not therefore be regarded in terms of the same economic criteria as ordinary production , but from a safety perspective .
Taking responsibility oneself can have very serious consequences when it comes to loading and unloading .
That especially applies in view of the fact that flags of convenience are a common phenomenon .
I am in favour of transparency and public scrutiny where ports are concerned .
I am in favour of self-financed ports .
I want to see quality and efficiency brought about through ports ' preparing their own development programmes instead of being subjected to extensive forms of control from Brussels .
Such programmes must be carried out in cooperation with staff and clients at the ports .
Mr President , over the next few years the present directive will determine the operation of our ports , which will play an ever more important role in trade traffic on account of ever increasing traffic flows among other things .
Unlike in the past , modern port users are uncommitted : they choose their port on the basis of price and quality .
There are important financial channels that run from authorities to port companies .
A need for more insight into the investment flows has arisen .
In addition , a level playing field is needed for all interested parties .
This situation could be improved by setting up a number of basic rules .
I should like to highlight a few aspects in this context .
First of all , there is the scope of the directive .
It does not simply cover the port itself , but mainly the port users .
Deleting cargo handling from the directive will not benefit the quality of the service which ports offer their customers .
Freight services , or cargo handling , should simply remain in the directive .
Secondly , ship services , also referred to as pilotage and towage services .
Amendments Nos 3 , 14 and 51 aim to keep pilotage outside the scope of the directive , based on the outmoded notion that pilotage services are always public services .
I will not support these amendments .
In my country , pilotage services have not been a public service for a very long time , and that has worked out very well .
A directive which regulates market access to port services therefore covers both ship and port services .
Needless to say , we must move towards more transparency of the financial flows with regard to infrastructure , but I should like to leave the powers where they are , and will therefore vote in favour of Mr Sterckx ' Amendment No 47 in which the Commission is still being requested to submit proposals in this field .
What matters is that ports facilitate reshipment and receiving companies .
Ports and their users deserve solid , well-thought-out legislation .
I regret that the way in which this directive has been dealt with in Parliament has created unnecessary tension between northern , southern and western Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , it was very difficult to assess this text as its focus has shifted slightly .
We were supposed to address the issue of competition in ports and we are now being presented with a text on competition between ports .
I do not know what will happen tomorrow , but I am sure there will be some confusion .
In passing , I regret that the mooring service providers ' lot is not the same as the pilots ' .
I do not see why we would maintain competition for mooring service providers while excluding pilots .
These professions are fairly similar .
With regard to competition between ports , I feel that transparency is a good thing , but I would warn you against going straight from that to decreeing competition between ports without closer analysis , for ports are first and foremost tools for regional development .
They do not have the same nautical qualities .
Moreover , if we were to increase competition , your entire sustainable mobility policy would fall through .
I actually think that , in years to come , we will have to help the southern ports and the ports on the Atlantic coast take over from the over concentrated mass of North Sea ports .
Otherwise , we will be going against both the Erika-Maritime Safety package and our desire to remove lorries from the major transit countries .
In my opinion , the Commission will actually have to present us with specific proposals on State aid to ports focusing on regional development rather than just competition between products .
Mr President , as other Members have already said , the full complexity and problematic nature of the work over which Mr Jarzembowski has presided , competently and doggedly , must be recognised , and we all hope that the final result will be positive in terms of providing the necessary safeguards for the different principles .

We support the Commission ' s proposal , particularly insofar as some of the amendments tabled by Parliament have helped to make opening up the port services market a viable possibility , and , although this does not in itself appear to be the most remarkable result , it is positive in terms of revamping services and of introducing elements of competition , provided , as some of the amendments advocate , that certain social clauses remain untouched , that certain requirements relating to environmental safety , professional standards and continuity of authorisations continue to be met .
Parliament ' s vote will make it possible to consolidate all this provided that , as far as the internal port services to be opened up to competition are concerned , there are no obscure exemption clauses which would render the scope of the directive meaningless .
That applies to cargo handling and terminal services , and we feel that , in due respect not least for the principle of subsidiarity , certain services in which safety and professionalism are of paramount importance , such as pilotage , could be revitalised .
Finally , subjects which do not fall within the scope of the directive must not be allowed to infiltrate it .
The Commission will certainly have the opportunity to present a proposal on public financing for ports , and we look forward to it , but we must not now make the mistake of anticipating the proposal and bringing forward its introduction without a legal basis , creating unacceptable areas of discrimination between the port systems of the Member States , which differ too widely in this respect .
Mr President , Mr Jarzembowski has undertaken a very difficult task , but he has carried out a major , carefully considered piece of work affecting crucial areas .
Ports are clearly a very important factor when we discuss fulfilment of the Kyoto commitments in as much as they can ease the pressure on land transport and make things easier in a wide range of other areas .
It is therefore essential from an environmental point of view to have some of the goods at present conveyed by land transported instead by sea .
If this is to happen successfully , ports must be efficient , and we must therefore see liberalisation within those areas proposed by the Commission : loading and unloading , passenger services and whatever else has been mentioned , presumably with some exemptions in special regions . Perhaps outlying districts , in particular , can ask to be accorded special consideration .
However , that too has , of course , been mentioned in the report .
I hope that , in the light of the many views presented in this House , we shall now be able to agree upon a proposal so that together we are able to support the Commission ' s overall goal for the benefit of the whole of the EU .
Mr President , Commissioner , as you know , I come from a small port , but nonetheless one with European credentials as regards the trans-European networks .
I will quite happily note in our logbook that it is not about seeing things in black and white when liberalising and creating free and fair competition , simply in order to adhere to a principle .
The unedifying dispute about duty free is still in my mind .
This discussion about ports is also about jobs , attractive business propositions and public profile , and I want to take part in it , we need to define transparency rules for the calculation of costs and the use of public funds by ports , in order to establish fair competition within ports and between them .
Only transparency about the flow of public funds and services will make it possible to compare the services offered by the various seaports and in that way demonstrate which works more efficiently .
Comparability of services creates competition , and transparency is , in consequence , indispensable if we want to have long-term liberalisation of the market in port services .
I will say in addition that , at this time , we should not yet liberalise the pilot services .
Pilots have , as at present organised , long maintained a high standard of quality and safety on sea routes .
These extraordinarily high standards would be needlessly jeopardised by liberalisation at any cost .
Every market structure contains components for which quality rather than competition must come first .
Of course , the pilots will one day have to adopt a new approach - one day .
Even they will not be able to resist the opening-up of the market forever , but as far as safety at sea is concerned , there are at present more pressing matters such as , for , example , the introduction of a ' black box ' for ships .
Immediately forcing pilots to be subject to competition would , under certain circumstances , lead to a price war that could compromise the safety of shipping lanes in the long term .
Mr President , while the European economy is having a coughing fit we must decide whether to say a final good-bye to ' Eurosclerosis ' and protectionism , whether to allow port monopolies to remain as they are or whether we should give free rein to the dynamics of economy .
Sabena is a warning example of the kind of inefficiency that centrally managed industrial policies can produce in the worst possible case .
Should we exclude cargo handling from the directive on ports , all that would be left of it would be an empty shell .
This is why Amendment 52 is dangerous .
Although I am in favour of the inclusion of all major ports , I can , nevertheless , give my support to Amendment 79 proposed by Mr Atkins .
This amendment would restrict the directive to covering public ports only .
My British colleagues could then accept the inclusion of cargo handling without any concern .
We must not forget that British exporters benefit from reasonably priced port services in continental Europe .
The numbers of port operators should not be restricted except for compelling reasons .
Should economic efficiency be accepted as a criterion for restricting the numbers , this would leave a great deal of room for speculation as to when operations are efficient and when they are not .
This is a reason why Amendments 6 , 25 and 44 should not be seconded .
On the other hand , Amendment 50 on the definition of the port system is not acceptable because , according to the amendment , a port in Greece and a port in Germany , for example , could be construed as forming a single port .
I am sorry but this is an absurd idea .
As regards pilotage , we , the members of the committee , concluded that strict national rules should apply .
Therefore , safety aspects cannot be used as an excuse for a monopoly .
Is it our intention then to prevent the development of EU ports by diluting the directive that has been awaited for so long ?
Cargo handling and pilotage , based on national rules , should be included , absolutely .
Also , the port system should be defined in a concise manner .
My highly honourable colleague Jarzembowski ' s ideas on this matter are , unfortunately , a long way away from the actual needs of port users .
We cannot change Europe into a giant Hamburg .
The committee has reached a good compromise and we should clearly stick to that .
' Eurosclerosis ' hits the poor hardest .
Now we have a good opportunity to do a favour to European employment and sustainable development .
Let us pilot Europe towards competitive ports .
Mr President , as a former member of the Amsterdam City Council Port Committee and as a current inhabitant of Rotterdam , I know what is wrong with competition , expansion and labour relations in ports .
The ports along the coast between Hamburg and Le Havre , spanning Germany , the Netherlands , Belgium and France , largely service the same hinterland .
They have traditionally competed with each other with low tariffs and large public investments to secure the highest possible cargo levels for their quays .
This competition involves taxpayers ' money , and there is unnecessary secrecy about the use of taxpayers ' money .
An orderly and scheduled distribution of tasks among those ports saves public funding and better provides the port workers with sustainable employment without the unnecessary peaks and troughs .
That is why I support the remarkable agreement between a large contingent to the Left and rapporteur Jarzembowski , which reminds us of the position which this Parliament has adopted once before , namely the position that transparent competition among ports is far more useful than organising competition in the ports .
Competing pilotage and towage services are at the expense of safety , working conditions and job security .
That is why we need to avoid the wrong interventionist measures from the powers that be .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank Mr Jarzembowski for all the work he has done as rapporteur throughout this debate .
It has clearly been difficult work , and we must all be aware of what is at stake here .
I would therefore ask Parliament as a whole to try to give the rapporteur the greatest support possible , with certain slight modifications to what Mr Jarzembowski proposes , since , for once , I do not agree with some of his suggestions .
I would like to remind you that 70 % of trade with third countries depends on the efficiency of our ports .
It is clear that sea ports play an essential role in relation to the European Union ' s trade .
But furthermore , if we want to deal with the future of transport within the European Union in a credible fashion , not trade between the European Union and third countries , where we will continue to depend largely on sea transport , but within the European Union , we must move on from words and declarations to actions , once and for all , and make short sea shipping a reality . This requires our ports to be as competitive , as efficient and as well-interconnected with adjacent territories as possible .
As you know , to this end , a few months ago , ports were incorporated into the trans-European networks for the first time , precisely so that they may be fully integrated into the Union ' s internal transport system and thereby play a crucial role in making that system sustainable and competitive .
The Commission ' s proposal is part of a package which deals with various issues of port policy : the transparency of flows of public funds destined for ports ; criteria for what is State aid and what is not .
It deals with aspects relating to competition between ports .
The proposed directive which you must vote on deals with the issue of competition between service providers within ports , covering all the services that are normally provided to port users and are of commercial value .
In a moment I will mention something which several of you have referred to ; competition between ports .
However , now we are going to talk about the proposed directive relating to competition within ports .
The proposal is based on two pillars : one relating to content and the other to procedures .
With regard to content , we propose bringing ourselves into line with the legislation passed by Parliament and the Council in similar areas , where rules have been established to open up the markets .
I am talking about telecommunications , gas , electricity , but especially , in the transport sector , ground services at airports .
Although the Treaty does not in principle allow restrictions to market access , the ports have their own specific characteristics such as possible space limitations and the fundamental importance of safety and environmental issues .
Our proposal guarantees a fair balance between these needs .
I am pleased to note that , in its vote , the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism expressed its satisfaction with this approach .
We must allow self-handling in ports where operators consider that they can obtain better performance from their own personnel and equipment and we must guarantee that , as in the case of all the other sectors , the number of service providers can only be restricted for justifiable reasons , such as space limitations , or the safety of sea traffic in this case .
All competent service providers must have equal opportunities to operate in the ports of their choice .
This brings me to the second pillar of our proposal : procedures .
The procedural rules must be transparent , non-discriminatory , objective and proportionate .
This is not always the case at the moment .
I am convinced that what was possible for ground services at airports must also be possible for ports .
And I believe that , although it is going to create certain problems , as is always the case when there is a change to a situation that has remained the same for a long time , perhaps even for centuries , it is certain that this change will be of benefit to the whole system , to the economy and to the quality of life of the citizens of the European Union in general .
Of course , specific local characteristics must be taken into account , above all on issues relating to safety , the environment and social aspects .
Our proposal will therefore allow for a high level of flexibility on a national , regional and , above all , local level , so that ports can manage their own affairs in an open and balanced fashion .
Focussing now on the amendments , I would like to say that , having examined them in detail , the Commission can accept most of them .
Many amendments improve our proposal substantially with regard to the clarification of the definitions of port services and self-handling and they include compensation rules which are not only implicit , but also explicit , as is the case with Amendments Nos 18 , 20 , 32 and , in part , Amendment No 46 , which we fully accept .
I would also like to mention Amendment No 15 , which allows Member States to extend the scope of the directive to inland waterways close to ports .
Furthermore , we accept part of Amendments Nos 25 and 44 which limit , for reasons of maritime safety , the number of service providers rather than that of just providers of technical-nautical services .
It is a reasonable measure and it is in accordance with the Commission ' s general interests in the field of maritime safety .
We also agree with the idea that the time period finally approved in relation to the maximum periods of authorisation should facilitate normal repayment and performance of investments , and we therefore accept an extension of the time limit and also , possibly , compensation where total repayment has not taken place , as certain other amendments suggest .
There are other amendments that , although they do not introduce changes , provide useful clarifications , particularly in relation to the continued application of the rules currently in force with regard to safety , the environment and social issues .
All of these amendments can be accepted , though with modifications to their wording .
However , there are issues that we cannot accept , for various different reasons , and you must understand this , ladies and gentlemen .
In the case of certain amendments to the recitals of the directive , they do not really correspond to the legislative text itself , for example : Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 12 .
Neither can the Commission accept amendments that substantially change or reduce the scope of the directive .
Having reached this point , please allow me to point out two problems which have been at the centre of the debates in Parliament ' s Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism : should ground services be included in the scope of the directive ?
The enormous majority of parties accept that this inclusion is necessary , and we could not accept any amendment , such as No 52 , which leads to the exclusion of this sector .
If we want modern , high-quality ports , that which is possible and necessary for ground services in airports must also be possible and necessary in ports .
Furthermore , this position received majority support in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
The same is true with the amendments aimed at excluding self-handling and the right of service providers to employ the personnel of their choice , such as Amendments Nos 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 and 73 , which are also rejected .
The latter is already included in the legislation .
However , if you read our proposal correctly , you will see that service providers cannot employ so-called ' pirate workers ' . It is not possible .
If these misunderstandings can be overcome by clarifying our text , the Commission is prepared to seek an appropriate wording .
Another problem is the issue of pilotage .
The question is once again whether pilotage can be included in the directive or not .
Many people believe that certain safety considerations make it difficult to include this particular sector , but there are ways to ensure safety which are different from those which are currently applied .
The same is true for other technical-nautical services , which is why the Commission cannot accept those amendments which exclude pilotage from the scope of the directive .
In this regard also , Parliament ' s relevant committee supported our proposal .
Certain other amendments are also unacceptable for various reasons : specifically , economic considerations concerning the service provider should not be a criterion , as is mentioned in the second part of Amendment No 25 .
Service providers must accept commercial risks and public authorities must not carry out economic assessments .
Having said this , our proposal leaves a door open : when exceptional circumstances arise relating to the volume of cargo , the number of service providers may be restricted .
Furthermore , without going into detail , we cannot accept various amendments for technical reasons and the list is available to you .
Lastly , I would like to refer to Amendment No 26 .
Our proposal indicates that normally , and I repeat , normally , at least two service providers will have to be authorised for each category of cargo .
If we were to remove this article , we would have to apply the rule established in another paragraph , which would authorise the greatest possible number of service providers , a consequence which I do not believe was intended on presenting this amendment .
Certain amendments express the desire to put more stress on competition between ports than the Commission ' s package on ports does .
Please allow me to deal with this issue by saying that I agree with the need to consider competition between ports as well , but I think that we need to find a more appropriate way of doing so .
For example , the increase in transparency : Amendments Nos 9 and 48 .
The Commission accepts this principle and I am counting on your support so that we can jointly find the best way to apply this principle .
Another example is the State aid mentioned in Amendment No 49 .
We all agree that this State aid should not exist , but we must first provide a clear definition of the dividing line between what is State aid and what is not .
The Treaty lays down that the Commission and only the Commission applies the Treaty ' s rules in the field of State aid .
The current legislative process will focus on this issue and I hope that we can sit down together to find a viable solution , within the framework of the Treaty , which clarifies such a thorny issue .
And if it is necessary to go further - and I have the impression from what you have said , and I share many of your concerns , that this is the case - I must say that I am prepared to go further than the provisions of the current proposal in the fields of State aid to ports and competition between ports .
Lastly , a few words on Amendment No 79 , which proposes excluding private ports , many of which do not apply access restrictions .
During the legislative process , we will have to study ways of suitably dealing with this issue .
Of course , this is only the beginning of the legislative process . During this long process , the Commission will be open to finding constructive solutions with the European Parliament which will allow us to be able to count upon the broadest possible support for this proposal , which is aimed at ensuring that a mature industry , an industry which has much to gain from the restructuring of the European transport industry , can meet the challenges before us and make a crucial contribution to our creating a sustainable transport system at the service of economic development , the creation of jobs , respect for the environment and the quality of life of our citizens .
Enlargement
The next item is the Commission communication on enlargement .
The President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , now has the floor .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , enlargement has been a top priority for this Commission from the very beginning of its mandate .
From the point of view of Europe ' s powers and responsibilities , its potential and goals , enlargement is the real acid test . It is also Europe ' s historic duty .
Enlargement - the unification of this continent - brings to a close a chapter in Europe ' s history and lays the foundations for the future .
Through this process , the Union is preparing to shoulder responsibilities as a continent and we therefore need to take a closer look at our resources , policies and goals , at global level .
Our commitment and courage must match the commitment and courage which the candidate countries are showing as they prepare to join the Union .
Since the beginning of my mandate as President of the Commission , nothing has made a deeper impression on me than my trips to the candidate countries , my meetings with their citizens and the representatives of their governments , or my contact with their parliaments , bravely working day and night on the arduous task of bringing their societies safely through the transition consisting mainly of preparations for enlargement .
In recognition of their efforts , I would like to send them a message of thanks and good wishes from the European Parliament here in Strasbourg .
There you are : these are countries which , barely ten years ago , were literally cut off from the Europe in which we live . Since then , they have been restoring contact with our shared values .
Even before being formally admitted as new Member States , the candidate countries are starting to reap the benefits of their integration . In practice , they are already part of our area of stability and development , as is shown by the ever-increasing presence in the candidate countries of companies from the Member States .
We have already seen extraordinary progress along the road to accession .
The reports we are presenting to you today analyse as precisely as possible the countries ' preparation efforts . Here , I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to Commissioner Verheugen and his colleagues for their huge , unprecedented efforts , in terms of both quality and quantity , in instigating and experimenting with a truly remarkable methodology , and if we should prove to have failed at any time , it is because we really were stepping out in the dark .
In short , our reports show that this historic moment really is possible and just around the corner , but only if we are able to keep up this sustained pace .
Without going into the details of the reports , which Commissioner Verheugen will be describing in a few moments , I can tell you that progress has been made in virtually all the chapters making up the accession process .
I think I can safely say that this remarkable progress has been greatly inspired by Nice , where , a year ago , we set out the practical stages and the ' roadmap ' , as we termed it , for the final stage of this path to enlargement .
One year from now , we will evaluate , together with Parliament , the ability of each of the candidate countries to assume the rights and responsibilities which are part and parcel of its integration into the Union .
We realise that , when that time comes , we will have to have concluded , or , at least , very nearly concluded the negotiations with the countries which have met the criteria laid down .
Once the conditions set by Parliament and the European Council have been complied with , and once the necessary ratification procedures are complete , these countries will be in a position to join the European Union before the June 2004 elections and thus elect representatives to this House for the next Parliamentary term .
Therefore , next year will be decisive for the enlargement process and for the future of Europe .
Negotiations will be tackling sensitive issues like agriculture , the Structural Funds and the budget and , in these negotiations , we will show the same determination to find constructive answers that we have shown in the past .
From the beginning of the year onwards , the Commission will be putting forward proposals based on the current acquis and on the principles adopted at the Berlin European Council .
Much will depend on the continued efforts of the candidate countries to adopt and implement the acquis .
As the Commission stresses in its Regular Reports this year , the candidate countries will also need to develop the necessary administrative capacity to be able to apply the Union ' s rules and policies properly .
However , sustained efforts on behalf of the candidate countries are only one side of the coin .
In order for enlargement to be a success , it will be important to strengthen the Community method and sustain the necessary cooperation between the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
2002 will be a year of intense reviewing and monitoring and I know I can count on Parliament to scrutinise this work closely .
I would also urge the Member States to continue to respect their existing commitments regarding enlargement , particularly those contained in Agenda 2000 and the Financial Perspective for up to 2006 , as agreed by the Berlin European Council in 1999 .
We cannot make further reforms a pre-condition for enlargement , although the responsibilities which we are taking on with enlargement must prompt us to begin preparing , with considerable momentum and political vision , the new institutional process due to be launched at the Laeken European Council .
Similarly , the current negotiations should not be linked to the issue of the Union ' s finances after 2006 , these are separate issues .
Any attempt to relate them would mean changing the rules and would inevitably ultimately disrupt our carefully balanced negotiation process .
The reports we are presenting to you also look at the implications of enlargement for the candidate countries ' neighbours , that is other European countries , and for the Mediterranean .
The terrorist attacks of 11 September against the US have completely changed the international situation . It is now less stable , less predictable and more frightening .
Now , more than ever , the world needs a strong Europe which is sure of its values , which sows stability , predictability , security and prosperity around it , and which is , at last , a leading power on the international stage .
With enlargement , Europe ' s position as the world ' s leading economy and trading power , with an internal market of 500 million consumers , will be confirmed .
With this situation established , we will be in a position to extend the area of stability and prosperity which we so need beyond the Union and the candidate countries .
If we are to achieve this , we will need a new ' neighbourhood policy ' , and this is one of this Commission ' s strategic goals .
As I have long maintained , and as I confirmed yesterday at the College of Europe in Bruges , we need to move beyond and expand the range of instruments available to the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership , the partnerships with Russia and Ukraine , and our stability efforts in the Balkans .
The fundamental intention is to extend liberalisation of trade , the technical standards and the laws governing our internal market to all our neighbours .
The form that the appropriate agreements should take - free-trade agreements or agreements modelled on the European Economic Area agreement - will have to be determined through negotiations , but the essential objective will be to consolidate mutual economic presence .
Our central aim is to build a partnership with our neighbours that is as close as possible and which can become an anchor for stability and security .
Basically , what we need to do is ' export ' stability , and lay the foundations for balanced development in all areas bordering on the Union , drawing on the main strengths of European integration .
This will make integration of our closest neighbours , the countries of the Western Balkans , easier when the time comes .
In our efforts , we must not , of course , neglect the importance of the cultural dimension of our partnership .
This is why we are working on a new initiative to encourage dialogue and mutual understanding between the northern and southern shores of the Mediterranean .
I am grateful for Parliament ' s past and present support and constructive attitude towards the enlargement process . I am counting on Parliament ' s continued support during this sensitive , final phase of the negotiations .
The work of the Members of this House will be crucial , not just in terms of ratification as such , but also , more generally , in terms of encouraging support for enlargement among Europe ' s citizens .
Opinion polls indicate that , in many parts of the Union , many citizens still need to be convinced of the overall benefits of enlargement .
The Commission will , of course , continue and intensify its information strategy , but it is Parliament and its Members that can make the greatest , most effective contribution to building up the necessary democratic support for enlargement .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the continuous involvement of this House in the enlargement process remains crucial , and not least in terms of the debate on Europe ' s future , a debate to which the candidate countries and future Member States are expected to make a substantial contribution .
The report presented by the Commission today shows that the beginning of a new European era is just a few steps away .
Let us take these steps together and continue and intensify our cooperation in the months to come , and thus lay the foundations for a larger , stronger , completely democratic Union .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will add to what President Prodi has already said by informing you of a number of things .
The Commission 's essential political message for today is that the desire of Parliament and of the Council to achieve the first accessions before the 2004 European elections may well be ambitious , but it is realistic and feasible .
Why is this so ?
Firstly , because the candidate countries continue to meet the political criteria , with the exception of Turkey with which we cannot , for this reason , begin negotiations this year .
Among the political criteria there are areas which still require our attention : good governance in the broadest sense of the word , international criminality , the functioning of the constitutional state - but I must repeat that the criteria have been met .
The progress made in fulfilling the economic criteria means that ten of the candidate countries are functioning market economies and are also either now , or will be in the near future , in a position to cope with the competitive pressure in the internal market .
These are all countries with which we have opened negotiations , with the exception of Bulgaria and Romania , where though , I must openly say , there has also been significant progress .
Particularly in Romania 's case , the Commission considers it important to note that , for the first time , there is real progress in terms of political , economic and social reform , something which will be shown clearly only in the next progress report .
As regards the adoption of the acquis , this is reflected , above all , in the progress made in the negotiations , of which you are all well aware .
So far , we have achieved all that was envisaged in the framework of the negotiating timetable , and therefore the negotiating timetable fixed at Nice will continue to be the keynote of our actions .
What is actually new about this year 's report is that we are now concentrating very intently on the last remaining , and very substantial , problem , namely how to ensure that the future Member countries , at the time of accession , will have the administrative capacity to meet all the obligations of a Member of the European Union .
For the avoidance of doubt , let me say that as yet they do not .
Not one of the candidate countries at present fully meets all three criteria .
The Commission therefore proposes the realisation of a special action plan to improve the candidate countries ' implementation capacity .
We are therefore also making extensive additional resources available .
We will inform Parliament and the Council of the outcome as early as the middle of next year .
I do not want there to be any misapprehensions here .
If the progress reports focus heavily on the shortfalls that we still have today , this is simply because we cannot repeat every year what has already been done , but the nearer we come to the objective of the negotiations , all the more clearly do we see the problems that still remain .
In order to have the full picture , though , we must see the remaining problems against the background of the enormous progress that has been made over the past few years .
Only then do we get things in the right perspective .
We believe that it is possible to reduce the existing administrative and legal shortcomings in due time for the candidate countries to have adequate implementation capacity when they accede .
To put it very plainly : the Commission will no doubt have to give final opinions next year , and by that point there must be no more deficits .
Let me say in addition , that the accession negotiations with Cyprus are well advanced .
It is our strategic goal to take in a united Cyprus as a new member .
This requires constructive and substantial progress towards a lasting peace solution .
I therefore reiterate my appeal to all concerned to make use of the ' window of opportunity ' to achieve this goal .
The pre-accession strategy for Turkey is showing the first positive results .
The constitutional reform recently adopted by the Turkish Parliament is a step in the right direction , but further reforms are necessary , especially in regard to effective protection of human rights and the implementation of economic reforms .
The Commission considers that it is now time to intensify the pre-accession strategy .
A more detailed scrutiny of Turkish legislation and its approximation to the acquis will be in the forefront .
We have , though , not yet progressed to the point where we can propose starting on Turkey 's screening .
Next year we will be embarking on the most politically sensitive stage of the accession negotiations .
We will lay down a general framework for the negotiation of the financial chapter which ensures that it can be dealt with in a common framework , and we will be doing this very early in 2002 , so that the Spanish Presidency will have the chance to keep to the timetable .
We are confident that the enlargement negotiations can be successfully completely on the basis of the current acquis .
In our proposal , we will strictly observe the expenditure limits of Agenda 2000 .
We will thus make no proposals going beyond them , nor will we make proposals binding the European Union beyond 2006 , so that it is perfectly clear that the Commission 's strategy involves no financial risks .
Finally , let me add that negotiations are currently concerned with issues , the resolution of which will have direct impact on the living conditions of citizens in the accession countries .
The decisions made now will influence either positively or negatively the acceptance of the accessions in the candidate countries .
We must therefore make every effort to give the citizens in today 's and tomorrow 's Member States all the information about enlargement .
No partner should be subjected to excessive demands in the accession process .
It is therefore essential that negotiations be both flexible and result-oriented .
The Commission will , then , on the basis of next year 's progress reports , submit recommendations on the readiness for accession of those countries that are adequately prepared .
It will make every effort to ensure that negotiations with these countries can be concluded successfully .
It will also produce a revised pre-accession strategy for those countries which are unable or unwilling to conclude negotiations by the end of 2002 .
These countries must not be made to feel that they are being left behind .
They therefore require special attention and special instruments , which we will be proposing in the 2002 Strategy Paper .
Thank you , Commissioner Verheugen .
I would remind the House that this debate consists of an exchange of short questions and answers .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , I have , of course , some questions , but a few statements are in order .
Let me say first , Mr President of the Commission , that we are glad to see you here .
We were , though , somewhat astonished to see your name appear on the monitor during our bureau meeting .
It took us by surprise , which may have been a mistake by our group .
We do , of course , make mistakes , but in general , according to what I hear around the place , it was not known that the President of the Commission was going to be here this afternoon . We are glad that you are here , even though we would have liked prior notice .
A second point , to which I would also like an answer , is that I was told this morning while the Group Chairmen were holding press conferences , that Mr Verheugen had also held a press conference .
I would be very interested to know , Commissioner , whether it was on the subject to which you have just been speaking .
If you can shed some light on that , then so much the better .
Now for my questions .
First , let me inform you that our group 's leaders had a meeting in Hungary last week .
There was grave concern in Hungary that the enlargement could , for them , be delayed if in another country , namely Poland , developments were not proceeding as quickly as might be wished .
Of course , we all want Poland to be in the first round of enlargement , but a consequence of that must not be that , if a Member country is not yet ready , the others have to wait and we cannot keep to the 2004 deadline .
Each country must be assessed on its own merits if enlargement is to be able to take place at all .
I would be obliged if you could say something about this .
I then have a very specific question .
There was also disquiet in Hungary about the critical judgment passed on the ' status law ' on Hungarians in other countries .
This law was adopted by 95 % of the Hungarian Parliament , and a commission of the European Council , the so-called Venice Commission , explicitly stated that this law was acceptable .
One last question : How do you see the overcoming of the past with reference to some EU countries today ?
I am thinking of the Benes decrees and of the acquisition of land in Poland , for example .
Can you say something more about that ?
Can we take as our starting point statements which , if these countries join the European Union , will make it possible for them to have a future with a clear record , which we of course very much want ?
We want the 2004 deadline to be adhered to , so that these peoples can take part in the next European elections .
Mr President , I would like to clarify the issue of Poland , at last , because the situation is incredible : in Poland they are saying that we favour the smaller States while the smaller States say we favour Poland .
Well then , we need to make it clear once and for all that good progress is being made , and by ' good progress ' we mean good progress for Poland as well .
This country has made excellent progress , and so there is no need to put Poland in a different category from the others .
I feel , or rather I must express my utmost satisfaction at the fact that , looking back at the rate of progress , it is apparent that Poland has displayed remarkable energy and ability in this race , on this journey towards enlargement , towards accession .
I can therefore find no reason to differentiate between Poland and Hungary or between Hungary and Poland .
Sir , neither the President of the Commission nor I myself have held any press conference .
We abide fully by what we agreed .
It is for that reason that the press conference is to take place at 6 p.m. , after Parliament has been informed .
I regularly talk to journalists , as you well know .
There was , though , no press conference , and that is an important distinction .
As far as the Hungarian law on status is concerned , we notified the Hungarian government of problems with this law from the point of view of the acquis communautaire even before the law was enacted .
These problems were then taken into legislative account , so that we have no problems with Community law .
My estimation of the Venice Commission differs from your own .
The Venice Commission ruled that whether the Hungarian Status Law is contrary to international law or not is dependent on the way it is implemented .
We have therefore had discussions for some time with the Hungarian government and with the governments of neighbouring countries in order to ensure that Hungary 's neighbours are involved in finding a way of implementing it on which they can all agree .
The Hungarian government is thankfully endeavouring to bring this about , and the Romanian and Slovak governments are also ready to play their part .
The Benes decrees have not to date been the subject of negotiations , since property issues , as you well know , are not covered by Community law .
As regards the acquisition of land , I expect something to happen very quickly in the relevant negotiations with Poland .
During my visit to Warsaw last week , the Polish government announced that it would be taking a flexible approach to this issue .
Mr Verheugen , no press conference has been held but the press already has your text .
I think that is the cause of this confusion .
Madam President , I would like to put three short questions .
The first is to Mr Verheugen : You have announced that there will be additional resources or an additional programme for modernising and adapting administration .
I would be interested to know whether these are financial resources deducted from other programmes for these countries on an anticipatory basis .
Perhaps you could define that a bit more exactly .
My second is this : Commissioner , the Court of Auditors ' report that we discussed today criticises the Commission for the absence of definite criteria in its programmes to reinforce atomic power stations , that is , to increase the safety of their reactors .
Are you prepared to consider the possibility that the Commission is not drawing up any criteria , that is to say , any general criteria , but only criteria for checking reactor safety improvement measures , carried out with the support of Commission resources ?
My third question , concerning Cyprus and Turkey , has already been briefly alluded to .
The Turkish Prime Minister has just made statements in what may be a new form , to the effect that , if it came to it , the northern part of Cyprus might be annexed .
Does the Commission have a clear , official and unambiguous answer to this ?
Madam President , I will answer the honourable gentleman 's questions as follows . Firstly , resources for the additional measures to improve implementation are being taken from the Phare budget , so additional resources are not being drawn on , nor are resources being transferred .
This is , rather , a change of priorities in Phare 's programming , something of which , by the way , I informed Parliament some time ago .
We had also said that we were ready to adjust priorities in view of the fallout from 11 September , if it were a question of meeting stricter conditions in internal and legal policy , police cooperation and the securing of our external frontiers .
As you know , the Commission has no authority in matters of reactor safety .
I do not know what the Court of Auditors is referring to in this instance ; it may be to the work of the Council working party on nuclear energy issues , which , however , is not a Commission office .
The Commission is in no way responsible and is not involved in any steps to improve nuclear safety in candidate countries .
All the Commission does is to negotiate the required decommissioning of the reactors , regarded by the Member States as incapable of being retrofitted , with the relevant countries such as Lithuania , Bulgaria and Slovakia and then go on to implement such decommissioning .
This has to a large degree been completed , as you know .
We still await a final closure date for Ignalina II in Lithuania and an offer of finance for this , still outstanding , is expected in the near future .
Apart from that , we in the Commission have nothing to do with the construction of further nuclear power stations in Central and Eastern European countries .
I must say quite frankly that this is the first time I have heard of this criticism by the Court of Auditors .
I would myself be very grateful , and I imagine the President would be too , if the Commission were to have responsibility for nuclear safety standards .
I must , though , tell you that the Member States , and you as an Austrian Member will know how watchful the Member States are in the Melk process in which the Commission is mediating between Austria and the Czech Republic , determinedly refuse to let the Commission create conditions that would lead to the rise of European Community law on reactor safety standards .
I am , though , quite happy to come back to this subject when I have been informed about this report by the Court of Auditors .
As regards the Turkish Prime Minister 's statement , what Mr Ecevit has said is nothing new to me ; I have heard it in many conversations with him and read it in articles by him for over a year .
Our response is quite clear .
If , first condition , no political reunification of Cyprus is achieved ; if , second presupposition , the Member States decide , and Parliament agrees , that Cyprus should be admitted in any case ; and if , thirdly , Turkey were then to react in that way - all hypothetical questions at present - if , though , that were to happen , it would result in probably the worst crisis ever in relations between Turkey and the European Union .
I do not at present see how we could quickly extricate ourselves from such a crisis .
Madam President , I should like to return to the question of what used to be called the Madrid criterion , the question of implementation capacity .
How will the institutions in general , in particular the Member States , judge , and by what criteria will they judge , whether the applicants have arrived at the happy state of having an implementation capacity ?
I share and salute the headline goal , but I wonder what is its measurable content ?
The problem is that in Parliament we have not had the opportunity yet to read all these contrary reports which have been adopted .
But given the comments that the Commissioner has just made about Turkey , could he characterise - because we have not yet had the chance to study it - the political mood of the Turkey report ?
I hope it is a report which gives sufficient and due recognition to serious attempts at change .
There are serious deficiencies which remain , but engagement with Turkey in the light of the earlier comments is an even more profound necessity in the near future than it has been in the recent past .
I am obliged to the honourable Member .
The monitoring of progress in the capacity to implement is a standard procedure that we have developed over a considerable time .
We simply observe what legislation was taken over , and whether adequate material and human resources were available to make this legislation a reality .
It goes without saying that we also observe whether it actually works in practice .
This monitoring is going on constantly .
The information required for it comes to us from the most diverse sources , not only from our own , but also , for example , information is used which comes to us from Parliament .
We have a system that puts us in a position to say at any time to any given country how far we have got with their capacity to implement .
This procedure has been well established and has proved its worth .
As regards Turkey , I can tell the honourable gentleman that the current picture presents varied aspects .
There are positive things in it .
One is no doubt that the Accession Partnership is now working in all its aspects .
All its elements are present and are being kept to .
In this respect , relations between us and Turkey were never before as close as they are now .
Another positive element is no doubt the remarkable progress being made in constitutional reform and also in legislative matters , towards democratisation and respect for human rights .
This is surely still dependent on the extent to which these constitutional changes and legislation are actually experienced in the country 's day-to-day reality .
There has been no progress in the economic sphere .
So much is well known .
There has been remarkable progress in conforming to the acquis .
That is the good I have to report .
On the negative side , I have to say that , as already stated , the human rights situation is still unsatisfactory .
I must say that I had expected more from Turkey by way of cooperation in resolving the Cyprus issue .
We have already discussed this in another context .
I am also disappointed by Turkey 's conduct as regards the issue of European security and defence policy .
I do not find it appropriate for a country desirous of being a member of the European Union to hinder the European Union from making progress with a significant aspect of integration .
This is , in my view , not the sort of behaviour that we should expect of a candidate country .
Commissioner , there are agreements between some of the candidate countries , such as the customs union agreement between the Czech Republic and Slovakia , rather than the Visegrad agreement , which could render the situation rather more complex should only one of the two countries join the Union , for example , if the Czech Republic were to join but not Slovakia or vice versa .
Now , as has rightly been said , all the countries have to respect all the necessary parameters and criteria .
Should this situation arise , what line should we take ?
Secondly , with regard to countries such as Croatia , countries which are not yet candidates , that is , although they have made considerable progress towards applying for and achieving the status of candidate countries , what is the current situation ?
Lastly , we have touched on the issue of Cyprus , with regard to which you said that were we to be faced with a reaction such as that threatened by the Turkish Prime Minister , there would be a very serious crisis .
My feeling is that , in this regard , we are proceeding almost without any safety net at all , for such a reaction would involve the annexing of part of the territory of the European Union .
It may be that we should safeguard ourselves against such an eventuality and allow ourselves a moment ' s reflection before coming up against this situation , which I feel is so very sensitive .
Madam President , I would like to say , in response to the honourable gentleman 's first question , that free trade agreements between candidate countries and third countries should of course cease before accession , but it goes without saying that they cannot continue to be valid after it .
Free trade agreements between two candidate countries would in fact create problems if these countries were then to accede at different times .
I must say , though , that the problem is a very limited one , as the countries you have mentioned are covered by the Europe Agreements , which already provide for quite wide-ranging liberalisation of trade in goods , and also of the traffic in services and other economic relations , so that a European solution can be found for this problem should it eventually arise .
I do not , though , think it likely that it will .
The question about Croatia is outside my remit ; I would have to ask the President to say something about it .
I would add , speaking of Cyprus , that I clearly stated that you were putting hypothetical questions .
I do not as a rule like answering hypothetical questions , but you were entitled to an assessment of the situation .
I did also say , though , that the Commission has not changed the clear line it has taken , that we must do everything , yes everything , to achieve a political solution to the conflict before accession negotiations are completed .
I have repeatedly appealed to all parties and must again say clearly that it is in the particular interest of the Turkish Cypriot community that a political solution be found before the accessions take place , as nobody will profit as much as the Turkish Cypriot community from Cyprus ' membership of the European Union .
For that reason , any policy that bars access to the European Union to the Turkish Cypriot community in Cyprus is a policy which directly , clearly and unambiguously works against the interests of the people there .
As you will remember , Mr Podestà , the very week after the political changeover and the establishment of a situation of recognised democracy in the country , I lost no time in going to Croatia to instigate relations of cooperation , which are currently progressing very well .
In recent weeks , we have had an official meeting with the Croatian Prime Minister and we have continued along that path : we are genuinely encouraging Croatia in all its efforts to establish a closer relationship with the European Union .
Clearly , the tragedy of war and its repercussions on the country ' s economy are still very deeply felt and mean that things will take time , but we are actively doing everything we can to speed up the process .
Madam President , I have three questions .
I would first like to say that I find it a very good thing that the Commission is at last turning its mind to supporting the strengthening of administration .
But my question is whether it is also going to look at the need for administration to really involve the citizens , so that things that go without saying , here in the European Union , are also put into practice there ?
My second question concerns the action plan and finance .
If you are allocating more resources from the Phare programme for the support of the institutions , does that then mean that resources are being removed from the other important area of social and economic cohesion , in other words that we are no longer supporting the halting of increasing social decay , which is a core problem in these countries , even though it is urgently necessary ?
My last question concerns a point which the report does not mention at all . Does the Commission intend to encourage the Council to publish a European programme for the Roma people , something which is in my view urgently required ?
In almost all countries at present , the Roma minority 's human and democratic rights are being violated as much as they have been in the past .
This can clearly not be resolved by these accession candidates on an individual basis ; it is a European issue that must be dealt with by a European programme .
Madam , it goes without saying that the degree of citizen participation that is normative in the European Union is also required of the candidate countries , and is a component factor both in the monitoring they receive and in the support they are given .
Secondly , the resources about which Mr Swoboda has already asked are not taken from the country-specific programmes , but are multi-country programmes , which relate to all countries and which , if you want to put it that way , are kept in the central reserve .
No one country therefore receives one single euro less from the projects which have been discussed up to now .
The burden is not therefore borne by other projects .
On the subject of a European Roma project : this has not yet in fact been included in the Commission 's proposals .
Discussion of the subject is already in progress in some of the candidate countries , which are saying that this is a European problem and must therefore be dealt with by a European Community programme .
As far as I am aware , this approach is not shared by most of the Member countries .
In any case , a specific European Roma programme would require significant material resources .
I have to answer your question by saying that the Commission has not as yet made such a proposal , but is concentrating on helping the candidate countries with the implementation of their national strategies to integrate the Roma .
Perhaps I should point out that we have very strict requirements on this point and demand of all the candidate countries with a Roma population that they present and implement a medium-term strategy towards the social integration of the Roma and the removal of social discrimination .
As you know , we are giving these programmes very substantial support by means of pre-accession instruments .
Madam President , Commissioner , you said that you had not held a press conference .
That appears to be the case , but can you confirm that you held a press briefing this morning , while the groups ' press conferences were going on ?
Secondly , should this question be answered in the affirmative , I would very much like to ask the President of the Commission whether he thinks that press briefings of this sort are conducive to cooperation between Parliament and the Commission , when we should be the first to be informed .
Madam President , I can tell the honourable gentleman that there was no briefing either ; on the contrary , I have conversations with the press every day , background discussions with many different journalists .
Such a conversation took place today , but it was not a briefing .
It was a background discussion , which was not intended for publication .
I think you will agree that it is a fairly subtle distinction , Mr Verheugen .
Madam President , Mr Swoboda 's question on reactor safety raised the question in my mind of whether the Commission can make it clear not only to its own bureaux , but also to the Member States and their governments , and certainly also to the European Parliament , that we cannot , in negotiations , demand more from the candidates for accession that we ourselves comply with as Member States of the European Union .
I believe that this is not quite clear to all areas of all our institutions .
Perhaps it should again be highlighted in the coming year .
The second question I would like to put is this . In your report , you are very optimistic that ten countries will have the chance to sign the Accession Treaty at the end of next year .
As you have expressed it , but I believe it needs to be expressed even more clearly : that is the assessment of today .
This means that , if countries fall behind next year because of poor performance on the political front , the list could well comprise fewer than ten , so that great individual efforts will be necessary and today 's judgment will offer no security .
To this will , of course , be added the issues of implementation and of administrative capacity .
Your paper points out that work will be being done on implementation even after the Treaty is signed .
What certainty will there be , though , on the day the Treaty is signed , that administrative capacity will actually be in place when accession becomes effective ?
Madam President , the honourable gentleman 's first question can be answered only with great difficulty .
I sometimes feel that at one point or another we are demanding of the candidate countries something that the Member States are not doing themselves .
This , though , has to do with the criteria we have and our obligation to report very precisely on the extent to which they are complied with - or not , as the case may be .
Today , I said to the Commission , and on the same subject , that we must always imagine what progress reports would look like if the same criteria were applied to the Member States .
The Member States would never allow us to do any such thing , but so much of what we criticise in candidate countries or describe as incompatible with the Copenhagen criteria , could , perhaps , also be found in one Member State or another .
So , at this point , I recommend modesty to our Member States .
Nothing more can , of course , be demanded in the negotiations themselves than is required of the Member States .
The negotiations are very precisely attuned to the acquis and to nothing else .
They touch on nothing else .
The problem you have described can therefore only arise when considering the question of whether candidate countries comply with the indeed very vaguely formulated political or economic accession criteria .
My answer is that it may be that we are sometimes asking for more .
As regards the other question of the ten countries , the Commission said today in fact , that we must prepare for the accession of all those which have complied with the conditions and completed negotiations by the end of 2002 .
This represents rejection of the idea of forming what might be termed political groups , and is , in the Commission 's judgment , the correct interpretation of the Helsinki and Gothenburg Decisions .
It was stated in Helsinki that all countries that had been invited to negotiate should have a chance to conclude , which can only mean that it was considered that their accessions could be simultaneous with those of the countries which had been negotiating since Luxembourg , and Gothenburg envisaged the first accessions taking place before 2004 .
It necessarily follows from this that we must prepare for the accession of up to ten countries , I will not say ten , but up to ten , because ten countries have set themselves the goal of completing negotiations by 2002 .
Whether it will actually come to that , I do not know .
The Commission will produce its concluding opinion next year , and will do so in strict accordance with the principles and rules that it itself has proposed .
As I said here in Parliament during the most recent discussion on enlargement , it is a subject on which we cannot let ourselves make political decisions as it were in the worst or narrowest sense of the word , that is , saying on the basis of purely political considerations that one country is coming in and another is not .
Such a decision must much rather be founded on compliance with the criteria and on the outcome of the negotiations .
The Commission 's proposal will be couched in those terms .
None of the ten countries that currently believe they will manage it can evade the possibility of us saying at the end of the day : this country is not ready .
Let me say it clearly : none of them .
Madam President , Commissioner , I have just been listening to what you have been saying about the enlargement of the EU .
I have heard a lot about the shortcomings of Turkey , about constitutional changes , the democratisation process and human rights .
My question is , what is there in the accession partnership document about the rights of the Kurds ?
What is the situation with regard to the rights of 25 million people who have not been mentioned in this discussion ?
I ask you , Commissioner , to tell us how the rights of the Kurds are affected and how you assess the political situation in Turkey as regards constitutional changes and the Kurdish question .
Madam , I regret to have to tell you that the accession partnership with Turkey was not the subject of today 's discussions .
Today we in fact discussed and adopted twelve accession partnerships , but not the accession partnership with Turkey , and that because it entered into force only in the early part of this year , and updating it after only a few months would make no sense .
We will therefore be proposing the updating of the accession partnership with Turkey only next year and will produce the assessment you have asked for in that context .
Madam President , I actually have one question for Commissioner Verheugen .
Not so long ago , he announced , with our blessing , the launch of a large information campaign both within the European Union and in the candidate countries , highlighting the advantages of the EU ' s enlargement .
How does he explain in that light and in the context of the activities carried out , that the support for enlargement , both in the EU and in the candidate countries , is declining despite this effort ?
What does the Commission intend to do about this ?
Sir , for a start I cannot see that support for enlargement is decreasing either in candidate countries or in Member States .
The figures with which I am acquainted indicate the precise opposite .
Quite apart from that , public opinion on the subject is , if I may say so , extraordinarily fickle .
It evidently very much depends on who is asking , what is being asked , and when .
In this way , you can obtain quite different results in the same country at the same time .
I know all the surveys that are being done , and my analysis is that we must not work on the assumption that we are dealing with dwindling support .
Secondly , as regards communications strategy , the European Parliament , and you as a Member of it will be aware of this , has considered it right , for reasons it has made known to us , to make the funds available relatively late in the day , only , in fact , in the course of this year .
The truth is that all the measures could be put in motion only after the summer recess .
You cannot expect that I should be able to supply you with some sort of report on the results of a campaign that started only eight weeks ago .
I must make it clear that this is outside the Commission 's remit .
The Commission made its proposal on the implementation of a communication strategy in April 2000 , therefore only a few months after we took office .
That it took so long for this strategy to become reality in the European institutions is in this instance regrettable .
I do not believe , though , that it is too late , because only now that the results of negotiations are becoming evident is it right and necessary to fully apply this strategy .
This strategy is in no way about indoctrinating people or , as you have suggested , convincing them of advantages , but about giving them an objective basis on which to form their own opinions and judgments .
The Commission would indeed not be permitted to do more .
That concludes this item of the agenda . I would like to thank Commissioner Verheugen and President Prodi .
Madam President , on a point of order .
This was advertised as a " catch the eye of the President " session , open to all Members of Parliament .
In fact it has been nothing more than a private meeting of Parliament 's Bureau .
Group leaders have been invited to speak , Mr Poettering was invited to speak twice and the groups have been asked to put forward speakers .
It has not been an open debate and I really do not know why the rest of us turn up if you are going to conduct business this way .
This is not in the interests of Parliament .
I must protest at the way in which you have conducted this matter .
Mr Titley , I quite understand that Members whose names have not been called feel somewhat frustrated .
Having said this , I would remind you that this was a question and answer session .
It is true that some Members far exceeded their allotted speaking time .
Should I have cut them off because of that ?
You are well aware that that is not my way of doing things .
I am sure you will also understand that I naturally had to give precedence to the rapporteurs , to those who have worked as rapporteurs on this subject .
I would also point out , for your information , that a number of rapporteurs were unfortunately unable to take the floor , including three from the European People ' s Party : Mrs Carlsson , Mrs Stenzel and Mr Van Orden , not to mention Mr Haarder and Mr Beazley .



So you see , Mr Titley , how difficult this was to manage .
I think that Parliament should make a decision , but it should be aware that if the question and answer session overruns , and I would gladly have extended it by a good half-hour , as I think the subject deserved it , the time devoted to questions to the Commission may have to be reduced .
You can imagine the reaction of your fellow Members who , as you know , are extremely anxious that the time allocated to questions to the Commission be scrupulously observed .
You know that , when this is not the case , those Members call us to task and they are quite right to do so .
I have tried to act for the best .
If I was wrong , I apologise .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Following Mr Titley 's observation , I would simply say that this is a most important question .
I am sure those who were not able to speak were very pleased to hear the Commissioner 's comments .
I will submit my questions to him in writing .
I should like to point out that four of our colleagues here today asked three questions .
If the President , and indeed colleagues , would limit themselves to one question , by my mathematics nine further speakers might have been called .
We take note of these comments , which are inevitable , furthermore , given the lack of time .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Questions to the Commission ( B5-0338 / 2001 ) .
Part I
Question No 28 by ( H-0857 / 01 ) :
Subject : Afghanistan and drugs According to the latest annual report of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme , opium production in Afghanistan has fallen strikingly as a result of the Taliban 's prohibition policy . From being the world 's leading exporter , the country now accounts for only 10 % of world trade in opium .
The events of 11 September have also contributed to the disruption of farming , including the cultivation of opium .
In the light of this situation and the desperate plight of the population , what practical initiatives can the Commission take , particularly through its participation in the UN anti-drug programme , to provide relief and aid to the communities affected , and to dissuade producers from reverting to opium growing or selling the stocks that they still have ?
Mr President , the Commission shares the honourable Member ' s desire to provide adequate support for the Afghan people , of whose difficult situation we are all well aware .
The significant assistance which the Community had been giving to the Afghan population has increased recently .
The Community finances actions in the following areas : emergency aid , aid to displaced persons , aid for food safety , human rights and landmines .
The assistance is implemented speedily through a wide network of non-governmental organisations .
In this way , we contribute to reducing the dependence on poppy cultivation of the people who receive this aid .
The food safety programme is of particular importance , since it provides seeds , tools and all the necessary elements for alternative crops .
Obviously , no donor has been able to offer assistance in the field of compliance with the law in order to combat drug trafficking in Afghanistan , owing to the government of that country .
However , the Commission has supported programmes in this sector , in countries which play an essential role in the heroin trafficking routes towards the European Union , such as the States of Central Asia : Iran , Armenia , Georgia , Azerbaijan , Russia , the Ukraine , Moldavia , Belarus , Bulgaria and Rumania .
It is still unknown whether , given the current changing situation , the significant reduction in poppy cultivation observed by the UNIDCP 2000 / 2001 will continue and , furthermore , according to the United Nations , the trafficking in refined heroin from Afghanistan does not appear to be diminishing .
According to the estimates of this United Nations body , the stocks accumulated before the crisis would keep the European market supplied for the next three to four years .
Thank you , Commissioner , for the information which you have given us .
However , I should like to ask if the immediate intention is for the European Commission programme to deal with this problem , on its own or through UN programmes , within the framework of the reconstruction of Afghanistan and assistance to neighbouring countries .
As you know , Commissioner , the European Commission is spending a great deal of money on public awareness campaigns and the European Drugs Monitoring Centre .
If we want to be sincere and efficient , we need to take more direct and effective action at the root of the evil , such as in Afghanistan .
I share the honourable Member ' s concern but , as I have said , the reality is that the United Nations ' Cooperation and Development Plan for Afghanistan has not been able to deal with ensuring compliance with the law , owing to the Taliban government which is still in Afghanistan .
I hope that , once things have changed in Afghanistan , as we all wish , and a government is in place which fulfils the minimum requirements in terms of respect for human rights , combating drug trafficking and other similar issues , we will be able to deal with issues such as the real application and the real effectiveness of this aid , which , I insist , currently has to be channelled through non-governmental organisations such as the UNHCR or the Red Cross , which are the usual channels of aid in these cases .
Because it is clear that the aid , which has been interrupted since 11 September for obvious reasons , is going to be renewed as soon as possible .
And I hope that on this occasion it is not restricted solely to funding and supported activity in the rural field , in the alternative crop sector , but that it also allows us to cooperate and maintain greater supervision of the real effectiveness of the authorities in their fight against this type of crop .
Question No 29 by ( H-0849 / 01 ) :
Subject : Threat to nuclear facilities in the aftermath of 11 September Will the Commission establish the appropriate institutional instruments to prepare , within six months , a thorough analysis of a range of options for reducing the threat posed by deliberately crashing aircraft and other acts of malice at nuclear facilities , including the prospective benefits of transferring spent fuel to dry storage facilities that are robust against acts of malice , and suspending reprocessing until stocks of liquid high-level radioactive waste have been vitrified or otherwise used as part of an immobilisation programme for surplus plutonium ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the physical and operative security of nuclear installations falls within national competence , provided that compliance with the provisions of the Euratom Treaty is guaranteed .
Each State of the Union is carrying out its own analysis of the situation in the light of the terrorist attacks of 11 September and , in this regard , they will adopt the necessary additional measures to increase the physical protection of nuclear installations and the materials which are used or stored in them .
We hope that all the existing options are analysed in detail .
For obvious security reasons , many of the details relating to these additional measures cannot be made public .
On the other hand , it is clear that the best way to reduce the threat posed to nuclear installations , or any other installation , by the possibility of terrorists deliberately crashing an aircraft into them , is to make it impossible , or extremely improbable , that they may hijack a large commercial aircraft in the first place .
In this regard , the Commission would like to remind you of the measures it proposed on 10 October for the adoption and application of common European Union rules in the field of civil aviation security , and which was first presented at the last Council of Transport Ministers .
These measures are intended to deal with this point .
Commissioner , I find that answer extraordinarily complacent .
We all know that nuclear power plants were not designed to withstand collisions with large aircraft , particularly jumbo jets .
You say that it is not that easy to hi-jack an airplane .
Only yesterday there was another terrible accident in New York .
I hope it was an accident and not an act of terror : at this point in time it is not entirely clear .
Let us all pray that it was merely an accident and not something that was designed to kill all the people on board .
I am sure we all sympathise with the families .
This is a very serious matter .
All I am asking is , will the Commission prepare an analysis ?
Surely you can say " yes " to that and not just pass it off as the responsibility of the Member States .
You have powers under Articles 34 and 35 of the Euratom Treaty .
According to a recent European Parliament study you are not exercising your powers under those articles .
Could you please comment on that aspect of my question .
Have you looked at that study ?
Have you looked at your powers , and can you at least prepare some kind of an analysis ?
I am not asking you to disclose the discussions you are having with the Member States .
Clearly , that may be inappropriate .
But can you not do something ?
Mr President , the first thing the Commission must do is act within the limits of the Treaties .
I would like to say that nuclear power stations are not designed to endure the impact of a large commercial aircraft .
It is true that not all the nuclear power stations in the European Union are the same ; those which have a second layer of protection and , specifically , the most recent ones built in Germany , perhaps have a greater capacity for resistance and better security in the face of this type of situation than others .
However , I would insist that security , in both its forms - security against terrorist attacks , external agents or sabotage and security against possible accidents - is a national responsibility .
Having said all this , the honourable Member is right and we are concerned about these issues , especially in view of enlargement and the achievement of security levels in the nuclear power stations in the countries which are going to join the European Union in the future .
We are studying how far we can go within the Euratom Treaty , in order to incorporate and seek equivalent levels of security within the nuclear installations in the current Member States , but , I would insist , within the margins laid down in the Treaties .
Like you , I believe it is necessary to guarantee the greatest possible level of security .
Finally , we must not only talk about nuclear power stations .
The great petro-chemical plants , the great chemical industries , the great dams , are other installations which are at considerable risk and unfortunately may cause significant disasters in the case of a certain type of attack or sabotage .
Various countries are working on this , not just those of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , the safety of nuclear installations is a problem for the whole of Europe and primarily an environmental issue .
Safety is , in the final analysis , a European added value .
Could you consider encouraging the preparation of a Green Paper on the safety of reactors or nuclear installations , so that in future a relatively objective assessment of the subject may be guaranteed ?
Mr President , according to the Euratom Treaty , security is the national competence of each Member State .
However , at the moment the WENRA , where all the regulators of the different Member States of the European Union meet , is working to find equivalent security standards which , in my opinion ( which is shared by the services , although it is not an official position of the Commission , and I am therefore speaking personally ) , are necessary and beneficial for all : for the States which have chosen the non-nuclear option , but also for everyone else , since I believe , like you , that if there is an accident in a nuclear power station , the repercussions will transcend administrative borders and the problem is pan-European or even global .
We must therefore support the Vienna Commission , which depends on the United Nations .
These equivalent security standards should therefore be established , with a degree of obligation which is similar to that demanded in the Community , which would offer greater safeguards for the whole world .
Our analyses are based on the situation and , if it is necessary to propose a modification to the Treaty , we would have to consider doing so .
I have a supplementary question to Mrs Ahern 's question .
Is the recent decision giving the go-ahead to the MOX plant at Sellafield not unacceptable ?
Is this not a violation of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea ?
We have been raising the Sellafield issue here for many years .
I would like to ask what your position is with regard to the UN conventions ?
Do you believe in upholding them ?
Do you consider that the authorities responsible for Sellafield have a duty to consult Ireland in this decision ?
Do you consider that even at this stage a full European-backed environmental impact assessment should be carried out ?
Mr Fitzsimons , I feel obliged to tell you that you have taken it upon yourself to bring forward Question No 62 .
I frankly do not believe that this obeys the Rules of Procedure .
We had said goodbye to the Vice-President for today .
Thank you for your attention .
Question No 30 by ( H-0839 / 01 ) :
Subject : Serious unwanted side effects following the consumption of energy drinks in the European Union In several Member States of the European Union ( including Ireland and Sweden ) a number of serious cases have been recorded in which the consumption of energy drinks such as Red Bull has led to unwanted side effects and , in a number of cases , proved fatal .
These drinks , when consumed in combination with alcohol or coffee or after vigorous physical exercise , cause complications chiefly manifested in the central nervous system .
Moreover , such beverages are freely available in places such as schools , gymnasiums and discotheques .
What steps will be taken following the deliberations of the 84th meeting of the Standing Committee on Food at which the Member State representatives expressed deep concern ?
Is it acceptable to treat as a normal beverage a product whose consumption is restricted in respect of so many sectors of the population ( including children , pregnant women , mothers who are breast feeding , the elderly and those suffering from high blood pressure ) and which is subject to general restrictions to the effect that it should not be mixed with alcohol or coffee or taken after intense physical exercise ?
What procedures are followed for the approval of such products ?
Does the Commission not consider that the above factors are sufficient to justify withdrawal of this product from the market as a precautionary measure until it has been proven that it is not harmful to health ?
Part II
Energy drinks were discussed at the 84th meeting of the Standing Committee on Foodstuffs on 19 September 2001 .
As noted , two Member States have reported deaths in their countries associated with the consumption of those products .
In neither case , however , was there any evidence that the consumption of energy drinks was the cause of death .
Both Member States have commissioned their own research , investigating the available data on the effect of these drinks on health .
Recently another Member State produced a list of incidents linked to the consumption of such products , but without any substantiating evidence .
None of the Member States concerned took any steps to restrict or prohibit energy drinks in their own territory .
The Standing Committee noted a need for further information on the potential effects on health of ingredients in the products and the Scientific Committee for Food is examining data submitted by a manufacturer of such products regarding the safety of one of the products in question .
According to information , further studies are nearing completion .
At the above mentioned meeting of the Standing Committee on Foodstuffs , the Commission repeated its request to Member States to submit information on the safety of products on their markets .
The Commission understands the concerns that have been expressed and it therefore intends to work with Member States to look at the issue in depth and identify the appropriate course of action to ensure a high level of protection for consumers .
So-called energy drinks are not covered by any specific legislation and are not subject to an approval procedure at Community level .
In the absence of Community legislation , Member States may apply national rules without prejudice , of course , to the provisions of the Treaty .
Overall , Member States should ensure that products placed on their markets are safe .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner .
However , you must allow me to couple my thanks with my disappointment at the tenet of your reply .
Commissioner , as you know full well , we are talking about a public health issue here and I should like to remind you that , in cases such as these , we do not need proof , we just need an indication , especially when we are talking about the public health of young people , and it is young people who are consuming these energy drinks .
To give you a specific example , in Greece there have been five cases in which people presented symptoms which related directly to the three active ingredients in these drinks .
I should like to ask you to repeat , because this has happened in the past and Community legislation subsequently prohibited Greece from banning this substance , if these drinks could in fact be banned at national level , because the committee responsible in my country has objected to my initiative on the basis of the principles of internal trade .
It is the responsibility of Member States to initiate action if they have evidence of harm due to the consumption of a particular foodstuff .
The Commission can take temporary safeguard measures if it becomes aware of a serious risk from a product to the health and safety of consumers .
Once the Commission is informed of action by a Member State , then the need for action on a Community-wide basis can be assessed .
However , the Commission is not aware of action being initiated by any Member State .
In fact the two Member States that have reported deaths associated with consumption of energy drinks have stated that there is no evidence of the association and they have instigated their own investigations into the effect of such products on health .
The Commission has sought the cooperation of Member States in looking at this issue in depth and identifying the appropriate course of action .
I should like to thank Mrs Malliori for raising this issue and add to what she has said .
May I ask the Commissioner specifically about how these energy drinks are marketed in combination with alcoholic products .
For example , a growing trend , certainly in Scotland , has been the combination of the product Red Bull with vodka , which is exceedingly dangerous .
This is of great concern to me , since Scotland has one of the highest rates of under-age drinking , that is to say drinking by 15 year olds and under , in the European Union .
Could the Commissioner tell me whether the Standing Committee on Foodstuffs discussed the combination of energy drinks with alcoholic products and , if so , what research did it propose and what information did it think was needed ?
I understand the concerns of the honourable Member .
I also have three children .
I know what is being consumed , mostly by young boys , so I understand her concern .
The Scientific Committee is also concerned .
It has noted that the possible interaction of the constituents of energy drinks has not been well studied , and considers that the possible interactions between caffeine , taurine and alcohol in humans may warrant investigation , particularly under conditions of exercise and consequent dehydration through sweating .
In the light of the advice from the Scientific Committee the Commission is holding discussions with Member States , with a view to ensuring that a draft Commission directive that includes specific labelling rules on caffeine in ready-to-eat foods is put into place .
Questions to Commissioner Reding
Question No 31 by ( H-0772 / 01 ) :
Subject : Ban on advertising directed at children In my question H-0663 / 01to the Council , I asked whether the Belgian Presidency intended to make the rules protecting children from television advertising more stringent and to support the position of the Swedish Presidency for a full ban .
The Council , however , replied that , in the absence of any proposal from the Commission , whether in the form of a specific proposal or of a point for inclusion in the revision of the ' Television without frontiers ' directive scheduled for 2002 , it was unable to consider the matter .
Will the Commission say what stage has been reached in its deliberations on this subject ?
Mr President , as you are aware , the ' Television without frontiers ' directive lays down the legal framework for television broadcasting in the European Union .
This directive contains provisions on the protection of minors , in particular Article 16 , which lays down a number of rules with regard to advertising and minors .
The Commission undertook to carry out a study on the impact of television advertising and teleshopping on minors ; this study was conducted by an independent advisor and has been published on the Commission website .
Moreover , the Commission will supplement its assessment of the chapter on advertising within the framework of its re-examination of the 2002 directive .
As Mr Papayannakis is doubtless aware , the consultation of professionals with regard to the revision of this directive began in 2001 .
Their conclusions will be published at the beginning of 2002 , after which the political discussion will commence .
We have also begun three studies , one of which will specifically examine the development of new advertising techniques .
If we intend to revise the directive , we should look to the future , and not restrict ourselves to analysing the past or the present .
Therefore , as you can see , Mr President , the Commission is approaching this issue with a completely open mind , taking extensive advice , and only after listening , analysing and discussing the issue with Parliament , of course , as well as others , will the Commission submit any proposals with a view to revising the directive .
My question was slightly more coercive , he said jokingly .
I asked you to tell me what your current thinking is in the Commission .
Whenever I ask the Council of Ministers , they tell me they are waiting to see what the Commission has to say .
Someone needs to tell us exactly what stage we have reached so that we can prepare our response to your future plans .
I would remind the Commissioner that the Swedish Presidency , and perhaps you can confirm this , was in favour of a complete ban on advertising directed at children .
This provoked me , if you like , into tabling a supplementary question and it is on this that I should like you to comment , as the Commissioner at the present stage .
Unfortunately , I cannot say any more for the moment about the state of progress .
I am currently organising consultations with professionals , which will come to an end this year .
I shall then consult the politicians , and at the end of this series of consultations I shall make specific proposals .
I refuse to put the cart before the horse by making proposals first and only then taking advice . No .
First of all , I want to take advice , listen , and then make proposals .
I can tell you my own personal opinion : I have made it quite clear that I do not think a total ban on certain types of advertising would be effective unless the experience of other countries , in particular , shows that such a ban is indispensable for the achievement of an objective of legitimate general interest .
I asked the Swedish Presidency very clearly not to attempt to adopt this approach , as I knew that , at this stage , I would have to say no .
I have said no , I am taking advice , listening . I know that the Swedish government , which , for its own reasons , has banned advertising on its territory , is moving in that direction .
I also know that the majority of Member States are not moving in that direction .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether she shares with me a concern that , in Sweden , because television advertising aimed at children is not allowed , there is a noticeable lack of programmes being produced specifically for children in Sweden .
Can she assure me that , in the study which she talked about - and I am delighted that she said it was going to be an open-minded study - this aspect will be fully considered and that , as there will be an explosion of television channels and television choice in future , she will look thoroughly at the possible impact of advertising on the generation of funds to produce high-quality programmes for children ?
Mr President , my work has always had a dual nature .
My first task concerns the application of the decisions made by the ' Television without frontiers ' directive .
For example , Article 16 restricts advertising aimed at children , as minors must be protected .
Obviously , we cannot do just anything in programmes intended for children .
However , I would like Parliament to help me out a bit , for example with regard to this point . Can we make just any old film for children ?
What sometimes shocks me just as much as certain adverts is the violence in films specifically intended for children .
We are analysing all that in order to find , together , the most effective way of making progress in this matter .
From the point of view of digital television , which will enable hundreds of programmes , including children ' s programmes , to be broadcast , I would like us , in Europe , to have a high enough budget , sufficient investments to produce good children ' s programmes .
This is my second task : ensuring that , in future , we have enough children ' s films suitable for that age , films that are positive and are both educational and imaginative .
This question interests me very much and is quite appropriate in the middle of November , in the run-up to Christmas .
Many parents would be very supportive of Mr Papayannakis ' question .
I would like to ask the Commissioner what comparisons have been made of the different advertising used in different countries at this time of year ?
I would like to hear her opinion on the fact that , certainly in my own country , this advertising begins just after August , well before the immediate run-up to Christmas and can be very aggressive .
What kind of measures can you suggest be put in place to protect minors from this aggressive advertising ?
It should be pointed out that the regulations applicable to television are completely different from those concerning the other media .
Television , therefore , is often subject to far more stringent regulations than those applicable to the other media , which are not always subject to specific rules concerning minors .
Thus , if you go into a supermarket with a child , for example , the child is swamped by unchannelled , uncontrolled advertising that is very different from televised advertising , which is actually regulated .
Many differences may be noted at Member State level as well , ranging from the age limits set , which differ significantly from one country to another , to the specific provisions governing certain sectors , such as financial activities and drinks advertising .
This proves that the approach adopted by the directive is the most appropriate as it provides a flexible framework within which the Member States have legislated according to their respective culture and traditions .
If Parliament considers that this framework should be changed , it will have the opportunity to say so loud and clear next year , as it will be given the opportunity to voice its opinion during the revision of the directive .
Whatever the case , if we amend the current measures , the amendments must be made within the limits of this directive .
Question No 32 by ( H-0776 / 01 ) :
Subject : World Anti-Doping Agency On 21 August 2001 , the EU was represented by Commissioner Reding at the meeting held in Tallinn , to decide on the location of the headquarters of the World Anti-Doping Agency ( WADA ) .
Does the Commission think that it might have been possible to avoid what happened in Tallinn ?
Was the choice of Montreal the result of the failure of the European candidates to present a united front ?
In 1999 the Commission submitted its support plan to combat doping .
Why not transform this plan into a full-blown programme and provide it with the appropriate funding ?
As the honourable Member will be aware , the World Anti-Doping Agency decided , on 21 August 2001 , to establish its future headquarters in Montreal .
This is a perfectly worthy city , which also offers many advantages .
It must be said that , amongst the candidate cities , there were also perfectly worthy European cities that also offered numerous advantages for hosting the headquarters of this agency .
What happened was that the European countries did not show sufficient coordination and the fact that so many European cities were put forward certainly favoured the choice of Montreal .
I wish to make it quite clear that the Belgian presidency cannot be held responsible for this failure .
It did make considerable efforts to overcome the problems , unfortunately , however , without success .
Europe put forward several candidates , whereas other countries put forward only one , and it was this approach that won the day over the plethora of European candidates .
I must repeat the fact that this issue does not fall within the competence of the Community , but rather within that of the Member States .
We must now apply to the future the lessons we have learned from the Tallinn meeting .
The first lesson should be that of the European Union ' s cohesion .
Furthermore , yesterday , the Fifteen ' s Ministers for Sport met in Brussels for an informal Council , and cohesion was one of the main items discussed there .
The ministers agreed to join forces and adopt the same approach to combat the scourge that is doping , firstly at world level , in other words , to step up their action within the World Anti-Doping Agency and , secondly , at European level , where there are good grounds for putting a concerted anti-doping programme into action .
There are good grounds because Europe is the most advanced continent in the fight against doping , the greatest number of world-class sporting events takes place here and because Europe has the greatest number of competitions between clubs of different sporting disciplines .
Furthermore , we have the greatest number of accredited laboratories and we must continue to bring our knowledge to bear in the fight against doping at world level .
Yesterday , I informed the ministers that a Community plan is being drafted and they gave me the green light to put this into action .
I shall now begin consultations on the aspects to be included in this action plan and in 2002 , we shall have the opportunity to discuss it properly .
I should also like to say that , in order to improve this European cohesion , which must apply not only to the fifteen governments , but must also exist between governments and sports federations , at the beginning of the Spanish presidency , a meeting will be held between the fifteen Ministers for Sports and the European sports federations to decide on the best approach to adopt in order to combat doping .
I would like to thank you , Commissioner , for your reply and your efforts with regard to the funding of the World Anti-Doping Agency .
In recent days , the sports press in our country has reported that there were problems with the funding from the European Commission .
I would like you to clarify whether these problems have been resolved after the meeting of Sports Ministers yesterday in Brussels and whether , if this is not the case , the Commission intends to channel this money towards other means of fighting doping or to stay with the World Anti-Doping Agency .
Mr President , the World Anti-Doping Agency is currently 100 % funded , for the duration of a transitional period , by the International Olympic Committee and it has been decided that following this transitional period , 50 % of the funds will be provided by the international sports federations and 50 % by the governments of the various countries involved .
We have accepted this division .
It appears that of the part falling to national governments , 47.5 % will be covered by the European Union .
This is a considerable proportion , but it is also proof of our sporting prowess on this continent .
Having said that , I am sure you are fully aware , Mrs Zabell , that we have interinstitutional rules governing payments made from the budget .
These interinstitutional rules force us to adhere to certain procedures , in order to ensure that taxpayers ' money is used scrupulously .
The rules of the World Anti-Doping Agency do not currently match the very strict rules that apply in the European Union .
This is why Europe has asked the WADA to change its internal rules so that there is , first of all , a serious budget , a budget that is forecast over several years .
Secondly , there would need to be an internal rule ensuring that the other continents cannot impose a budget on the European Union but instead that we have a right of veto , and a right to examine proposals .
Thirdly , this 47.5 % funding must also be matched by appropriate representation on the WADA ' s board of management .
Once these three conditions are met , they will enable us to launch the process of the Council and the European Parliament taking a decision on funding the WADA .
For the moment , and until 3 December , when the World Anti-Doping Agency meets , the ball is in the Agency ' s court .
Once the Agency has met the basic conditions enabling us to set the budgetary process in motion , however , the Commission will submit a proposal and the ball will then be in the court of the Member States and Parliament to implement this decision .
In the meantime , with regard to the year 2002 which is rapidly approaching , I would ask governments to shoulder their responsibilities .
They stated very clearly yesterday , in Brussels , that they are willing to do so .
It is therefore , up to the Council of Ministers to arrange these payments for 2002 .
We are running a little late .
I would like to remind Members that the more supplementary questions there are , the fewer questions on the list will naturally be asked .
I would like you to bear this in mind .
Mrs Malliori has the floor for a supplementary question .
As you perhaps know , doping substances are traded on the free market so quickly that often , when one substance is detected and banned , a new one has already appeared . The reasons for this are purely bureaucratic , for the simple reason that there are not enough laboratories .
Does the Commission intend to help so that substances can be recognised and banned immediately , thereby reducing the time available for new substances to reach the free market ?
The World Anti-doping Agency was created precisely to answer such questions .
This is the body that has the task of drawing up the list of substances that should be banned and the body which governments and sporting bodies must then deal with .
Another point is research .
The Commissioner responsible , Philippe Busquin , and I have decided to open up European research and to put it at the service of the fight against doping , because we know that the inventors of new chemical formulae are often steps ahead of us .
We will , therefore , be making Europe ' s research capabilities available to this fight .
Although we are right at the end of Mrs Reding ' s time , we are going to ask the following question by Mr Collins .
It is a very important question , but I would request , if possible , that only Mr Collins should ask questions .
And , if there are supplementary questions , they should be very brief , since it is a very broad question and it could take a long time , which would prevent us from moving on to questions to other Commissioners .
Question No 33 by ( H-0805 / 01 ) :
Subject : European Year of Languages The European Year of Languages 2001 is now coming to an end .
The Commission has co-funded 185 projects aimed at promoting the European Year .
Does the Commission consider that the objectives for the European Year are being met , and will it make a statement on how it considers the European Union can further develop the learning of languages in the EU , including the 60 plus European languages which are not official languages of the EU , and what measures it considers need to be introduced to help to further promote interest in and learning of languages among young people in the Member States ?
As the honourable Member is well aware , the linguistic issue is one that is close to my heart , since I am a Luxembourger .
It is , moreover , one of the reasons why I have been so committed to the European Year of Languages 2001 .
Something I did not realise at the beginning , when I launched this plan , was that there would be such enthusiasm , in all our Member States , about the linguistic phenomenon .
All sorts of organisations have lobbied , local councils have discussed language education , in short , there has been huge enthusiasm in all our Member States and this enthusiasm has also made itself felt at government level .
Some governments have adopted measures to give language learning greater priority in their curricula with effect from the 2001-2002 school year .
I shall be attending the Education Council on 29 November , and on that occasion we will be discussing the best way to follow up the European Year of Languages , because it is not enough to have launched an action and for that action to have been received with great enthusiasm on the part of the public ; this action also needs to be followed up .
Let me reassure you that I shall be pursuing this course of action most conscientiously .
In concert with the Ministers for Education , I shall be making the frameworks of the Socrates and Leonardo da Vinci programmes more open to language teaching than has been the case in the past , and then I shall be presenting a report on the very practical way we have been implementing on the ground , and that is not all , because the year is not yet over and many projects are still underway , the lessons we have learned from the public . In this sense , when I talk about lessons that we have learned from the public , I am thinking of the entire linguistic panoply that we have in Europe , not only the 11 official languages , but also the sixty-odd languages spoken by Europe ' s citizens .
Mr President , in deference to you and following the very comprehensive and satisfactory reply given to me by Commissioner Reding , I waive my right to a supplementary question .
We are going to ask the two supplementary questions , but we must try to be very specific .
May I frame a question which I hope the Commission will feel free to answer simply yes or no .
Wittgenstein told us that to choose a language is to choose a form of life .
I think , therefore , that if we lose languages we lose forms of life .
Does the Commissioner agree with me that it would be a tragedy for Europe if it loses languages such as Scots Gaelic , and Lowland Scots through neglect and that the lesser-used languages deserve greater encouragement than they get now ?
Very good , I believe that Mr MacCormick has received the reply he wanted .
Many months ago , in the run up to the European Year of Languages , plenary unanimously adopted a report by Mr Graça Moura which proposed that ancient Greek and Latin , as the root languages of today 's languages , should be taught in secondary schools throughout the European Union , so that contemporary languages could be taught properly and in greater depth .
I should like to ask , first , if you passed this recommendation on to the governments of the fifteen Member States and if you have any information as to whether or not this matter is being pursued .
The Commission has funded some 200 projects in the course of the Year of Languages .
Some of these projects involved Greek and Latin .
The Commission has never , therefore , sidelined these languages .
It must , however , be pointed out , Mr President , that the Commission cannot set school curricula .
This is in the sphere of subsidiarity and , therefore , falls within the remit of the Ministers for Education .
This is why I conveyed to the Education Ministers all the discussions that took place in all the institutional frameworks , of which there were many , in order to tell them : ' Here you are , Europe ' s citizens and their representatives want the linguistic element to become an important part of the education system ' .
On the basis of all the reports available , at the end of November , the Ministers will have to decide and adopt a resolution , and then I shall ensure that this resolution is followed up with deeds , in other words that these ministers will make sure that their national or regional education systems , depending on the country , will provide the greatest possible range of languages , and from as early an age as possible .
I cannot , however , force a minister to put a particular language on his or her agenda .
I can only encourage him or her to do so .
Let me assure you that I am quite convinced that multilingualism represents Europe ' s future , because it reflects cultural diversity , which is our true wealth .
Thank you very much , Mrs Reding .
We now come to questions to Mr Liikanen , and I would invite him to take his place .
We now have no choice but to strictly obey our time limits .
Questions to Mr Liikanen
As they deal with the same subject , Questions No 34 , 35 and 36 will be taken together .
Question No 34 by ( H-0786 / 01 ) :
Subject : EU safety markings on instruments useable for torture I am concerned that EU Member States may be effectively allowing manufacturers of stun weapons ( which are readily useable as instruments of torture ) to use the European Commission CE ' safety ' markings on their stun batons as a quality ' selling point ' .
Can the Commission please indicate its position on the following points :
What is the process by which European CE standard marks are awarded and which Commissioner is responsible ?
Can the Commission estimate how many stun weapon manufacturers are using the CE markings on their products ?
Will the Commission take action to prevent stun weapon manufacturers using CE markings to promote the sales of their products ?
Question No 35 by ( H-0790 / 01 ) :
Subject : Electric-shock devices The recent Amnesty International Report , Stopping the Torture Trade ( 2001 ) , found that electric-shock devices have been used to torture or ill-treat people in prisons , detention centres and police stations in no less than 76 countries around the world .
The report also found that stun gun weapon manufacturers are advertising that these products have been ' awarded ' the European CE standards mark .
I am concerned that EU Member States are effectively allowing stun gun weapon manufacturers to use the European Commission CE ' safety ' markings on their stun batons as a quality ' selling point ' .
Could the Commission clarify the process by which European CE standard marks are awarded , and explain to the European Parliament how many stun gun weapon manufacturers are using the CE marking on their products ?
Could the Commission also take action to prevent stun gun weapon manufacturers using CE markings to promote sales of their products ?
Question No 36 by ( H-0801 / 01 ) .
Subject : CE markings The Commission is aware that manufacturers and distributors of electro-shock devices ( or ' stun guns ' ) have been using CE markings to promote sales of their products , sometimes claiming that such marks constitute a ' guarantee ' or an indication of product quality .
What steps is the Commission taking to ensure that CE markings are not used as a promotional device , both in the EU Member States and in third countries ?
In cases where a product is manufactured , distributed and sold by companies based in countries not in the EU , can the Commission say what authority may challenge the validity of the CE mark , and prevent a firm from claiming that the CE mark on its product is a guarantee or an indication of quality ?
Mr President , we have just been discussing minor languages .
That is the reason why I am now using the Finnish language .
Regulations on the CE marking are contained in a Council resolution of 1990 on the various phases of the compliance assessment procedures to be employed when applying directives on technical harmonisation , and also in a Council directive issued in 1993 .
The latter stipulates that the CE marking should be incorporated in a number of directives on technical harmonisation that apply to specific industries .
Conformity marking must be affixed to any product falling within the scope of a technical harmonisation directive providing for it .
It signifies that the product complies with the legally binding requirements of the applicable technical harmonisation directive .
The manufacturer is responsible for affixing the CE conformity marking , although the directives often require the intervention of a third party conformity assessment body .
Member States are responsible for the designation of such bodies in accordance with the applicable provisions of the directives .
A number of services in the Commission are responsible for technical harmonisation directives providing for the CE conformity marking , although most fall under the responsibility of the Enterprise Directorate-General .
However , the Commission does not directly intervene in the evaluation of product conformity , nor in the award of the CE conformity marking .
All the manufacturers of stun weapons falling within the scope of technical harmonisation directives providing for CE conformity marking must affix this marking to the relevant products .
The Commission does not have information about the number of manufacturers involved .
In an earlier reply to a written question in 1997 , the Commission noted that a wide variety of equipment could potentially be used for purposes of torture .
However it is not always possible to determine in advance what use such equipment will be put to .
Therefore it is not feasible to apply different treatment under these directives to equipment that could potentially be used as an instrument of torture .
Nevertheless , to take account of the concerns of Members of Parliament and many others who have written to me on the issue , the Commission , in particular the External Relations DG , is currently preparing a proposal for a Council regulation concerning trade in equipment which may be used for torture or for cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment .
The specific aim of this regulation is to lay down Community rules to prohibit the export , sale and transfer to third countries and the import and purchase from third countries of such equipment .
This proposal should also deal , as appropriate , with electrical devices .
The Commission will no doubt have realised , from the shared language of these three questions , that they originate outside this House , and indeed Amnesty International has been pressing us on this point .
I need not underline the significance and weight that attaches to representations by Amnesty International .
I am very grateful indeed to the Commissioner for his assurance in response to the third part of the question about the steps that are being taken to try to bring this matter under reasonable control .
It is a kind of irony , is it not , that the original idea of the CE marking was to give assurances about safety .
Well , if I am at the wrong end of a safe piece of torture equipment , it is not a good place to be .
Can you give us any indication of a timetable for the progress you hope to make on this ?
The inter-service consultation in the Commission is going on right now .
Different services are expressing their opinions , so it is at an advanced stage of internal preparation today .
Further to the comments of my colleague , Mr MacCormick , I too was very concerned .
That is why I tabled the question .
The Amnesty International Report , Stopping the Torture Trade ( 2001 ) , found that electric-shock devices have been used to torture or ill-treat people in prisons , detention centres and police stations in no less than 76 countries around the world .
The report also found that stun-gun weapon manufacturers are advertising these products with the ' awarded ' CE standard .
As Mr MacCormick has said , the CE mark was meant to be a sign of quality and safety , but in a torture weapon it is pretty perverse and sickening .
I welcome the Commissioner 's proposal and would welcome further clarification of the timetable .
To push things a little bit forward : you have explained how the CE mark is awarded , but how are the recipients of the awards monitored and have any CE marks been withdrawn , to your knowledge ?
I will make two comments .
Firstly , according to the Amnesty International report referred to , stun guns are not used for torture or ill treatment by either the police or prison guards within the EU .
It is in the export to third countries where problems may arise .
As far as the CE marking is concerned , if it is incorrectly affixed and the competent authorities of the Member States know this , they can intervene with the manufacturer or his representative within the EU .
So there are possibilities for national authorities to take action .
It is our responsibility to monitor it properly .
The third part of my question is slightly broader .
I ask by what authority can the validity of a CE mark be challenged ?
The Commissioner has said in his first answer that it was not the Commission that would make a ruling and in his second supplementary he said that it would be the competent national authority .
Is there any system of mutual recognition of a ruling by one national authority , or would it be necessary to challenge the use of a CE mark on something like a stun gun separately in each of the 15 Member States ?
Is there not some overall body that can say this is valid ?
It seems to be a very long-winded process if it has to be challenged 15 separate times .
The market surveillance authorities of Member States are responsible for this .
We do not have any European body to do this .
Questions can , of course , be raised and we can consider how the provision of information between the authorities could be improved and progress made .
However , we must remember that it is only the producers that are involved and that there may not necessarily be producers in all countries .
Question No 37 by ( H-0800 / 01 ) :
Subject : Proposed ban on hydrofluorocarbons Can the Commission confirm what steps it is taking with regard to the proposed ban on hydrofluorocarbons by the Danish government ?
Denmark notified the Commission in March 2001 of a draft regulation intended to prohibit the import , sale and use of three greenhouse gases - HFC , PFC and SF6 - and products containing them as from 2006 , except in the case of certain products and applications for which a different timetable was laid down .
This notification , pursuant to Directive 98 / 34 / EC , allows the Commission and other Member States to carry out a prior examination of a measure which might create obstacles to the free movement of goods in the internal market .
Several Member States have reacted to the Danish proposal .
The Commission for its part has sent the Danish authorities a letter whose effect was to postpone the possibility of adopting the proposal until 6 September 2001 .
Denmark must reply to the Commission and inform it of the action it intends to take on the proposal .
The position expressed by the Commission can be summarised as follows . Firstly , the Commission recognises the legitimacy of the objective of the Danish proposal .
The text is aimed at combating greenhouse warming and at contributing towards a 21 % reduction of six industrial gases to which Denmark committed itself at the Environment Council in June 1998 .
The European Union , for its part , undertook under the Kyoto Protocol to reduce by 8 % the emissions of the six industrial gases in question produced by all its Member States .
In the light of information already provided by Denmark , however , the Commission considers that the proposal is disproportionate to the objective pursued and does not appear , therefore , to comply with the rules of the internal market .
The Commission notes that there are technical measures for monitoring these emissions and that those measures create fewer distortions of intra-Community trade than a total prohibition .
Moreover , the Commission is not convinced that safe alternative measures which are technically compatible with the systems currently used exist in all cases or will be in existence within deadlines laid down by the Danish proposal .
If Denmark does not respond to the Commission 's request the latter , as the guardian of the Treaties , may , whilst the proposal has been adopted , initiate infringement proceedings under Article 226 of the EC Treaty .
First of all , I thank the Commissioner for a comprehensive and clear reply .
Clearly the Commission has taken action with regard to this issue .
It is of concern not only to myself but to a great deal of other people in the Union , particularly those in the airconditioning industry , who could see a potential change in their market happening far too rapidly for them to respond with technical measures on with any kind of appropriate economic steps .
I hope the Commission will continue to press the Danish authorities to be quite clear about their intentions .
I hope that the Commission will seek further contact with the Danish authorities over and above the letters they have already sent , to ensure that a reply is received quickly .
The amount of uncertainty at the moment with regard to the intentions of the Danish Government is creating ripples across the single market and raising doubts that are not conducive to the progressive restructuring of the air-conditioning market - and the other markets in which these gases are used - so that they can be phased out over an appropriate and sensible period of time .
I hope the Commission can assure us that action will be taken .
We will act accordingly and keep the European Parliament informed .
Question No 38 by ( H-0821 / 01 ) :
Subject : Swedish ban on cadmium in fertiliser At the end of this year the Swedish ban on cadmium in fertilisers will expire .
The EU derogation will then run out and new arrangements cannot be prepared in time .
On its accession in 1995 , Sweden was entitled to retain stricter rules than those applying in the EU for various chemicals and dangerous substances for four years .
The derogation for the Swedish restrictions on cadmium in fertiliser was extended by three years .
This time is up at the end of this year , and no new arrangements will be ready .
The purpose of the derogation for a limited period was that the EU would , in the mean time , tighten up its rules on dangerous substances .
This has been done in some cases , but not in respect of cadmium in fertilisers .
Pending common rules the stopgap solution must be to extend the derogation , which applies to Finland and Austria as well as Sweden .
But not even that will be possible before the end of the year .
The Commission proposal has yet to be submitted , and it then has to be adopted by the Council and Parliament .
This will mean that there will be a period during which high cadmium content fertiliser could theoretically be sold in Sweden .
Does the Commission consider that Sweden may continue to apply its own rules during this interim period ?
On 14 September 2001 the Commission proposed the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to fertilisers in which the derogation permitting Austria , Finland and Sweden to maintain national limits on the level of cadmium in fertilisers is extended up to 31 December 2004 .
This proposal is now in the hands of the Council and Parliament for the codecision procedure .
The issue of cadmium in fertilisers has been under study by the Commission for a number of years , originally with the aim of introducing appropriate harmonising legislation before the derogation expires on 31 December 2001 .
However , due to the complexity of the scientific issues involved , and the delays in the risk assessments carried out by the Member States , it was not possible to propose the required legislation at an earlier stage .
For this reason , the Commission decided to extend the derogation on cadmium in fertilisers for a further three years and it did so by including the appropriate provisions in a proposal for a regulation recasting the existing fertiliser directives .
As the major part of the text of the proposed regulation is not new , it is hoped that this proposal will be adopted rapidly , possibly at first reading .
The Commission is doing everything possible to facilitate rapid adoption of the regulation .
But if it turns out that it is not possible to have the proposed regulation in place before the end of the year , the Member States concerned can ask for a derogation under Article 95 ( 4 ) of the Treaty .
I would thank the Commission very much for its exhaustive and constructive answer .
I would also thank the Commission for its proposal to the effect that the derogation on cadmium in fertilisers should be extended .
This derogation is very important to Sweden and also to other countries .
I obtained the impression that the special derogation rule mentioned last in the answer means that we have a sort of guarantee against having to receive fertilisers containing cadmium for a possible interim period before the new extension comes into force .
Is this view correct ?
I am very familiar with this issue because it was already important in 1993 in the negotiations on enlargement with Finland , Sweden and Austria .
If the Council and Parliament do not manage to adopt the proposed legislation in time , it is important for these three countries to request a derogation .
I believe that all the Member States are likely to be prepared to approve this quickly .
It is the Commission ' s responsibility to check that EC legislation is implemented carefully .
We have already produced a proposal .
We do not intend to take measures to cover only a specific short period of difficulties .
I believe we can find a good way of dealing with this issue .
Thank you for all your replies , Mr Liikanen .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , Questions Nos 39 and 40 will be replied to in writing .
We now come to the last series of replies which will come from Mr Vitorino , on behalf of the Commission .
Questions to Mr Vitorino
Question No 41 by ( H-0782 / 01 ) :
Subject : Landing of large numbers of illegal immigrants in the Canary Islands What measures does the Commission intend to put forward to guarantee the integrity of Community waters around the Canary Islands , given the recent reports that motherships are being used to land large numbers of illegal immigrants from Africa on the Canaries ?
The events referred to by the honourable Member demonstrate how important it is for the European Union to develop policies on preventing and combating illegal immigration and in particular irregular arrivals by sea .
Such policies need to be developed in partnership with the countries of origin and transit , and should also contain initiatives concerning the internal policies of the European Union .
The Commission is in favour of addressing migration in a comprehensive manner which implies that European Union policies should not only address illegal migration but also include initiatives to serve the socio-economic interests of countries of origin and transit as well as legal migration .
As regards the initiatives that need to be developed in partnership with the Mediterranean partners , it should be mentioned that illegal migration is one of the subjects currently being discussed within the framework of the Barcelona Process .
Both sides agree that multilateral efforts are needed to address illegal immigration from North Africa to the European Union .
The need to develop such a policy was underlined during the Euro-Mediterranean Conference of Ministers of Foreign Affairs held in Brussels on 5-6 November this year .
This subject , including a number of concrete proposals on preventing and fighting illegal immigration , is also part of the draft regional programme on justice and home affairs .
Partners hope to adopt this programme during the next Euro-Mediterranean Conference of Ministers of Foreign Affairs to be held on 22-23 April 2002 in Spain .
Moreover , illegal immigration has been identified as one of the relevant themes for cooperation within the framework of the Association Agreement between the European Community and its Member States and Morocco .
During the Association Council of 9 October this year Morocco underlined its determination to fight illegal migration and the networks of traffickers and called on the European Union for support in its efforts .
The Moroccan authorities have presented concrete and ambitious proposals which aim to curb illegal migration , primarily by reinforcing the surveillance of Morocco 's Atlantic and Mediterranean borders .
The Commission is currently studying these proposals and hopes to be in a position to respond to the proposals fairly soon .
The Commission has also decided to use the newly-created budget line , aimed at cooperation with third countries in the area of migration , to support financial projects to assist the Moroccan authorities responsible for border control and the fight against illegal immigration by providing training and technical assistance .
Thank you , Mr Vitorino , for the information you have given me .
The problem we have today is that every week approximately 100 illegal immigrants are reaching the islands of Lanzarote and Fuerteventura .
The operation seems to consist of getting hold of a supply ship from somewhere and than putting the immigrants onto small boats which take them to the coast .
Some make it , others drown , and the process goes on and on .
The Commissioner ' s response is that there is no Community action , but that it is hoped that the neighbouring countries will control immigration . But the fact is that this immigration is taking place .
My supplementary question is as follows : a couple of weeks ago , the Mayor of the city of Las Palmas bought 200 one-way air tickets for illegal immigrants who were there and they flew to Madrid .
The Mayor of Madrid , who is from the same party , was not very happy .
Does the Commissioner believe that , if this immigration continues in this way , this would be the way to proceed , i.e. that the Canarian local authorities should pay for one-way tickets for illegal immigrants , because there is no more space on the islands , or do you believe that there is another possible solution , which would not make this air link for immigrants between the Canaries and the European continent necessary ?
Mr President , I believe there has been positive development since our last dialogue here in Parliament on this issue .
Firstly , the Barcelona process recognised the priority nature of the debate and dialogue on the joint strategy of the European Union and the Mediterranean countries for fighting illegal immigration , which is not an isolated issue , but which must be integrated into the overall negotiation of the socio-economic development of the Maghreb countries .
Secondly , in the bilateral relations between the European Union and Morocco , the Moroccan authorities have sent us very specific proposals to strengthen the control of the Atlantic and Mediterranean borders .
And I stress the Atlantic border because , as well as being an innovation in relations between the European Union and Morocco , it is particularly important for the specific situation of the Canary Islands .
These are two positive points in the dialogue between the European Union and the countries of this region , and specifically , Morocco .
The third point , which I believe is new , is that there is no European policy on returning illegal immigrants to countries of origin or transit .
Therefore , the Commission intends to present Council and the European Parliament with a communication in the coming weeks on illegal immigration , which includes the issue of creating common standards for the policy on returning illegal immigrants .
When we have this communication , the honourable Member will be able to see the Commission ' s ideas and contributions to this debate on the creation of a European policy on returning illegal immigrants , which is currently the exclusive competence of national or regional governments , as in the case of the Government of the Autonomous Community of the Canary Islands .
Question No 42 by ( H-0792 / 01 ) :
Subject : Inclusion of religion on new EU identity cards The recent terrorist attacks in the USA have given rise to intense debate over whether more detailed information about an individual 's characteristics and origin should be included on identity cards in the Member States of the Union .
The Greek press reports that this issue will be discussed early next December in Brussels at the meeting of the Ministers of Justice , Internal Affairs and Public Order of the 15 Member States of the EU .
In the light of recent events , what is the Commission 's view of including religion on the new identity cards to be introduced in the EU , as mentioned in the above reports ?
Mr President , The European Commission has not submitted any proposal that seeks to have an individual ' s religion included on his or her identity card .
In no Member State is the religion of an identity card holder mentioned on the card .
Lastly , the Republic of Greece has removed any mention of religion on identity cards and its initiative has been approved by the Greek Council of State , which considered that even the optional mention of religion on identity cards contravenes Article 13 of the Greek Constitution , which guarantees freedom of religion .
The Commission ' s position with regard to the indication of religion on national identity cards has not changed .
We would ask the honourable Member to refer in particular to the answer the Commission gave to the oral question H-0456 / 00 by Mr Alavanos .
Such a measure would not only breach an individual ' s right to freedom of religion , but could also lead to discrimination , whether overt or covert , on the grounds of religion .
Thank you Commissioner for your reply , but you did not answer my question as to whether the Ministers of Justice , Internal Affairs and Public Order of the fifteen are due to discuss the matter in their forthcoming meeting in Brussels .
That was my question .
My second comment is this : I absolutely agree on the sensitivity issue and , anyway , it is the common view in the European Parliament that the argument of religious identity should not be used as a factor which might cause problems if it is included ; but I should like to ask if the European Union agrees that schools in the Member States of the European Union should do the same as the madrasses in Islamic countries and teach the view , and we see this on a daily basis , that Muslims should kill Christians and Jews and that this is a part of their religion .
I should like to ask , given that it is prohibited to teach Fascist or Nazi ideas about the annihilation of the Jews , if we can accept , on the contrary , that they be taught by Muslim fundamentalists in the light of the specific circumstances which have arisen following the attack on 11 September .
First of all , I have attempted to answer your question by saying that the Commission has not submitted any proposal on the matter .
This type of issue could not , therefore , be discussed at a Justice and Home Affairs Council on the basis of a Commission proposal .
As far as I am aware , nowhere on the agenda is a discussion scheduled on the issue that you raised at the meeting of Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs of the European Union .
With regard to what I believe is your second question , the content of education provided by schools in Arab countries , if I have understood correctly , I must , of course , tell you that the Union has no competence at all to interfere in the content of school curricula of third countries .
Furthermore , even in schools within the European Union , as you are well aware , Mr Marinos , this falls within the sphere of subsidiarity , which means that it is within the exclusive competence of each Member State government to define the content of school lessons , both in state schools and in private schools , within the European Union .
Question No 43 by ( H-0794 / 01 ) :
Subject : Application of fundamentalist laws within the European Union With regard to a number of violations of women ' s rights within the European Union justified by fundamentalism , is the Commission in favour of taking appropriate measures to prevent the implementation of laws incompatible with human rights ?
Can the Commission accept that basic human rights are violated on the pretext of religious beliefs , cultural practices or customs ?
What steps will it consider taking in the short and long term ?
The breaches of women ' s rights to which the honourable Member refers come in different forms and should be considered on an individual basis .
Nevertheless , the Commission notes that , in accordance with Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union , the Union is founded on the principles of freedom , democracy , and respect for human rights , fundamental freedoms and the Rule of Law , principles shared by all Member States .
As confirmed at the Fourth World Conference on Women , held in Beijing , in 1995 , the promotion and protection of women ' s rights are an integral part of universal human rights .
In no circumstances can the Commission accept the abuse of an individual ' s fundamental rights under the guise of religious beliefs , cultural practices or customs .
This position is laid down by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ( Articles 1 , 4 , 21 , 23 , 24 ) and by the other texts dealing with fundamental rights , such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ( Articles 2 and 5 ) and the European Convention on Human Rights ( Articles 2 , 3 and 14 ) .
Item 18 of the Vienna Declaration , adopted in June 1993 by the World Conference on Human Rights , lays down that all forms of violence towards women , including those resulting from cultural prejudice , must be eliminated .
Regardless of national protection of fundamental rights and of women ' s rights in particular , it should be noted that the Community has been working on a policy to promote equality between the sexes since 1975 .
Equal access to the labour market , to governing bodies and to social rights are equally important rights in this respect , as well as the right to protection from violence and sexual harassment .
There is a raft of Community legislative measures , directives , and even case law from the Court of Justice , underpinned by a specific legal basis , Article 141 of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Incidentally , Article 3 of this Treaty imposes the obligation of integrating concerns about equality between the sexes into all Union policies .
Thank you very much for your reply , Commissioner . It shows that the Commission has understood the problem .
As a supplementary question , I would like to know whether , in accordance with your reply , you foresee , or support the idea , that women immigrants should be informed of their rights within the European Union .
Could women immigrants be provided with services to defend their rights ?
I would like to hear your opinion and whether you have any intentions in this respect .
I am very happy to reply .
I will begin by saying that all the initiatives presented by the Commission in the field of asylum and illegal immigration contain specific legal rules to deal with the very special situation of women immigrants or women seeking asylum or refuge in the countries of the European Union .
We have ensured that in the questioning relating to the granting of asylum there are specific conditions for dealing with the situation of women .
For example , women who have been victims of sexual abuse can ask for the official doing the questioning to be changed , so that it is a woman rather than a man , because that will perhaps make them more feel more comfortable when recounting the story their asylum application is based on .
The honourable Member has raised a very important issue : informing immigrants of their rights .
Unquestionably , one of the Commission ' s concerns is that it should be possible to provide immigrants , refugees and asylum seekers with the fullest possible information about their rights .
I believe that if the honourable Member examines the Commission ' s specific proposals to the Council and the European Parliament , both with regard to immigration and to asylum , she will see that the idea of information about rights is present .
It is the responsibility of the national authorities of the Member States , as well as the non-governmental organisations which we work with very closely in these areas , to provide complete and full information on the rights which immigrants seeking asylum in the European Union can benefit from .
As the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 44 to 84 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was adjourned at 7.40 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Security of energy supply
The next item on the agenda is the report by Mr Chichester ( A5-0363 / 2001 ) on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the Commission Green Paper ' Towards a European strategy for the security of energy supply ' [ COM ( 2000 ) 769 - C5-0145 / 2001 - 2001 / 2071 ( COS ) ] .

Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the Commission on the Green Paper . It is an excellent analysis of our energy supply situation in Europe .
I thank all my colleagues for the way in which they have contributed to my report to bring it to this stage this evening .
There are three main points in the Green Paper .
Firstly , the European Union will become increasingly dependent on external energy sources , reaching 70 % by 2003 .
Secondly , the EU has very limited scope to influence energy supply conditions so that it is on the demand side that the EU can intervene , mostly through promoting energy saving in buildings and in the transport sector .
Thirdly , in present circumstances the EU is not in a position to respond to the challenge of climate change and to meet its commitments , notably under the Kyoto Protocol .
One thing above all else is staring us in the face : the massive dependence on oil and on imported oil in particular .
For commonsense reasons of security of supply and protection of the environment , urgent steps should be taken to address this disproportionate dependence .
We cannot alter the fact of where the oil comes from , but we can do a number of things on the demand side , particularly in the transport sector .
Being dependent on imports is not necessarily a bad thing or economically inefficient , provided that the sources are diverse , no one supplier is dominant and we can produce sufficient goods and services to pay for them .
The Commission is correct to focus on demand management measures as a first priority and it is to be hoped that the Member States will pursue this approach vigorously .
However I do not accept the view that little or nothing can be done on the supply side .
In four areas the EU and Member States can be masters of their own destiny and make a real difference , both to security of supply and to protection of the environment .
Renewable energy sources are by definition indigenous supplies and we are correct to seek to increase their share of final consumption and electricity generation .
However let us be realistic , .
Even if the ambitious targets for RES are met , they cannot be expected to replace any of the other energy sources completely or become the sole supplier of all our energy needs .
Nuclear energy is not popular in some quarters , but it supplies more electricity in Europe than any other energy source .
It provides large volume , base load power and produces hardly any greenhouse gas emissions .
It is a safe and secure European technology , operated under stringent standards of regulation .
To deliberately deny ourselves this major source of electricity seems perverse in the absence of an alternative source of supply that can provide an equivalent volume .
Coal is a source of energy in decline in Europe , because of cost and environmental concerns .
Yet it is an important indigenous resource which could be given a new lease of life with new technology to make it more efficient and less pollutant .
Furthermore , there is huge scope for gaining business in the rest of the world for European suppliers of equipment and systems , if the industry can seize the opportunity .
The fourth area is research work for future technologies and energy systems .
That is something Europe must do in order to safeguard future security of supply , employment and technology .
It seems obvious but needs repeating .
For all the above reasons , I also disagree with the view that the EU cannot meet its Kyoto commitments .
What is needed is realism on the nuclear issue , determined effort on clean coal technology , much encouragement of RES and coordinated demand management measures , as well as a sustained effort to inform public opinion about the necessity to stop wasting energy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to congratulate the Commissioner and the rapporteur because the Green Paper on the security of energy supply is a wonderful document which is accompanied by a great report .
This document represents the first great step in Europe ' s energy strategy ; it offers a global view of the situation and raises all the relevant issues in this sector without reservations or conditions .
It states that our main problem is our supply , characterised by great external dependence , which will increase over the coming decades .
We must not leave aside environmental issues , however , which are inseparable from energy use .
In this respect , the directive adopted on renewable energy sources and the proposal on the promotion of biofuels are going to lead to great progress in terms of the diversification of the supply of clean energy , but they are not the solution in either the short or medium terms .
We must not hinder any type of energy , above all if it does not produce CO2 emissions .
The solutions , as the Commission points out very well , involve the diversification of supply sources , especially clean sources - those which do not produce greenhouse gases .
We must insist on technological research into energy sources , energy saving and the liberalisation of the gas sectors , in order that we may create a genuine internal energy market .
Furthermore , it would be good if the Treaties could include a chapter on energy .
Mr President , I too wish to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Chichester , on the remarkable work he has achieved in analysing the issue and making a proposal and to say that I fully subscribe to his realistic and pragmatic approach , which maintains a crucial balance between the various sources of energy in implementing a European policy for energy supply .
This strategy is based on three complementary objectives , which I support : to reduce the European Union ' s energy consumption by improving efficiency in certain sectors , particularly the construction and automobile industries ; greater cooperation and investment for supplying countries , the diversification of energy resources with what I consider to be an essential objective : to reduce our dependency on oil .
I am also very pleased that this report explains how these objectives are to be achieved , namely by liberalising the energy sector , and I should like to reiterate the need not to give in to populist rhetoric , especially where renewable energies and nuclear energy are concerned .
We must remain realistic and understand that , without the contribution made by nuclear energy , the European Union will not be able to reach the objectives it has set for itself for reducing greenhouse gases .
Compliance with the Kyoto criteria must be one of the European Union ' s priority objectives .
This is within our grasp if we demonstrate clear thinking in our choices and I also note that the options available in the field of taxation could prove to be powerful incentives , provided that they do not block the development of industry in the European Union .
Several amendments by the group of the Greens are counter-productive .
Instead of stimulating debate , they exclude from the outset various possibilities for energy choices and I feel they should be rejected so as to maintain the coherence of this report .
I hope that we shall do so , following the recommendations of our rapporteur .
Mr President , I like this report , and would like to congratulate the rapporteur on what he has said and , moreover , congratulate the Commission on its Green Paper , for , by it , the Commission is making us aware of our dependence on energy .
I can recall no debate in the past twenty years which has pointed out our dependence on imported energy in the way this Green Paper has .
Thank you again .
I would like to make two observations on nuclear energy .
Unlike many in my group , I take the view that it has a future .
I believe that we should also express that in a positive way .
Secondly , and this is perhaps even more important than the first point , I would like to observe that we have been given the task of developing a clean coal-fired power station .
I say this also with reference to our obligations as a result of Kyoto .
A clean coal-fired power station is not only of interest to Europe , but also to the world .
For let us not forget , as the Commission repeatedly emphasised , that in the next one or two generations , our dependence on fossil energy , at any rate worldwide , will be up to 80 % and it is all the more important to master combustion technologies .
Mr President , I also wish to express my thanks to Mr Chichester , the rapporteur , for his significant work in preparing this matter .
As has already been stated here on previous occasions , the EU has only limited possibilities to interfere with the terms and conditions of energy supply .
Its chances of influencing the matter are restricted to the demand , and hence to the promotion of energy saving in the construction and transport industries .
The most important things , therefore , are to ensure the diversity of energy sources and an even distribution of suppliers of energy .
The availability of energy on a local level enhances the reliability of energy supplies , reduces dependence on imported energy and provides employment opportunities .
In particular , research into and the use of renewable energy sources must be promoted .
Responsibility for assuring the reliability of energy supplies is primarily a matter for national energy policies .
In order to enhance the reliability of supplies , it is also necessary to enter into agreements with other countries .
Also , energy projects that serve common European objectives are an excellent way of putting into specific terms the EU ' s policies on the Northern Dimension .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my own position and that of the Greens have been discussed at length in other forums , and it is not possible , in two and a half minutes to present a detailed argument .
I shall , therefore , limit myself to asking the Commissioner a few questions .
First of all , it is important that this debate should be based on figures that are as precise as possible .
Even at an early stage of the debate , it was clear that the various scenarios available to the Commission are not really ' bottom up ' scenarios , for energy efficiency , for renewables , or for cogeneration .
Furthermore , another problem is that , often , European scenarios do not correspond to the detailed scenarios drawn up by Member States .
In this context , I should like to know whether the Commission has begun working on this type of scenario with a view to the Barcelona Summit .
Secondly , energy efficiency is everyone ' s birthright and everyone is insisting on this point .
What is the Commission ' s view today , in concrete terms , on the important actions to be taken in the field of energy efficiency ?
Parliament has put forward a number of alternatives , both in its Energy Intelligent Europe initiative , and in the action plan .
Nevertheless , since October , I have not seen the Commission making a genuine , sustained effort on this matter .
Thirdly , and this is a fundamental point , at the beginning of your presentation of the Green Paper , you promised us a real democratic debate .
Today , however , I see that the national round tables have not been entirely transparent and that , at European level , we are still waiting for an open and transparent debate to be held , something that you announced at the beginning as being a key element .
This is why I am asking you today , Commissioner , when will the round tables take place in civil society , amongst experts at European level ?
We have been hearing about them for the last six months , and we have yet to see one take place .
I fail to see how the Commission can ensure that the Green Paper is followed up without organising these round tables .
Mr President , we are all aware that the European Union is highly dependent on external energy sources and has very limited scope to influence energy supply conditions .
That does not mean , however , that the European Union should not do more to promote the use of alternative energies and safer and cleaner energies .
It must also play a leading role in ensuring that all the conditions of the Kyoto Protocol are implemented .
The broader international community has not covered itself in glory in the efforts to ensure that the depletion of the ozone layer is stopped .
This report refers to the fact that nuclear energy in Europe will be playing a less significant role , following the decisions by five Member States to phase out the use of nuclear energy in the future .
It also states that no country in Europe is currently constructing new nuclear reactors .
It would be greatly appreciated in Ireland if you would inform the British Government and BNFL of this fact .
The British Government is currently planning the expansion , not a reduction , of nuclear activities at Sellafield .
The MOX facility at Sellafield means more nuclear reprocessing , not less , and nobody in the British Government and BNFL can deny this .
In Ireland we are sick and tired of BNFL breaching so-called high standards of regulation in their nuclear operations .
We cannot easily forget that BNFL falsified documents in relation to nuclear reprocessing contracts with the Japanese Government .
Where are the stringent standards of regulation , when you are dealing with a company that has falsified documents and has been shown time and time again to operate its affairs in this very slipshod manner ?
I believe that BNFL is technically insolvent . Its liabilities for cleaning up after the closure of nuclear plants and the disposal of nuclear waste will be up to GBP 34 billion , while it has GBP 235m worth of shareholders ' funds on its balance sheet .
What is the economic justification for the continuation of the Sellafield nuclear plant , let alone the expansion of its nuclear operations in the future ?
Are the British people fully aware of the extent of movements of nuclear materials by rail and sea in Britain ?
In Ireland we are very concerned about the security arrangements at Sellafield in the light of the terrorist attacks in America on 11 September .
What assurances can the British Government give the people of Ireland that maximum security operates in the region ?
We know the type of devastation that would occur if a twin towers type attack were to take place at Sellafield .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Green Paper on the security of energy supply is fundamentally to be welcomed .
It deals with an acute problem , one directly linked with the world political situation , which is more extensively unpredictable than ever .
Despite the very large number of good statements , I cannot share the rapporteur 's view that nuclear energy is a practical alternative to energy imports .
The reasons are well known .
Only recently , a study was completed , commissioned by Parliament , which comes to the conclusion that the reprocessing plants at La Hague and Sellafield discharge as much radioactivity over seven years as was emitted in the Chernobyl nuclear accident .
The problem of the ultimate disposal of radioactive waste has not been resolved .
Nor does nuclear fusion offer a solution .
It therefore makes more sense to invest in safe and renewable energy sources than in nuclear fusion , which can achieve results in 100 years at best .
Mr President , if a good policy consists of producing complete and correct diagnoses and drawing up and implementing the corresponding solutions , there is no doubt that the Commissions ' energy policy , promoted by Commissioner de Palacio , is an example of a good policy .
Within this good policy , the Green Paper provides a detailed and consistent analysis of the situation .
The Green Paper provides four fundamental messages : the message that there is excessive risk associated with dependence on external sources beyond a reasonable limit ; the message that it will be impossible to comply with the Kyoto objectives if we remain bogged down in inertia and do not introduce corrective measures ; the message that we have little room for manoeuvre in terms of supply policies and we must concentrate our efforts on demand policies ; and the message that we need to provide our energy policy with a genuinely European dimension .
There is no doubt that this good policy goes further than diagnosis , because the Commission demonstrates that analysis and action can be simultaneous ; and in Parliament at the moment we have the directive on the energy efficiency of buildings , the directive on transport , the directive on the liberalisation of the gas and electricity market and the regulation on cross-border exchanges of electricity .
For all these reasons , we must congratulate the Commissioner and I will not end without also expressly congratulating our rapporteur , Mr Chichester , on his well-considered report and his receptiveness to the work of his colleagues .
Mr President , honourable colleagues , I praise the part of the report where this gas pipeline link with Russia has been incorporated in the Northern Dimension .
Honourable Member of the Commission , I propose that the Commission take swift measures in order to get this northern gas to balance our energy situation .
A great deal of attention in this presentation has been given to lignite .
I should like to ask , therefore , why peat , although it renews itself by a millimetre every year , has been completely forgotten ; but then , peat is a type of vegetation found in poorer areas , while lignite is found in wealthier ones !
Nevertheless , peat is an important fuel component in remote areas , and it is also a regional fuel .
Forty per cent of all energy is spent in buildings , to heat them , to provide water , air-conditioning and lighting for them .
Already , during the previous energy crisis , we in Finland had to make modifications to buildings and we have managed to achieve good results in severe conditions .
We must greatly enhance energy efficiency in buildings because that is where there really is a great deal of room for improvement .
We shall have to gradually get accustomed to twilight conditions , for example .
It is great to live in semi-darkness and not always in the sunshine , in artificial light .
Mr President , successive petrol crises and the political and social fragility of the main oil-producing countries demonstrate the importance for our economies of the concept of self-sufficiency in energy .
Unless we show a solid political will to implement this self-sufficiency , our future lies in the direction of energy dependency .
If we allow things to continue the way they are , in 25 years ' time , the European Union ' s dependency on external sources of energy will reach 70 % rather than the 50 % we have today .
This realisation is what underlies the Green Paper .
If we wish to remain masters of our destiny , we must give priority to action on two fronts .
We must , on the one hand , encourage energy savings wherever possible . On the other hand , we must make good use of our advantages , our skills and our resources .
With this in mind , and as the Green Paper and our rapporteur suggest , in a realistic rather than an ideological way , we should address the issue of developing nuclear energy .
This would require acknowledging that this form of energy cannot be faulted in terms of creating greenhouse gases but also that intensive research efforts are absolutely crucial if we are to make waste end products completely harmless , even if they only exist in low volumes .
Blaming reprocessing processes , as the WISE report , commissioned by the STOA and of highly dubious scientific merit , has done once again , will not help us find a solution .
Instead of allowing their technological lead to stagnate , the European countries should capitalise on it , particularly by focusing their research on improving reprocessing and recycling techniques .
The same research effort must be made in the field of biofuels , which have the merit of representing a major indigenous source of energy for us : these are non-polluting and offer promising outlets for our farming .
I am sorry that the Green Paper has not given this matter sufficient prominence .
Mr President , here we are , all worried about our dependence on imported fuels and energy , worried about the future of our economy and our jobs , and yet we have Mr Fitzsimons and Mr Kronberger bemoaning and belittling one of the main potential sources for meeting that problem , the nuclear energy solution .
Not only does it meet our energy and economic requirements , but it also meets our environmental requirements under Kyoto .
I would say - and Mr Chichester 's excellent report bears this out - that unless we diversify our sources of supply of energy , especially by promoting indigenous supplies of energy , we will be in trouble with our economy and our jobs in the future .
Nuclear energy must play a significant part in both those ambitions : diversification and indigenous supplies .
There are other areas as well .
Mr Chichester mentioned coal .
We must promote clean technologies in coal .
In my part of the world , in Scotland , we would like to see more emphasis on promoting the oil and gas industries and their potential for better recovery systems , for exploration in marginal areas , for developing marginal oil and gas fields , for replenishing the reserves , the reservoirs in the south part of the North Sea , with gas in the meantime to protect us for the long term , and particularly transmission systems .
That applies not only to oil and gas but also to electricity .
In all these areas there is great potential for research .
That ties us into what we will discuss tomorrow in the Caudron report on the Sixth Framework Programme .
In all these areas , diversification , indigenous supplies and research will help us to meet our objectives .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wished to speak in this evening ' s debate for two reasons .
First of all , I too wish to reiterate the importance of energy for Europe at a time when it is predicted that we will be 70 % dependent on external energy sources in 2030 with clearly very little room for manoeuvre .
Next I wish to stress that I entirely support the approach of Mr Chichester , who is proposing both a diversification of energy sources and the development of all current sources without exception .
These proposals do , of course , make calls for liberalisation that I would probably have rejected had they appeared in isolation .
They are presented today , however , in a very broad range of demands , some of which are extremely bold and that is why I am able to support the package put forward by Mr Chichester , whom I wish to compliment on his report .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to express much thanks to Mr Chichester .
Very rarely have I seen reports on energy of this calibre .
The Commission Green Paper was already first-rate , but with this supplement I believe we have many sound building blocks for the EU ' s energy policy .
The greatest concern , of course , is , as Mr Chichester rightly points out , our energy dependence and the question ' what can be done about it ? '
In my view , therefore , the well-balanced package in the Chichester report offers an excellent helping hand .
That means that one should not only consider natural oil and gas supplies , but also new forms of energy . That one should consider renewable energy sources , but that one should not immediately rule out nuclear energy .
Certainly with regard to the way in which its use can be made safer .
That is certainly feasible , and a great deal needs to be done yet .
One cannot say that nuclear energy is no longer acceptable , for then one gets into the greatest difficulty in Europe .
Something must also be done about those aspects which give rise to questions , of course , and on that score too , a great deal can be done , partly by finding intelligent solutions .
It has been said time and again : if there is no energy chapter , then nothing can be done .
Well , if I read Paragraph 21 , which merely sums up all elements of the EU policy that can be achieved at the moment , that is an enormous agenda .
On that score , our Commissioner has a great deal of work to do .
Energy and geopolitical developments are closely related , particularly if we consider the developments after 11 September .
I therefore hope that the energy charter will be ratified at the earliest opportunity and that we will further develop the Caspian Sea Basin , for in that way , we can also slightly reduce Europe ' s dependence .
I should like to finish off by congratulating both the Commissioner and our rapporteur on their sterling work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Chichester , and congratulating him warmly on the quality of his work and his efforts to produce a truly remarkable report .
I am aware of the scale of this challenge , given both the size and complexity of the issue itself and the number and diversity of the parties affected by it , inside and outside Parliament .
When I speak of the security of energy supply , I am not just referring to the physical supply , but also to energy systems and services which are ecologically , socially and economically sustainable .
In this respect , the security of energy supplies is essential to our development and security in the broadest sense , and recent events have demonstrated this even more clearly .
In fact , the tragic events of 11 September have highlighted our dependency on imports and the security of our installations .
The risk factor has multiplied overnight : the risk of premeditated damage to installations and infrastructures , the risk of volatility on the oil markets ( with its prejudicial effect on the world economy ) and the risk of interruption to our supply , both internal and external .
All of this means that it is more important than ever to provide appropriate measures for responding in the event of emergency .
It is encouraging to note from the responses to the Green Paper - more than 150 formal responses from different organisations of all types - the interest in issues relating to the security of energy supply throughout Europe and beyond .
I am pleased that the Commission ' s analysis has received general support and that there is a considerable degree of awareness of the risks and problems faced by Europe in terms of guaranteeing the security of the energy supply and the international nature of those risks and problems .
This is reflected in the excellent report you have before you .
Many respondents have accepted that it is no longer possible to view energy supply as being independent from economic and environmental objectives .
Furthermore , a series of points in the report confirm that the European Parliament has clearly understood that there is a close link between these three objectives and the balance between them must be maintained .
The responses also confirm that European public opinion shares the Commission ' s desire to confront the problem of climate change .
I am pleased to see that the European Parliament not only shares this concern , but that it has many ideas on the instruments which may help us to achieve this objective .
We will carefully study these ideas when we prepare our response to the consultation on the Green Paper .
I am not going to refer to it at the moment , but I would like to state very clearly , ladies and gentlemen , that the issue has given rise to debates in numerous national Parliaments , in some of which either I or high level officials from the Commission have participated , and in various universities , companies and non-governmental organisations , thanks , amongst other things , to the use of the Internet , which is a vehicle for openness within society , which , although not yet concluded , gives us an idea of the importance of this issue in all social fields of the European Union .
I am especially pleased to highlight the insistence on energy efficiency .
Like you , I believe that there are huge areas for possible improvements .
Your ideas are clear , in relation to the supply , in the context of the general recognition that there should be diversification of energy sources and supply origins .
As the report accepts , no individual source is completely lacking in drawbacks : they all have a cost and they all seem necessary .
With regard to coal , we have no alternative but to maintain basically subsidised production , at least for a certain amount of time .
In any event , the Commission ' s proposed regulation confirms the importance we attach to own-production , but , above all , the importance of developing clean coal technology , which will allow us to use the only ample reserve of fossil fuel that the European Union has and promote the possibility of improving and reducing emissions internationally .
In this way , furthermore , we will maintain cutting-edge technology which offers all sorts of possibilities for our industry .
With regard to renewable energy sources , their importance will depend on the speed with which we can overcome a whole series of technical , social and economic obstacles .
The renewable energies directive , in relation to electricity , offers a guide for the direction we should take .
I know that we have been criticised for not making sufficient progress with this directive , but we are still trying to achieve our objective of doubling the percentage of renewable energy sources by the end of this decade .
In this respect , ladies and gentlemen , I refer to the previous intervention by Mr Souchet , we approved a few days ago an important and ambitious proposal on biofuels , which I hope will be approved and supported both by the Council and by Parliament .
With regard to nuclear energy , I am very satisfied with the frank and constructive exchange of views which the presentation of the Green Paper has made possible .
Some Member States have announced a moratorium or the progressive dismantling of their capacity for nuclear generation .
But one Member State has clearly stated its intention to go ahead with nuclear energy and to build a new reactor .
In any event , the abandonment of nuclear energy by some Member States may make a significant hole in our energy capacity and speed up the use of forms of energy generation which emit more greenhouse gases and , therefore , create problems in terms of our Kyoto commitments .
Although I have total respect for the decisions taken by the Member States , naturally , I believe that in these circumstances it is very difficult to confront the problem of climate change if we maintain a diversified energy base .
I believe that it is advisable to keep all the options open while the research into the management and elimination of waste is intensified and that is essentially the greatest problem with nuclear energy , given the progress made in terms of the safety of nuclear plants .
The debate on the Green Paper is still open .
It is therefore premature to anticipate its final conclusions .
However , the Commission is continuing , and will continue , to make proposals in the quest for new perspectives on energy supply .
We are working with you and the Council on the internal market legislation relating to one of the pillars of our strategy , in terms of both gas and electricity .
We must continue looking into the tax framework and pricing and , specifically , the guarantee of a mechanism for setting energy prices which reflects all the quantifiable external social and environmental costs .
Also in this field , we will shortly present certain energy network interconnections which will further integrate the national markets and therefore strengthen the security of the whole market resulting from this integration .
Furthermore , I hope soon to present a proposal on the combined generation of heat and electricity , which will allow us to make progress in the battle for efficiency .
Somebody said earlier that we have done little .
But I would remind you , ladies and gentlemen , of a proposal on buildings , which is very important ( buildings represent 40 % of energy consumption , and there are margins for savings of almost 20 % ) , the proposal we will present to improve the current regulation on combined generation of heat and electricity , and a general proposal , a framework proposal , which will provide measures for all types of electrodomestic or electrical equipment within buildings .
With regard to demand , the benefits of energy saving which have been raised are clear and , I insist , we have presented many serious , solid and important initiatives , and we are going to present those which I have just mentioned .
With regard to transport and its effect on demand , the Commission makes a very detailed analysis in the White Paper , of which I have mentioned some important aspects when I spoke about the proposal on biofuels which was approved last week .
The report also clearly recognises the international nature of the challenges relating to energy supply .
The increase in our dependency , not only on oil , but also on gas , makes it essential that we study the broader geopolitical repercussions of the current market situation .
The Commission intends to produce a report on this issue next year ; of course , we would like to use the opportunities offered by the Sixth research and development framework programme and the successor to the energy framework programme as instruments for supporting our strategy .
Ladies and gentlemen , the security of the energy supply is an inextricable element of a balanced social and economic development .
The debate on the Green Paper has highlighted , as never before , the delicate interrelationship between energy needs , environmental objectives and balanced economic development .
Many of the ideas presented in this report may be important elements in guaranteeing the security of our energy supply .
As I have explained , some of them have already been implemented , but they are not yet a defined strategy .
Europe needs to establish a stable long-term framework to guarantee the security of energy supply , which can deal with changes in international economic and environmental circumstances , and which creates a firm basis for the future role of Europe on the international stage .
Bearing this in mind , I would like to use the European Council in Barcelona next spring as a launch pad for a European strategy on energy supply , and you can rest assured that , in drawing up this strategy , the ideas contained in this report will be taken into account .
I hope to have further opportunities to debate this idea with you .
I would like to congratulate Mr Chichester once again on his wonderful report and the work he has done .
I also congratulate and thank Mrs Ayuso for her opinion on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , and I thank everybody who has spoken on this report and this debate .
I promise that we will continue working on it when the conclusions closing the general debate on the Green Paper produced by the Commission are finally presented .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Mr Turmes , on a point of order .
I asked the Commissioner two very specific questions and I am rather disappointed that she has not managed to give me an answer .
One question concerned possible scenarios and the other concerned round tables .
Sir , that may well be the case , but that is not a point of order .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Chemicals strategy
The next item on the agenda is the report ( A5-0356 / 2001 ) by Mrs Schörling on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the Commission White Paper on Strategy for a future Chemicals Policy [ COM ( 2001 ) 88 - C5-0258 / 2001 - 2001 / 2118 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the strategy for the future chemicals policy , which we are to discuss and adopt positions on in this debate , is extremely urgent and important because it will form the basis for a draft legislative text and for new framework legislation for the EU ' s chemicals policy .
Gratifyingly enough , the European Council decided , at the Gothenburg Summit in June , that a new chemicals policy would have to be introduced by 2004 at the latest and that this time limit would have to be respected .
The Commission must therefore table its draft legislation in the course of 2002 .
The debate on deficiencies in the current chemicals policy has been going on for quite some time .
Among the criticisms made is the fact that there has been a lack of information about the majority of the 100 000 existing chemicals , that the work has proceeded far too slowly and that the present policy has , in practice , failed to protect human health and the environment .
The Commission ' s survey of the legislation on existing substances shows that human beings and the environment are potentially exposed to a large number of chemical substances whose dangerous characteristics are not known .
We know that the human body contains measurable quantities of 350 chemicals .
We also know that the quantity of brominated flame retardants in breast milk has been increasing each year .
Even if PCB and DDT are now surrounded by tough restrictions , it remains the case that high quantities of these chemicals are still found in the fatty tissue of human beings and animals throughout the world , even in the Polar regions where these chemicals have not been produced at all .
New chemicals are added to the list , for example PFOS or perfluorooctane sulfonate , which does not bind in fatty tissue but , rather , in blood protein .
These chemicals are found in a number of products , for example shampoo .
Through the regulation adopted by the Council in order to overcome the deficiencies , detailed risk assessments should be carried out and recommendations made as to measures , etc. which might be taken .
We now know that there are only 140 chemicals on the ' priority list ' and that risk assessments have been completed in only eleven cases .
Even worse is the fact that not a single measure has been decided upon in order to reduce the risks , in spite of its having been shown that such measures are needed for the majority of these substances .
The Commission ' s White Paper , produced by the Environment and Enterprise Directorates-General , is trying to create a high degree of health and environmental protection , at the same time as maintaining the competitiveness of the European chemicals industry .
This is done , for example , by saying that chemicals policy must stimulate technical innovation and the development of safer chemicals .
In common with the majority of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I believe that the strategy should be focused on the protection of the environment and of human health and that the point of departure for the Commission ' s White Paper should be the debate in the Council and the growing unease about the fact that current chemicals policy cannot offer adequate protection of the environment and of human health .
Naturally , the economic and social aspects must be accorded a fair degree of importance as parts of a strategy for sustainable development .
If a majority of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy voted for a proposal that goes further than the Commission ' s and shows how an effective , open and consumer-friendly control of chemicals should look in the future , that is completely in line with , and receives strong political support from , the European Council Summit in June when the conclusions drawn by the 15 Member States were significantly stricter and more far-reaching than the Commission ' s proposal .
There is therefore an express political will to adopt the policy for a new chemicals strategy proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , above all when it comes to the scope of the REACH system .
As currently desired by the industry and the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , only CMR 1 and 2 and POPs are to be included which , in that case , cannot be said to be much in the way of a strategy for the future .
Even among industrial companies there is a desire to go further , for a competitive industry cannot be achieved through the unacceptable situation we have at present but only by producing safer chemicals and chemicals that protect human health and the environment .
I therefore believe that we should stick to the compromise achieved between the various political groups and to the proposal backed by the majority .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 11 October the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market adopted my opinion on the White Paper on Strategy for a future Chemicals Policy .
Harmonisation of chemicals policy across the EU is especially important , but the following three aspects are no less significant .
First , the practicability of the registration system . The amount of data to be collected means we must keep a sense of proportion in order that the system is not congested from the start .
The principle of proportionality is also to be applied to the required definition of use , so that the manufacturer of a product must be able to restrict the definition to actually intended purposes .
Secondly , a clear definition of the substitution principle .
The definition of this principle varies from one Member State to another , if they have one at all .
If it is to be laid down in Community law , it will have to be formulated in a consistent and unambiguous way .
Thirdly , appropriate protection for test data .
Insufficient account is taken of the need to guard commercial confidentiality .
At the same time , the security data document should be under copyright in order to protect the applicant against misuse of the data obtained .
Mrs Schörling 's report is to that extent unbalanced .
It takes too little account of the interests of medium-sized chemical businesses and of the industry as a whole , something that can lead to distortions in competition .
I therefore recommend adoption of the amendments resulting from the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which contribute to a better balance of the interests of all interested parties .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy . ( DE ) Mr President , the Commission 's White Paper has the ambitious intention of comprehensively modernising EU law on materials and products .
It is fundamentally right to unite , in legal terms , old and new materials and combine them with standardised registration and evaluation procedures for all materials over one tonne per annum in a strict time concept by 2012 .
This fundamental line taken by the White Paper strengthens sole responsibility for chemicals management in the industry and takes past experience with individual items of legislation as the basis for proposing a comprehensive reorientation .
Parliament 's Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has adopted this report by a large majority .
The consequences of the White Paper 's proposals for competitiveness , international trade , employment and medium-sized businesses had not previously been sufficiently examined , and further studies are still required .
In addition , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy expressed the view that legislation should be made to apply not to the attributes of materials but only to actual , scientifically verifiable risks .
Amounts are merely auxiliary quantities .
What is crucial is the amount of risk involved .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy therefore demands a two-stage screening process .
We expressly reject the following suggestions made by the rapporteur of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy : that sensitising substances be included in the approval procedure ; that approval be granted only for a limited period ; that the registration requirement should apply to all amounts under one tonne ; that the public be given unrestricted access to all data ; that there should be extensive prohibitions on materials ; that extensive data and evaluations to be submitted by the industry should be subject to additional examination by peer review ; and a number of other points .
A massive extension of the approval procedure would run quite counter to our common goal of reducing animal experiments .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy therefore takes a rational line , as demanded by both trades unions and employers in the European chemical industry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , chemical substances and products are a part of our daily life today .
To a large extent , we could not manage in our society without them .
For example , we use cleaning materials , cosmetics , plastics , medicines and much more besides , almost without thinking about it .
It is though , equally self-evident that we must know what effects the use of these substances and products has on our health and our environment , and so we need a practical and flexible system to monitor and evaluate existing substances and those materials that may be created in the future .
The Group of the European People 's Party / European Democrats takes the view that the White Paper must do away with the inadequacy of European chemical policy and give first priority to protecting human beings and the environment , as well as to sustainable development , without thereby jeopardising the competitiveness of the chemical industry and of SME 's in the global market .
The chemical industry is the third largest processing industry in Europe , and , according to the Commission 's figures , provides 4.7 million jobs in almost 40 000 firms , most of them small and medium-sized enterprises .
With this report , we are deciding on their future .
The Schörling report clearly focuses on the ecological dimension , and there are grounds for concern that the excessive demands , on the authorities as well , will paralyse the whole system and condemn it to failure from the outset .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party / European Democrats therefore cannot go along with the obligatory registration of materials of which less than one tonne is produced per annum ; the extension of the approval procedure ; the substitution and prohibition of substances only on the grounds of their characteristics ; an additional peer review process ; impracticable duties of notification and databases .
It is our opinion that only a balanced system can ensure the production of high-value products within the European Union , the safeguarding of jobs in it , and the improved protection of people and the environment .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission proposal on chemical policy .
It is long overdue .
For too long we have seen a gradual increase in allergenic reactions and even worse human health effects and at the same time a series of undesirable effects on the general environment .
If we adopt this report , we will be taking a first step towards asking a very important question : whether the 30 000 chemicals in general use today and the 100 000 components that they are used to make are in any way responsible for the things we see happening to human health and the world around us .
There is no doubt that we will have to make a very wide-ranging examination of the chemicals in use today and those that we might want to introduce into our environment in the future .
We will have to start considering issues and areas that we have not previously considered .
Socio-economic issues will be particularly important .
The full effects of changing our chemicals policy and strategy will be wide-ranging across the whole of Europe .
However , one would hope that , by taking a serious step forward tonight and starting to formulate a new structure for chemicals policy , we will arrive at a policy which is truly sustainable in the long term ; which brings genuine and positive benefits to society as a whole ; ends any negative impacts upon human health in the environment and stands as a shining example to other parts of the world as to how they should progress in future .
So tonight we are taking a step not just towards a cleaner and better European environment and a stronger and more prosperous chemical industry in Europe but also towards a healthier and better future for the whole world .
Mr President , I hope the Commissioner has caught up on her sleep after another succesful climate change conference .
It all seemed very easy when the Commissioner first put the plan to us .
She said that we use tens of thousands of chemicals in Europe .
They are essential to our way of life but there is very little public information about them and the real fear is that some of them may be causing long-term damage to the environment and human health .
So we must get the information , we must carry out the tests and , while keeping the good and maintaining a strong European chemicals industry , we must identify the bad and weed them out .
But that was a few months ago .
In the meantime all of us have learnt a great deal from the lobbyists about the difficulties of putting the policy into practice , as is well illustrated by the difficulty of identifying even the number of chemicals we are talking about .
Sometimes we hear of 30 000 , sometimes of 100 000 - quite a big difference .
At least the chemical industry says it is in favour and supports the Commission 's objectives , but it warns that the proposals are impractical , will increase bureaucracy and will be immensely costly .
The testing regime , it says , will cause paralysis of the whole system , especially if we extend the requirements .
Millions of animals will be killed painfully and perhaps unnecessarily in order to meet the testing requirements .
All these concerns need to be taken into account .
When the draft directive comes before us , I will be listening very carefully to industry 's complaints .
I recognise that in environmental matters we often hear industry crying wolf , but even so we must ensure that new requirements placed upon the companies are realistic and practical and that they enhance rather than damage a very important business .
This is only a White Paper .
In making recommendations , I support Mrs Schörling in asking the Commission to strengthen its environmental commitments , rather than relax them .
But in reality we will probably end up following the Council of Ministers in passing the buck back to the Commission , asking you to find a way around the obstacle course and giving an absolute guarantee that we will criticise you , whatever proposals you come up with .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report is a milestone for environmental and consumer protection , areas in which chemical policy to date has completely failed .
Hundreds of thousands of chemicals have been on the market for decades and we do not know in what quantities they are available and what risks they present .
It is as if the precautionary principle was trodden underfoot ; these chemicals were , without controls , tested on us and on the environment .
Amounts totalling under 1 000 tonnes per annum are not even notifiable , regardless of the dangers involved .
We have , then , for decades been playing Russian roulette with our health and with the environment .
We must put an end to this frightening , indeed irresponsible , situation as soon as possible .
If the industry does not put the data on the table within a specified period of time , these chemicals will no longer be allowed to be put on the market .
I hope the majority in this House will not allow itself to be made the lackey of the chemical industry , for the aggressive advertising of the German chemical industry in accusatory mode has clearly shown it to be too helpless and incapable of presenting valid arguments at a political level .
Complaints about shop closures , raised even by Members of this House , are a positive joke in view of the way the chemical industry , while increasing production in real terms by 25 % over the past ten years , brought about a reduction of 14 % in its workforce - without a chemical policy along the lines proposed by the White Paper , and we know all too well that the chemical industry only has the chance to offer long-term employment if it offers for sale products that do not harm the environment .
Only then can the chemical industry 's position be strengthened .
We will fight for the new chemical policy as the central point of European policy on the environment .
I believe this is about putting an end to decades of the ' ostrich with its head in the sand ' policy and implementing a chemical policy which is effective and has a future , a policy which puts health interests and the precautionary principle in first place .
Mr President , the EU ' s chemicals policy requires a thorough renovation and a single , new and comprehensive set of regulations .
Mrs Schörling ' s report from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , which we are now discussing , provides an excellent point of departure for a new chemicals policy .
With this report as a basis , the Commission should quickly be able to table proposals for a new directive .
The strength of the report is that it really puts the environment and public health first , and that must be our main task .
We also believe that industry has a lot to gain from strict regulations in as much as they encourage modern manufacturers , promote innovation and mean that old chemicals that have not been investigated are no longer promoted , as they are in fact at present .
The following points in the report are especially important to our group . Firstly , the proposal as to which chemicals are to be included under the requirements for registration , evaluation and authorisation should be made more comprehensive , as proposed .
Secondly , tough requirements should be made of chemicals , and of products containing chemicals , when these are imported .
Thirdly , everything must be done to minimise the number of animal experiments .
Fourthly , the substitution principle should be made a crucial component of chemicals policy .
Great importance should be attached to this so that safer alternatives will always be sought .
Fifthly , use of the most hazardous chemicals of all should be considerably restricted .
Our group is pleased with the committee ' s proposals .
We nonetheless have some minor amendments we believe could further strengthen the report .
We wish to emphasise the demand that it should be those departments of the Commission with responsibility for environmental protection that should approve new chemicals .
It is also a question of further tightening up the requirements made of the most hazardous chemicals of all .
In the committee , the rapporteur chose a very sound and open method of working which gave all the political groups the opportunity to compromise at an early stage , and I think that that is something positive .
Mr President , it is high time the chemicals strategy were reviewed , for only 11 of the 140 substances on the priority list have been assessed to date .
However , we should take care , in our enthusiasm , not to bite off more than we can chew .
Of course , I too would welcome a complete overhaul , but in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , the Commission has already warned that if the chemical substances policy is overloaded , the ship will sink .
That seems to me reason enough to remove some of the cargo from the ship .
In concrete terms , I mean that the substances below one tonne should remain outside the scope of the new policy for the time being .
Furthermore , the ship is reeling from side to side , swaying from a stringent policy on the one hand to the wish to take generous account of social and economic effects on the other .
This half-heartedness can be avoided by prioritising the most harmful substances .
In that way , the benefits for the environment and public health will be the greatest , and the social and economic effects on industry will automatically be contained .
We therefore no longer need to pull the wool over the eyes of industry by positing that the new policy will improve innovation and businesses ' competitive edge .
Finally , I am of the opinion that the generally recognised criteria for harmfulness , namely dosage and use , need to be maintained .
Mr President , the principles underlying the strategy for a future EU policy on chemical substances , namely to ensure a high level of protection for human health and the environment while ensuring the efficient functioning of the internal market and stimulating innovation and competitiveness in the chemical industry , receive my unqualified support .
However , I am struggling with the White Paper and also with Mrs Schörling ' s report , because I believe that the White Paper is not effective on a number of scores .
Although Mrs Schörling has worked hard , she too is complicating matters .
Let me therefore give a few examples of a system which , in my view , could function .
I know that the Commissioner too has been informed by the Dutch government about where industry initially refused point blank to adopt the new system entitled SOMS . However , industry and the government are now very happy with this system .
Allow me to give you a few examples and in doing so , expose a few weaknesses in the White Paper .
First of all , the industry ' s responsibility .
Lip service is being paid to this , for the White Paper is limited to risk assessment data and to providing information to downstream users .
Responsibility should really be placed with industry , and that means , therefore , that it must also be able to take risk-restricting measures off its own bat .
The entire system proposed by you , including heavy-handed interference from the powers that be , has proven that it does not work .
That is why a change is needed .
Secondly , the reach system should be modified .
In any case , a possibility for rapid screening must be introduced .
Rapid screening can also be done on the basis of a harmfulness profile , for the tonnage is not a determining factor .
My fellow MEPs and I have tried to include these provisions in amendments , and I hope that at least Amendments Nos 102 and 103 will be adopted accordingly .
Mr President , Europe needs a new strategy for dealing with the issues surrounding chemicals .
We are concerned here with the health of all of us , as well as with that of future generations .
The Commission ' s White Paper is a good point of departure for continued work on the strategy .
Mrs Schörling ' s report creates good conditions for bringing about necessary changes .
It is exceptionally important that Parliament adopt the report in such a form that it have the same thrust given to it by the rapporteur .
In the debate that took place while the report was coming to fruition , many objections expressed the fear that stricter regulations would put jobs and economic development at risk .
That is an anxiety which must , of course , be taken entirely seriously but , at the same time , it is necessary to raise one ' s sights and look beyond jobs and the economy .
Economic growth and access to jobs can never be invoked to prevent necessary requirements concerning the use of chemicals , work on achieving sustainable development and a high level of protection of public health and of employees .
What is the use of jobs and a sound economy if we poison our countryside and destroy what is essential for future generations ?
We have only one earth and we must take care of it .
We often say that we have the earth on loan from our children .
If we are to be able to hand it over in good condition , it is high time that we modified our way of life .
It is in a number of capacities that , as human beings , we are affected by the ways in which chemicals are used .
We are affected as employees and as consumers , and we are affected by persistent and bioaccumulative substances which can give rise to hypersensitivity , hormone changes , cancer etc .
The regulations which now have to be devised must , in the first place , be aimed at protecting individual people and not , as now , companies ' interest in making profits .
A society characterised by sustainable development also provides lasting employment , a sustainable living environment and people able to have faith in the future .
In that way , a better world can be created .
Mr President , Commissioner , there is no doubt that the European Union must , with the passing of time , equip itself with a new chemical policy .
The one we have at present is unsatisfactory .
There had been advance indications that there would be a vast array of tests , but the overall test result is unsatisfactory .
The Commission 's principled involvement is therefore to be welcomed even if we cannot support every aspect of its proposal .
There is , though , something of which I must warn you .
You , too , Commissioner , are on my mind today in particular .
When you introduced yourself to us , you announced that the experience of your own country led you to want to establish a new policy on chemicals in Europe .
My impression is that today , like Goethe 's Faust , you have conjured up something you cannot control .
What the rapporteur , Mrs Schörling , has presented is not a proposal about environmental policy .
It is a classic export of pollution , as many enterprises that are already being marginalised by the European Union will move themselves very quickly even nearer to its boundary and indeed also outside the EU in order to save themselves these unimaginable impositions .
This cannot be a modern environmental policy .
Rather , we must take this branch of industry with us in integrating high but feasible standards .
I believe that the aspects already mentioned - temporary approval , obligatory regulation under 1000 kilos , the principle of substitution and regulation of use as well - are an attempt at multiple protection , for every owner of a medium-sized business is being enslaved , because only industry can now meet the obligations which your proposal envisages .
I believe that this proposal should be sent back to the Commission , but certainly not to the rapporteur , whom I otherwise greatly respect and who , on this occasion , has thoroughly disappointed me .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , particularly my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party / European Democrats , let me beg you , as a matter of urgency : can we please turn it down a bit ?
This is about a White Paper , and I believe we should not be trying to engage in muscle contests , which are in one way or another politically motivated , on the basis of this White Paper .
At some future point we will be having the legislation , when we can do the real fine-tuning .
It is a pity that some of the earlier speakers are no longer here ; they will not hear what I have to say .
But perhaps someone will be able to tell them .
We have submitted amendments with the very same things in mind , which state that the duplication of work is to be avoided .
Amendment No 97 is to remove peer review in order to simplify the procedure .
We have already in committee brought in submissions on behalf of medium-sized businesses to the effect that there should be pilot projects , in which medium-sized businesses could deal with registration simply and effectively .
We want simple administrative regulations and have provided for the employees , who will be directly affected - the employees and the members of the European works councils - to be involved in the decision-making process .
These demands have been met , and I do not know why this all has to be played up and why the fate of the chemical industry has to be dependent on it .
We are dealing here with a White Paper , in which nothing is finally decided .
I cannot understand it .
We have also included a subparagraph relating to substitution principle , which states that substitutes , too , have to be subjected to complete life cycle analysis before they can be used .
So if we do not accept that and say , ' that is the way to do it ' then I do not know what we are supposed to do next .
And this one tonne : I simply cannot understand the argument that substances under one tonne are intrinsically less dangerous than substances over one tonne .
Even they should be registered .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the enormous amount of work she has done , but I do not congratulate her on the content of the report .
Mr Lange , I know we are talking about a White Paper , but this White Paper sketches a mere initial outline of our views , and when we in the PPE-DE express our opinions , we like our subsequent actions to be consistent with them .
It is no good saying one thing now and then doing the opposite when the time comes to legislate .
Let this be clear : this is a major sector of industry , the leading sector or one of the leading sectors in Europe .
This sector employs millions of people and includes tens of thousands of small businesses .
However , it is also a sector that is causing concern in society because there are 100 000 unknown chemicals being used , and it is therefore right that we should respond to this concern .
That is why we consider the Commission ' s proposal and the White Paper to be a good starting point , in that it gives us a procedure , a goal and targets to achieve .
We welcome the industry ' s willingness to bear the cost of this operation of sifting the good chemicals from the bad and providing information .
However , what we do not support is the unnecessary expansion , the complicated procedures of expansion , the extension to too vast a range of substances , the use of scientific grounds which are too vague as the basis for forming opinions , which is what the Schörling report advocates .
This , ladies and gentlemen , not only harms the chemical industry but also jeopardises the environmental objective we have set ourselves .
As the Romans used to say , ' The best is the enemy of the good ' .
Let us steer clear of such at times populist , at times fundamentalist attitudes , for our shared , common objective of protecting health and the environment in a sustainable economy against precisely an excess of , so to speak , overexhaustive initiatives , is in jeopardy .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to welcome the White Paper .
In reality , we are aware of the effects upon the environment and public health of only a very small proportion of the hundred thousand chemicals that exist .
I think it is a serious problem for the EU ' s environmental and public health policies that a combined strategy for chemicals policy was not implemented many years ago .
Now , however , it has arrived as something I very much welcome .
I should also like to thank Mrs Schörling for an outstanding report which tightens up the Commission ' s proposal in some crucial ways , ways which , in my opinion , could well be adopted without changes .
That is not , however , going to happen .
The industry , and others , have also made their influence felt here in Parliament , and the result we shall adopt tomorrow will not be quite as good as it might have been .
I should like to point out some of the substantial improvements contributed by Parliament .
We are having a very great deal of emphasis placed upon the precautionary and substitution principles .
This constitutes a reversal of the burden of proof .
With what is also the Commission ' s point of departure , we are now acquiring a stricter system - with , importantly in my view , some clear deadlines - for regulating , phasing out and authorising chemicals .
It is also important that we should have an extended list of hazardous substances that are to be phased out .
Finally , I should also like to highlight the issue of animal experiments .
I think that , in this area , a very important contribution has been made , including by the Liberals , to getting the issue of restricting animal experiments onto the agenda . That is something I am very pleased to be able to support , including in the vote tomorrow .
There are many substantial advances which ought to be included in the forthcoming legislation , and I shall therefore merely ask the Commissioner , finally , when the Commission ' s proposal for joint legislation is to be tabled ?
I understood it was to have been early next year , but it would be splendid if we could have a fairly clear date made known in this House today .
Mr President , I too appreciate the work of the rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on a genuinely advanced strategy .
Parliament is thereby making a major contribution , applying the approach of sustainable development in all its inseparable dimensions , environmental , social and economic , to the chemical industry .
In this report , protecting the environment and safeguarding human health go hand in hand and it is intended to maintain the competitiveness of the chemical industry through incentives to support innovation and facilitate the gradual replacement of the most hazardous substances .
Other improvements can be included tomorrow if we adopt the amendments tabled by Mr Lange and other Members , benefiting smaller business , in particular .
This is a prevention strategy , then , and not just a strategy of acting in retrospect , when the damage has already been done , but it is also a strict , rigorous strategy .
That is why the reference to environmental responsibility must be accorded due importance . This is a principle which must also be recognised as important in those countries in which safeguarding health and safety in the workplace and protecting the environment are not always given due consideration .
I refer to the recent decision which failed to condemn the Porto Marghera petrochemical plant and let the directors of Montedison Enimont get off scot-free , even though they were responsible for the death of 157 workers and the disastrous pollution of the Venice lagoon and the surrounding land , a decision against which the Italian government should appeal .
Mr President , we need to be clear that chemicals can be good for you .
You only have to look around this chamber at the carpets , chairs , desks , paint , steel and glass to see how much we depend on them .
However they can also be bad for you .
Some insecticides , flame retardants and even hair sprays can be a danger and we need to be wary of them .
Chemicals can certainly present a risk if they are mishandled and they can need regulation .
Sometimes they need to be phased out or banned .
However , I fear this report goes too far too fast and so , in some respects , does the White Paper .
I know it is only the White Paper stage , but we need to look carefully at some of the potential costs , said to be some EUR 8bn to European industry .
A massive cost to animals has been referred to .
The BUAV estimates 2 123 animals per high production volume chemical test .
We are told that 12.8 million would be at risk if one were testing on 30 000 substances and the report goes up to 100 000 .
Of course not all those would need animal tests , but a substantial number would .
One other example of how this report overreacts : paragraph 38 sweeps up all CMR category 3 substances and designates them of very high concern .
Just take one example from one industry , the raw materials for flexible foam .
The finished product is in no way a hazard and provides comfort and safety for consumers in products from furniture to car dashboards .
That is an industry employing 360 000 people , 96 % of them in small- and medium-sized firms .
They could be at risk .
The aims of the White Paper are right : we want to improve knowledge about chemicals and we want a safer world .
We should prioritise areas for action .
That means rigorous management of risk , without damaging unnecessarily the many small- and medium-sized firms that make up the chemical industry which has its risks but also brings jobs , benefits and safety for our citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are apparently all in agreement , for I notice that even the PPE-DE believes that the current chemical policy is characterised by a lack of substance , too much bureaucracy , powerlessness to acquire knowledge about all substances and also the incapacity to take measures .
That is why support for the White Paper is so important , but even more so , support for the improvements which are being proposed in the Schörling report .
Pressure from the chemical industry has been enormous , particularly in the last few days .
Apparently , it does not lack the necessary financial resources to set up big campaigns and to portray a large majority of this Parliament as a bunch of eco-fundamentalists .
But I believe that the outcome of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy was balanced and that it therefore deserves every backing tomorrow .
I should like to mention a few essential points .
I am of the opinion that , in the long term , all substances will need to be registered , but that in the medium- and short-term , priorities will need to be set ; the latter , however , not simply on the basis of production volumes .
Smaller volumes too must also be granted sufficient attention , and the starting point should really be the intrinsic characteristics of a substance .
As Mr Bernd Lange stated a moment ago , the substitution principle is essential .
If a less dangerous substance is available and tested , what logical reasons do we then have not to use it , other than perhaps financial considerations ?
A second essential element is that we must be able to ban substances of high concern , such as persistent and bioaccumulative substances and endocrine disrupters , unless they are essential from a social point of view and no alternatives are available .
We should then be able to authorise them under strict licensing .
Last but not least , maximum consumer information must be provided via clear labelling , but also via publicly accessible databases and information on the substances .
Mr President , I too voted in favour of the Langen report in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and believe I was right to do so .
On the other hand , I also understand how our colleagues in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy put a different emphasis on things .
That , too , I consider understandable , for otherwise we would not need both committees and could do everything in one .
I also take the view that it is only this tension between the various committees that makes it possible for something sensible to emerge at the end of the day .
I will be quite frank in saying that I have a number of difficulties with the Schörling report .
The main one is perhaps that I believe substances should be evaluated not only according to the danger they may present , but also according to their characteristics .
In this sense , they are not simply capable of being substituted for each other , at least not all of them .
There are substances that are dangerous , but which are useful in certain chemical processes .
Secondly , I believe that whether or not a substance is dangerous has to be founded on scientific statements .
It must be verifiable .
I am always very dubious about suspicions of danger or risk .
Being very subjective , these can be understood but not verified .
The vast number of testers required leads me to ask where they all are .
Safety does not increase in line with the amount of hyphenation or the number of regulations , but is increased by actual testing .
So we will have to look into that .
And one more little observation : which substances are actually necessary to society ?
How does one ascertain something like that ?
Who ascertains something like that ?
I still need some clarification on that point , but I am happy to listen .
I would , by the way , like to remind the President that , this evening , we are discussing over EUR 800 billion in turnover , 400 billion of it in energy and 400 billion in chemistry .
That is a hell of a lot for two and a half hours .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank the European Parliament for the report on the Commission ' s White Paper on a future chemicals policy .
I really do hope that it will be adopted tomorrow .
It is incredibly important that we should take this step towards a new , better and more effective chemicals policy .
I want to say a special thank-you to Mrs Schörling , who has put a great deal of work into her role as rapporteur .
I also want to thank all those who have taken part in the debate , because it has been an important discussion in which important points of view have emerged .
The White Paper presents the Commission ' s proposal for a new chemicals strategy .
The modes of procedure presented in the White Paper are well balanced , and I believe they involve a step forwards in the direction of sustainable development .
The debate in this House has perhaps shown that we have succeeded reasonably well in finding a balance between different views , even though there is scope for improvements .
The background is as follows . Chemical production has increased almost explosively , from 1 million tonnes in 1930 to 400 million tonnes per year today .
We wish to maintain a high level of protection for the environment and human health , but we also need to try to make use of the advantages presented by chemicals .
We all know that there are chemicals in practically all the products we encounter every day .
It would be unrealistic to believe that , with a wave of the hand , we could get rid of all chemicals or that there could be a chemical-free modern society .
However , we must balance these requirements .
Anyone who examined what is now the European Union ' s 20 year-old system of supervision would see clearly that it is not effective enough by a long chalk .
I would maintain that the system makes , for example , an artificial or arbitrary distinction between old and new chemicals .
Chemicals have many extremely important advantages for society .
Thanks to medicines and pharmaceutical products , it is possible to combat illnesses and suffering .
It is probably the case that a majority of the products forming part of our modern life-style today are manufactured from plastic or contain chemicals of some kind .
The chemicals industry is one of Europe ' s largest manufacturing industries , employing 1.7 million people .
Between three and four million jobs depend upon it .
Ninety-six per cent of all companies are small and medium-sized , and they account for approximately 23 per cent of chemicals production .
We are all of us exposed to chemicals on a daily basis .
We have tried to look into whether this situation can be described in figures .
Calculated , for example , in tonnes , each and every one of us probably comes into contact with several tonnes of chemicals in our daily life .
That should also mean that we are exposed to several tens of thousands of chemicals .
More and more reports are coming in concerning health problems , allergies and asthma assumed to be connected with chemicals .
As has already been mentioned , research results show that the human body can contain at least 350 synthetic chemicals which , in the natural course of things , ought not to be there .
There are persistent and bioaccumulative chemicals , and these are now to be found in placentas , foetuses and new-born children , to which they are transferred .
These chemicals are the first things a child ingests .
Chemicals are found in the depths of the sea and in the Arctic , where they have never once been used .
Hormone-changing substances can affect our reproduction and our nervous systems .
That is a fact .
The procedures governing the present EU legislation have been rightly criticised for being too slow and unwieldy .
Even though we have made some progress within the EU when it comes to evaluating the risks and restricting and controlling the use of hazardous chemicals , there is still an incredible amount to do .
At present , it is the authorities who have to demonstrate that a chemical is unsafe .
That obviously has to change .
As in the case of all other products , responsibility for ensuring that products released onto the market are safe must lie with producers , manufacturers and users at later stages in the manufacturing chain . That , basically , is what EU legislation will amount to .
Can you think of any other product about whose content we do not even have basic information or for which responsibility is entirely assumed by the authorities ?
That is a basic error in the system .
What we now have to do is find a suitable balance between , on the one hand , the chemicals ' advantages and , on the other hand , the unacceptable risks they involve for human health and the environment .
At the same time , we naturally want to ensure that the internal market is able to function and that the European chemicals industry , which is the world ' s largest , can maintain its competitiveness .
In order better to be able to assess the consequences of different ways of implementing the proposals in the White Paper , we have set up an inquiry which will look more closely into the costs .
The Commission proposes that a ' REACH system ' be set up to cover both existing substances , many of which have been on the market for at least 20 years but have never been properly tested , and new substances released onto the market after 1981 .
The industry must be given incentives to gather data and , if need be , test the substances , preferably without using animal experiments .
We must help one another ensure that animal experiments are restricted .
An integrated policy is needed in order to do this .
None of us , I trust , would happily see full-scale experiments carried out on living human beings , animals or the countryside involving chemicals whose contents we do not know enough about .
There is , in actual fact , no denying that that is what happens at present , because we do not know enough about the chemicals that are released .
Pragmatic decisions are required in this area , together with a sensible application of the precautionary principle to chemicals policy .
If there are reasons for suspecting that a substance has damaging effects on health or the environment and if our scientific and technical knowledge is not sufficient to provide a clear appreciation of the risks , we must take no chances and restrict or prohibit the use of the substance until such time as we know more .
The absolute top priority is to fill the gaps in our knowledge of the risks involved in the 30 000 ' existing substances ' that are produced or imported in quantities greater than that of one tonne per manufacturer per year .
The proposed new system includes a special arrangement for substances that give cause for special concern , or what are known as CMR substances .
These are substances that are carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to reproduction .
They must be authorised before they are allowed to be used , and companies must show that they can be used safely on condition that risk management measures are taken .
It should then be possible to authorise such safe use with reference to the cost and income analyses supplied by the companies .
In this way , the burden of proof will be redistributed , and the risk assessment will be focused on those areas of use for which the companies have sought authorisation .
In this way , approximately 1 500 substances , that is to say 5 per cent of all substances , will be covered by this authorisation procedure .
The system will promote innovation , and that will lead to the most hazardous substances being replaced .
I note that , in its draft report , Parliament proposes that several categories of substance be added to the authorisation procedure .
I can appreciate its wanting to do that , but I believe that , as matters stand , it would be inappropriate to accord the system too much scope .
We must be pragmatic to start with , so that we do not relapse into having an unmanageable system .
If we overload the system , a large number of resources will be employed in managing a very small portion of all those substances that need to be investigated .
We have limited resources , and we must establish priorities and decide how we are to use our resources in the most effective ways .
Parliament ' s draft report also says that the proposed EU system must cover chemicals produced in quantities of less than one tonne in the form of substances or preparations that occur in products .
On the part of the Commission , I want most definitely to recommend a limit of one tonne so that it is possible to use the resources of the industry and of the authorities in the most effective way possible .
If we want to get the proposal through , we must concentrate on what is most hazardous .
There is no doubt a misunderstanding here .
This limit does not apply to the most hazardous substances which , in each and every case , must go through the authorisation procedure .
The very fact that the limit is set at one tonne does not mean that chemicals produced in smaller quantities escape monitoring .
The industry is still obliged to carry out a risk assessment of the chemicals and to provide safety information to users in the form of marking and Safety Data Sheets .
It is the responsibility of the Member States to ensure that these provisions are complied with .
The industry must be able , upon request , to supply information to the authorities .
The Commission has now set up a number of technical working parties with experts from the Member States , industry , non-governmental organisations and the Commission .
The result of their deliberations is expected in February 2002 , and it will constitute one of the most important contributions to the draft legislation on the part of the Commission .
It is difficult to prophesy when the Commission will be able to table its proposals .
If everything goes smoothly , I believe that we can aim for April or May 2002 , but the objective is , no matter what , to submit the proposals to Parliament and the Council before the summer of 2002 .
Finally , I want to say a few words about the debate which I know is taking place and which is perhaps being conducted most eagerly in Germany and the United Kingdom .
What matters is that the European chemicals industry should remain competitive , but we are doing nothing that is not also being done in the United States , Canada and Japan within the framework of the OECD .
Roughly the same measures are also being taken by our competitor countries and in the world around us , where precisely the same problems are being experienced as in Europe .
If the desire is for the European chemicals industry to hold its own , sustainable development must be worked for .
It must be possible to guarantee that what is produced is safe for use in terms of human health and the environment and that it corresponds to the requirements of consumers .
We have tabled a balanced proposal which takes account of the needs of industry but which also states that what is most important is to bring about a high level of protection for human health and the environment .
I think the best answer that can be given is to say that there is no need to be anxious .
This proposal will lead to innovation in the chemicals sphere .
We can defend our European chemicals industry through the safe use of chemicals in the future .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Pricing policies for enhancing the sustainability of water resources
The next item on the agenda is the Report ( A5-0341 / 2001 ) by Mrs Flemming on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the Commission communication to the Council [ COM ( 2000 ) 477 - C5-0634 / 2000 - 2000 / 2298 ( COS ) ] , the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on pricing policies for enhancing the sustainability of water resources .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing here not with a legislative procedure , nor with a White or Green Paper , but exclusively with the implementation of Article 9 of the framework directive on water , which very precisely indicates how the costs of water services are to be covered .
By 2010 at the latest , the Member States have to ensure that their policy on water charges offers appropriate incentives for users to use water resources efficiently , and that it takes into account the social , ecological and economic effects of covering the costs and the geographical and climatic conditions of the region in question .
I have therefore attempted to make it clear in my report that the exploitability of our water resources must be maintained , for future generations as well , that we must keep to proven ways of keeping water pure and providing the population with clean drinking water , but that we may also look into new ways of doing this .
In doing this , universal supply and drainage , high environmental standards , quality of provision and affordable prices must all be safeguarded .
It should be possible to introduce business instruments and involve private enterprise , but also achieve proportionate optimisation of the operational structures involved in providing water supplies .
I myself say an emphatic ' No ' to the deregulation of water supply and drainage , but I say ' Yes ' to every country being able to use its water in the way that the people want .
I say ' Yes ' to solidarity in water use within Europe , but this must not be invoked to force any Member State to make its water available to another Member State without charge .
On the subject of the many amendments that have been proposed , I would just like to say briefly one thing : It is marvellous to repeat things that are important , and also to repeat them over and over again .
It is also very difficult to speak against things that are right and important , especially if they have long been part of legislation and of a directive , such as the water framework directive .
But the question arises of how suitable it is to proceed in this way .
Since we are today only drawing up guidelines rather than legislating , I would say : so what ?
One amendment really hurts me - the one which , as it were , condemns a certain Member State because of a project which really is purely an internal matter for that State and the environmental effects of which have not yet been assessed and in respect of which , as and when European Union funds are actually granted , the laws of the European Union will of course have to be abided by .
If I may establish a disagreeable precedent , I would be very happy if this amendment were perhaps to be voted down .
I found the Commission document very good .
I also think it a good thing that Parliament , in contrast to the practice in many Member States , can also be heard on the subject of a law 's implementing regulation .
I would like to hope that the Commission and the Council will find their efforts supported by Parliament 's opinion .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate both the committee responsible and Mrs Flemming for the work they have done .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development welcomes the communication from the Commission .
A suitable pricing policy for irrigation water will play a fundamental role in encouraging more efficient and sustainable use of water in agriculture , its largest consumer , and will free up resources for other uses , thereby reducing environmental pressures .
The analysis of the pricing of irrigation water is complex , due to the wide range of agricultural uses in the European Union and also regional differences in the need and availability of water for agricultural usage .
Water is , essentially , the very backbone of the agricultural community in the Mediterranean regions .
Without water , nothing grows , apart from the controversial almond trees .
The pricing policy should be heterogeneous , taking into account the ' polluter pays ' principle , as well as the social , environmental , economic , geographical and climatic variations in regions that no doubt will be the most affected by this pricing policy .
The financial , environmental and resource costs of irrigation farming require differential treatment if gradual-recovery objectives are to be achieved .
For this reason , the introduction of this policy should be progressive , transparent and must be adapted to local requirements .
In this way , information to irrigation farmers and the adaptation and optimisation of infrastructures and irrigation techniques should be applied in parallel so that farmers can accept this policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , in its current form the CAP does not help to achieve the objectives set out in the framework directive , which means we must seek coherence between these two policies in order to guarantee the protection of European agriculture ' s functional model .
Today , in Europe , water is a factor for cohesion between countries .
The revision of Agenda 2000 on the development of agri-environmental measures should include the objectives of water policies .
This will require the revision of certain types of aid , the application of eco-conditionality and the recognition of the right to adequate compensation for more vulnerable farmers , such as those who work on family holdings , with the aim of promoting the sustainable use of water and an integrated rural development .
Mr President , the price of water is a factor that has an undeniable effect on its consumption . However , the subject should be broached with appropriate caution , so as not to give rise to counter-productive effects of an economic and environmental nature .
The great disparity in the application of criteria in this area should be taken into account , as well as the barriers that can exist in Member States , both of a legal nature and with regard to acquired rights and customs , that can be difficult to amend , particularly in the short term .
On this subject , it is interesting to note that there are certain crops that contribute to the survival of a habitat and fauna that , without these crops , would disappear .
There are also industries today that , after using a certain quantity of water , return it to its source in the same or even in a better state than before they used it .
In principle , it does not seem a good idea to place a burden on this type of activity .
If time permitted , I could continue to give examples of economic activities , both agricultural and industrial , that , far from posing a threat to our water resources , are clearly beneficial to the environment .
Lastly , Mr President , financial resources gained from water-pricing policies should be used to improve infrastructures , which would prevent water loss in transport , for example , and would ensure better and increased access to this resource .
Paying for the amount of water we consume is , indeed , a key element , but only one of the many measures that should lead to a more rational use of this vital resource in all Member States .
I believe , Mr President , that this important issue of water distribution can be relatively easily solved if we have the good will and solidarity of EU governments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , water is a commodity to which every human being should have access , but it is also a scarce resource whose efficient use by all is becoming increasingly crucial .
Pricing policy is one way , therefore , in addition to the other instruments included in the framework directive on water , in which we can move closer to this objective .
It is important , therefore , that a price should be put on water and that this price reflects , as accurately as possible , its cost to the environment , the cost of supply and the cost of resources used .
It is equally important that a water pricing policy should take account of the social function of water , and of the need to consider climatic , geographical and regional aspects when the terms of such a policy are fixed .
It is possible , and , I would even say crucial , to make efficient and environmentally-aware water management compatible in all Member States with respect for the form of water resource management that each Member State feels is best suited to its needs .
The European Parliament should , therefore , support all the methods proposed in the communication aimed at achieving a more efficient use of water , and acknowledge that an appropriate pricing system is an important instrument in achieving this .
However , we should strongly reject any proposal for intervention in a Member State ' s water resource management policy .
Firstly , because this goes entirely beyond the remit of the communication , and secondly , because it goes against the spirit and the letter of the framework directive .
We should not forget , when talking about costs and their recovery , about the terms in which this concept is fixed in the framework directive , in which establishing a pricing system that involves the maximum recovery of costs is advocated , leaving the criteria to each Member State , and with regard to the aspects that have already been mentioned - also in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for the concrete fixing of prices in each case .
When we talk about the integrated recovery of costs , therefore , this recovery should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of the framework directive , which is the only legislation in force on this matter in the European Union .
Mr President , water is the Number One food .
I therefore consider constant use of water and protection of water resources to be indispensable .
One means by which this may be achieved is , as required by the water framework directive , a price for water that covers costs , comprising the environmental costs and the cost of infrastructure and of treatment .
Incentives are necessary for water to be continuously used .
Careful use of water is encouraged by having a basic price for basic services and increasing prices for use over and above that .
The basic price must also take social aspects into account , for access to water must be possible for the less well off in society .
One important area in which there is a need for action is that of agriculture .
The reduction of water subsidies in agriculture and the careful use of water resources will only be achieved by promoting rural development and finding new sources of income for farmers .
Water polluters must also be called to account , which means that the ' polluter pays ' principle applies .
Every water consumer in Europe should additionally receive a statement of how much water he has used and how the price he pays for his water is made up .
I see it as an important question , how much of a market we permit and whether private commitment conflicts with public and regionally-organised water supply and careful use of water .
I believe that cooperation between public and private undertakings using private know-how and capital is an option when it comes to making the best use of water resources from an ecological and economic point of view , without regional supply zones being given up .
So here I am not talking about deregulation and competition at any price , but about ensuring efficient and environmentally friendly water supply .
Mr President , Mrs Flemming 's report builds on the existing water framework directive .
My group is happy to support it .
If water resources are to be used sustainably , the price of water to users must reflect both the costs of delivery and the costs of subsequent treatment .
But when we vote tomorrow , a great deal of attention will be focused on just one aspect of the report , the Spanish hydrological scheme to build 120 dams and transfer vast quantities of water from one river basin to another .
I am not sure that a report about general principles should single out any one Member State for criticism but , having listened over the past few weeks to both sides of the debate , my personal view is that this scheme seems to be the antithesis of the approach laid down in Mrs Flemming 's report .
The Commissioner has made very clear in the past her personal opposition to the use of EU structural funds to support projects which are damaging to the environment .
So I hope she will watching closely when the Spanish Government comes to the Commission seeking billions of pounds in structural fund support for a project which seems to me to directly contravene the principles if not the letter of the water framework directive , one of the Commission 's greatest achievements .
I expect the Commission to make it absolutely clear that environmental impact studies must be independent and must consider the entire scheme , not just individual proposals .
This Spanish scheme is set to become a test case of whether the Commission 's commitments toward environmental sustainability are matched by a determination to stand up to pressure from vested interests and the governments of Member States .
I hope that the Commissioner will do her best to make sure that her colleagues pass that test .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mrs Fleming on her excellent report , which is better than the Lienemann report on the water framework directive .
The Flemming report deals with water prices and , as Chris Davids has already stated , particularly relates to one very controversial issue , Paragraph 28 , in which concern is expressed about the plan by the Aznar government to tap a vast quantity of the northern Spanish river , the Ebro , and to transport this water 1 000 km to southern Spain to cater partly for the tourist industry and partly for agriculture .
This plan is detrimental to hundreds of nature reserves in Spain and will also adversely affect the natural habitat of the brown bear and Iberian wolf in the Pyrenees .
This gigantic plan will cost EUR 22 billion and Spain wants Europe to contribute EUR 7 billion .
Spain should learn that water is a precious commodity and that clean water comes at a price . That is why hotels and farmers use it sparingly .
This is standard practice in northern Europe .
It is also striking that the Portuguese government - Portugal is , after all , also on the Iberian Peninsula , does pursue a sound water price policy .
Under pressure from the Aznar government , a new Amendment No 6 has been tabled by Messrs Flemming , Cox and Davis , precisely to delete reference to this Spanish plan .
Does Pat Cox ' application for presidency have anything to do with this by any chance ?
How else can it be explained that the liberal group is now all of a sudden adopting a different position from that which it adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Fellow Members , I urge you to vote against Amendment No 6 to the Flemming report and to vote for the original paragraph .
Mr President , as my fellow Members have stated , water is a limited natural resource that citizens have a fundamental right to access and use .
We cannot , therefore , support the amendments that talk of water as being a commodity or those which talk about the private management of water .
And we will be voting against these amendments .
However , I do believe that the rational use of water is an absolute necessity , as stated in Mrs Flemming ' s report , and also a moral responsibility for Europeans with regard to those populations that have an enormous water deficit .
Article 9 of the framework directive which , as the Commissioner knows very well , required a great deal of time and discussion time to complete , provides for the recovery of costs .
The same directive , however , and the report by Mrs Flemming , as other speakers have mentioned , state that different regional , social and climatological situations should be taken into account , which leads on to the need to adopt water-saving measures in order to prevent leaks from water production and distribution systems , and to ensure the maximum re-usage of purified water , as well as the improvement of irrigation techniques .
In order to achieve this , the public , and those who work in the three sectors affected : domestic , agricultural and industrial , need to be informed .
The quality and purity of water must also be improved .
Commissioner , there is still a high level of nitrates in water and this should be addressed , as we have always said in the European Parliament .
I would like to finish , Mr President , by saying that it is hardly surprising that , in the context in which we are speaking , there should be clear opposition to the Spanish National Hydrological Plan , approved , it is true , by a majority in the Spanish Parliament , for it is based principally on the use of reservoirs and the transfer of water in rivers such as the Ebro that could have a disastrous effect on an ecosystem that is unique in Europe .
Furthermore , the planned reservoirs are located in Special Protection Areas .
For this reason , it must be said , Commissioner , that , without wishing to condemn my own country in particular , we must pay more attention to how European funds are used .
Mr President , water is not a commodity and the right to water remains a fundamental one .
On the other hand , the Member States must set a number of objectives for themselves to ensure the proper management of water .
In this context , a comparison between States could lead to the use of best practices .
States must , however , maintain control over pricing and regulation .
A community pricing system would create many problems .
How can we reconcile the interests of the countries of the north with those of the south ?
As for regulation , the local water committees , for example , the main consultative and administrative bodies in France , should not be undermined .
Similarly , it makes sense for water policy to take account of specific geographical and regional characteristics .
Water needs differ according to the type of agricultural production , soil quality and climate .
Like the Commission , the rapporteur questions the application of the ' polluter-pays ' principle to the agricultural sector .
This pricing policy would lead to a substantial increase in price per cubic metre , an additional cost that would be added to the cost of animal welfare .
Changing crop-growing techniques would put farmers in a risky and insecure situation .
Regulating water in too dramatic a way would penalise farming , which has already made huge efforts towards making refunds .
Farming is in crisis and will have to stretch itself even further to comply with the rules of the WTO , which is now meeting in Doha .
Instead , preserving the multifunctional character of our farming , which contributes to land-use planning and to managing the environment , will enable us to achieve better water quality .
Legislating now would be a mistake .
Let us wait for the CAP reforms before we adopt a global approach to the issue of water , listening to and consulting all parties involved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the communication from the Commission shows that they are giving thought to how to put into practice the requirements of the water framework directive , and Mrs Flemming 's report makes valuable additional suggestions .
Average household water consumption varies , per person per day , between 120 litres in Belgium and 213 litres in Italy .
Germany , with DM 7.72 per cubic metre for the supply of drinking water and for wastewater drainage , is , with Denmark , far and away at the top of the world league , but , as regards consumption , is third from the bottom .
Adequate high-quality water supply and appropriate drainage are part , of course , of services of general interest in the broadest sense , such as we have been discussing this morning .
We must not , though , make the mistake of lumping deregulation and privatisation together .
Privatisation can , in conjunction with other means , be perfectly adequate in achieving the objectives set by Article 9 of the water framework directive .
I would , though , at this point , like - in the context of the discussion on the subject-matter for the new Inter-Governmental Conference - to give a clear reminder of the topic of the demarcation of competencies .
We should not be making the sensitive area of water supply and drainage even more unstable while this issue has not been satisfactorily resolved .
The various aspects of water and the price paid for it are among the most politically sensitive issues in some Member States , not only the southern ones , but also for Ireland and Austria , for example .
I would wish to emphatically warn against mentioning or even attacking individual Member States .
This applies all the more in view of the attempt , for example in item 28 for obvious reasons of party politics , to realise demands at a European level which would not be feasible in terms of domestic policy .
Additionally in this case , the issues addressed are , then , only very marginally concerned , if at all , with the subject of the report .
We would be creating a precedent with unforeseeable consequences , and I urge the adoption of Amendments Nos 3 and 6 , for otherwise we would have to vote against an otherwise very good report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the purpose of this report was to propose a text describing the effects of water pricing on consumption .
Some Members , however , found the temptation to include proposals on the prospects for privatisation in this sector too strong to resist .
To my mind , privatisation is often the first step towards liberalisation . Some of us in this House support the idea that water must not become a commodity like any other and must instead be given special consideration and above all remain the property of everyone , in present and future generations .
Public authorities must remain in control of the distribution and treatment of water , even if we accept the idea of delegating services to private companies for set periods and under precisely defined conditions .
Above all , if we wish to involve Europe ' s citizens in these issues and to ensure that our policy does not simply result in higher bills , let us work on informing and communicating with the public on this crucial matter .
We must win over as many people as possible to our concerns if we are to directly encourage individuals to reduce their water consumption .
Mr President , the report works on the basic assumption that the easily-accessible fresh water reserves have been largely opened up , that long-term water use and savings can be achieved by using economic leverage , and that this would promote the responsible use of water .
This requirement can only be met on a world-wide basis .
I do not see implementation of the report 's objectives on pricing as the high road that we should be taking .
Affordable prices are often saddled with negative associations .
The cost of clean water depends on the right investments , on technical skill and on better success than hitherto in allocating tasks in accordance with the ' polluter pays ' principle .
The Member States are free to come to their own decisions .
It will be difficult to keep to the timetable .
Mr President , as has been said , this debate is directly related to the debate we held before the entry into force of the European Parliament and Council Directive establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy .
The report before us captures the spirit of the directive and applies it directly to the issue of the cost to be paid , by all users , although maybe not in equal amounts , for using water for economic purposes .
However , the report also , rightly , and here I congratulate the rapporteur , stipulates that access to water at a proportionate or reduced cost , according to need , is a human right .
Therefore , any pricing policy must be based , above all , on a realistic examination of the social and other conditions in which the commodity of water is to be used , but also on a user education campaign that raises awareness and particularly focuses on water saving measures .
In order to provide a service which best responds to the different situations , it would be appropriate to incorporate the principle of subsidiarity so that each State makes its own decisions and each region sets its own levels and parameters .
The general line taken by this report could be described as preventing wastage and assisting the less economically developed areas , and our thoughts therefore turn immediately to the matter of the agricultural world , which , as some of the Members have pointed out , must certainly not be too casually confused with the general issue .
The basic principle is , in fact , that all the users should , in any case , contribute to paying for the commodity of water but in different proportions .
However , priority scales also need to be established on the basis of first social and then economic requirements .
The most direct comparison is with the CAP , which is intended to encourage and propose development measures which , as well as being suitable for the area concerned , are also compatible with the level of water resources available .
Where there is no water available at all , Mr President , I feel that this needs to be taken into account , especially in the pricing policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the report ' s assertion that water is not a commodity , but rather a heritage that must be protected , defended and treated as such , and that access to water is an inalienable human right .
As socialists , we do not share the idea that water is an economic commodity , which excludes its social and cultural character , and we think that the protection and defence of water should not be guided by the rules of the market economy .
With regard to the amendment on the Spanish National Hydrological Plan that , according to Mrs Flemming , we should withdraw , both my colleagues and myself , who presented it , are not going to withdraw it .
We think that it is reasonable , that it criticises an EU country ' s hydrological plan that is unsustainable from the economic , social and environmental points of view , and that it clearly contradicts the European Union ' s Sustainable Development Strategy .
For this reason , we are not going to withdraw the amendment .
We hope that other Members will vote for it and we trust that this will be the case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I want to thank the European Parliament for the resolution on the Commission communication on pricing policies for enhancing the sustainability of water resources .
I want especially to thank Mrs Flemming who took on the task of rapporteur for this very sensitive issue .
The communication must be seen in conjunction with the launch of the new water policy in Europe - the water framework directive , adopted last year .
The aim of the communication is to establish guiding principles to support the implementation of the article on water pricing , that is to say Article 9 of the directive .
The European Parliament ' s draft opinion covers all the relevant issues affecting water pricing , from the covering of environmental costs to transparency and consumer participation .
Moreover , emphasis is given to areas in which more research and analysis are required in order to ensure that future water pricing policy also embraces environmental , economic and social aspects .
Part of this analysis will naturally be carried out in conjunction with the drawing up of management plans for river basin areas in accordance with the water framework directive .
The views of the European Parliament will form the basis for future work at EU level aimed at implementing a more sustainable pricing policy .
In this connection , allow me also to say something about what is happening in connection with the common strategy agreed by the Member States and the Commission to facilitate the implementation of the water framework directive .
Working parties , including a working party on economic issues , have already been set up .
These working parties are to develop implementation guidelines .
The European Parliament will be kept informed about the future development of water pricing issues at EU level .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Packaging and packaging waste
The next item on the agenda is the Report ( A5-0323 / 2001 ) by Mrs Corbey on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on implementation of Directive 94 / 62 / EC [ 2000 / 2319 ( INI ) ] of 20 December 1994 of the European Parliament and the Council on packaging and packaging waste .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the waste mounting is still growing .
Packaging only plays a minor , albeit visible , role in the environmental problem and is a source of irritation to many people .
Packaging could be used as an example of a fresh approach to environmental problems .
We must make sustainable development viable .
We can adopt all the sound ideas from the sixth environmental action programme and apply these to the packaging policy .
Fortunately , we are not starting from scratch .
We have had a packaging directive since 1994 , which we can use as a basis to work from .
The packaging directive has a dual purpose : to reduce the harmful environmental impact of packaging to a minimum and to guarantee the functioning of the internal market .
It is important for Parliament to consider how the directive operates in practice , for we must learn from experience .
Compliance with legislation is important , but the effectiveness of the legislation is at least as important .
In the field of compliance , there is good news and bad news .
The good news is that nearly all Member States have implemented the directive well .
Most objectives have been fulfilled , and Greece recently became the last Member State to inform the Commission of its measures and the results it had achieved .
The Member States all did it their own way : Germany by means of the green dot system , the Netherlands by means of the voluntary agreements , etc .
However , there is also bad news , and I should like to mention four points .
Firstly , the volume of packaging waste is still on the increase .
Prevention of excessive packaging was an express objective , although it is not further specified in the directive .
Only in four countries has the volume of packaging materials diminished .
We clearly need to be more ambitious in this respect .
Secondly , the proportion of plastic in waste is growing .
The directive prescribes a very modest target for plastic : at least 15 % must be recycled .
But even this minimum target has only been achieved by four countries , namely Germany , Austria , Belgium and Sweden .
More than 50 % of all products are wrapped in plastic .
As it is difficult to recycle plastic , something must be done about this .
Thirdly , reliable and comparable data is lacking .
The Member States all have their own way of collating data and it is unclear , for example , whether plastic waste that is exported is also included in the figures .
Political decisions must be based on sound data , and the directive must be adapted accordingly .
To finish off , I should like to mention one major point : it is , in fact , unclear what the environmental effect is of all the collection , sorting , recycling and re-use .
We think it is positive , and that is probably the case , but a sound assessment of environmental effects is required in order to continue to motivate consumers to separate their waste .
Furthermore , the effect on the internal market , this directive ' s second pillar , is equally vague .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is clearly time for a change .
We need better reporting , better definitions and in addition to this , I would suggest a threefold approach .
First of all , we must devote more attention to recycling .
The targets must be raised considerably and we must encourage the use of recycled materials .
Special attention must be given to plastic .
To date , plastic has had no positive residual value .
In order to make the collecting and sorting of plastic profitable nevertheless , a levy is required , and I would ask the Commission once again to quickly present the revised proposal now .
Secondly , I would ask the Commission to promote re-use .
For that purpose , situations must be identified where re-use is useful from an environmental point of view .
That is connected with transport distances and the materials .
Thirdly , we must accord prevention a far more prominent role .
For that purpose , I suggest making the manufacturers responsible .
On the basis of a lifecycle analysis , manufacturers must demonstrate that they have chosen the best possible packaging for their product from an environmental point of view .
The question is , of course , how this can be measured .
The emission of CO2 , the use of natural ancillary resources , harmful substances and residual waste must definitely form part of the equation .
By adopting this approach , environmental costs can be charged on as part of the product , and that is the direction in which we need to be heading .
We must define clearer environmental parameters within which the market can go about its business and manufacturers can make choices .
Manufacturer responsibility must be further detailed and the Commission must now take the stakeholders dialogue seriously .
The interested parties from each sector , not only from industry but also consumers and representatives of environmental organisations , must be invited .
This can lead to a refreshing approach which can be incorporated in clear guiding principles .
In addition to the three above-mentioned points , fellow MEPs have added a number of useful suggestions : clear responsibility not only for products but also for retailers ; paying attention to the role of local councils and of consumers ; and paying attention to planning and transport packaging .
I welcome these suggestions with open arms .
The long-overdue revision of the packaging directive is an opportunity to demonstrate that the internal market can be reconciled with the environment , and we must not let this opportunity slip .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by acknowledging the great work done by Mrs Corbey in drawing up this report .
It is clear that in this particular case we are dealing with a directive whose implementation has been very complicated in the majority of Member States , given that the fine-tuning of the mechanisms needed to meet the objectives of the directive is in itself a very complicated issue .
It is one thing to issue a piece of legislation , because everything holds up on paper , and a completely different thing to put it into practice .
I thank the rapporteur for the commitments we have been able to make and I regret that we could not agree on certain points , which are by no means trivial ones .
Firstly I would like to make it patently clear that this should have been a report on the implementation of the directive on packaging , but it has turned into a report that is trying to tell the Commission the direction it should be taking with regard to the revision of the directive in question .
It is a clear example of the temptation that we frequently give into in this Parliament , which is to forget that it is the Commission that holds the legislative initiative .
We in the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats propose the following : Firstly , that the objectives for the prevention and reduction of packaging waste should not be binding , nor should they be classified by material , in order that competitiveness is maintained between them .
For we should not forget that the legal basis of this directive is the environment and also the internal market .
We think , however , that these objectives should be linked to the quantity of the product that is packaged and put on the market .
Secondly : the responsibility for the prevention and removal of packaging and packaging waste must be shared between producers , packaging companies , retailers and consumers , and not only the producer , as the draft report proposes .
Thirdly : Life Cycle Analysis is a very useful method from an environmental point of view , that should be taken into account , but it cannot be proposed as the standard norm to ensure that the requirements of Annex II are being met .
These standard norms should be issued by the European Committee for Standardisation and this body , in turn , should continue working in this direction .
Fourthly , we are against introducing any other new standard apart from the so-called ' green dot ' , already in use in most countries .
Lastly , we propose that the recitals alluding to the situation in specific Member States in 1998 with regard to compliance with the objectives of the directive be removed , for at this time the directive was in the process of being transposed , and the data , and I quote directly from recital B , " are not meaningful for the purpose of assessing the real degree to which the directive 's objectives have been met " .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mrs Corbey for addressing these issues and writing this own-initiative report .
We really need to discuss packaging .
I nonetheless think - and I say this following 30 years ' experience of environmental issues and environmental debate - that , as usual , we have an incredible talent for running after problems and battening upon them .
To discuss packaging solely from the perspective of waste , as we are doing now and have always done , is completely wrong .
I address the Commissioner with responsibility for environmental issues directly and appeal to her to allow us to discuss the whole chain .
We have to discuss logistics , transport and the packaging that eventually becomes waste .
Above all , the amount of consumer packaging must and can be reduced .
You and I come from the same country , and we know that experiments led to a 30 per cent reduction in the quantity of material in consumer packaging over approximately three years .
It is possible .
I might perhaps be allowed to appeal for the forthcoming White Paper on Integrated Product Policy to address the whole of the logistical chain , something which did not feature in the Green Paper .
That would be a merciful answer to our prayers .
Mr President , my group very much supports the report by Mrs Corbey and the compromise amendments , which improve the text .
We also have some amendments of our own which we would urge Members of Parliament to support , particularly as the directive makes it more difficult for Member States with more progressive policies to go ahead in a more environmentally friendly way .
There should be nothing to prevent Member States from making progress .
I received a briefing from my own Department of the Environment in Ireland today , bemoaning the fact that it was going to be very difficult for Ireland .
That is only because Ireland has done nothing about the waste problem or about packaging .
In two other amendments we look to the Commission to present a proposal which takes proper account of the role of packaging throughout the logistics chain .
It should also be putting forward proposals on prevention and reduction . That is where the problem really lies .
We need to reduce and prevent the amount of packaging first of all , not look at what we are going to do with it afterwards , particularly the amount that goes into landfill .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Corbey , thank you for the work you have put in on this report .
I would very much like to start by asking you , Commissioner , why you have brought before Parliament a report on the implementation of the packaging directive when the revision of the Packaging Regulations is already before us .
I would very much like to know if there is a strategy for this , whether you need more time for a new debate on strategy and whether you are in the process of moving over from a product policy to a materials policy .
As I now observe , that is a vain labour of love , as you are now applying yourself to other things .
You are right , Mrs Corbey , to say that packaging waste is increasing , and so it is entirely right and proper for us to concern ourselves with these Packaging Regulations and with those to be enacted in the future .
I simply think that we must first discuss what has actually been done by the Member States .
Were the old Packaging Regulations from the Nineties right , or did we make mistakes ?
Did we rightly see how things would turn out today ?
Is there not a multitude of loopholes ?
As you mentioned , databases are largely lacking .
Has transposition into national law really taken place punctually and in the way we intend , and is the hierarchy envisaged by the Packaging Regulations actually as flexible as we need it to be in the future ?
I do not believe so .
Yet we must , now that the Commission has imposed on us this report on implementation , concentrate on these important matters .
It is unfortunately not our present task to consider what quotas have to be set for landfill dumping , recycling , and so on .
Let me make clear that I regret that .
There are a lot of other points I would like to make . Having lost the first minutes , though , I shall admit defeat and carry on debating in the next round .
Can you please briefly repeat the question you have just put ?
Commissioner , I would like to know why you are presenting us with a report on the implementation of the Packaging Regulations , because we all know well enough that the revised Packaging Regulations have already arrived .
My question is whether this is to do with a new strategy .
Is it the case that you want in future to leave product policy behind and turn your attention to the torrents of refuse ?
Mr President , these oversight reports by Parliament are very important because we need not only to examine new legislation but to look back to see what has happened to the legislation we have adopted . Mrs Corbey is quite right to name names .
The Member States were supposed to bring into force the laws , regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with the packaging directive before 30 June 1996 .
That did not happen .
Two things should flow from the findings Mrs Corbey has put before us .
Firstly , we must ask whether the original directive , as Mr Florenz has said , was defective or whether ministers were not honest with themselves about what they could achieve when they adopted it .
The answer is probably a combination of the two .
Secondly , we should ask why the Commission did not act more quickly than it has to investigate why the directive was struggling to gain universal compliance .
I regret that Mrs Corbey did not focus on these questions .
Individual countries have had very different experiences as each has put a recovery system in place .
My own evidence from the United Kingdom is that our system has been too bureaucratic . One businessman in Cornwall complained to me that he had to employ a graduate specifically to keep a track of his firm 's obligations under the directive .
What lessons are there from our experience which could underpin the revision of the directive , or at least a revision of the way that Member States are applying it ?
The Commission is wrong if it proposes higher targets for recycling .
This is the easy way out , but the wrong way .
Such targets cannot take account of the considerable variations and circumstances between Member States , so we will end up with an even bigger range of results than we have now , creating trade barriers and distorting competition .
If we are to get EU environmental law that really makes a difference , we must , within much broader targets , allow Member States to adopt solutions best suited to their respective local environments and economies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , allow me to accord due recognition to Mrs Corbey as rapporteur .
I would thank her for her work on this own-initiative report including a resolution on implementation of Directive 94 / 62 / EC on packaging and packaging waste .
The report addresses relevant issues and will be of great importance when the Commission goes on to prepare the revision of the directive .
We have also noted that the European Parliament would like to carry out a more extensive review of the issues affecting packaging waste .
I think this is necessary , but things must be done in the right order .
We have now committed ourselves to tabling before long a proposal for revision of the existing proposal and for new targets .
This , moreover , is something we are going to do .
I anticipate the Commission ' s being able , before the end of the year , to take a decision on the promised revision of the Directive on Packaging and Packaging Waste .
After that , we must look to the longer term considerations addressed by Mrs Paulsen and Mrs Jackson .
We must therefore adopt several different approaches to this work .
The first revolves around an Integrated Product Policy .
I want to state in no uncertain terms that we have specifically emphasised life cycle analysis and this way of looking at the issues .
Certainly , further efforts are required and further proposals and ideas about how to proceed , but the life cycle analysis contains the whole mode of thinking and way of approaching this issue .
It is important that we continue to work with an Integrated Product Policy .
The second revolves around the thematic strategies we have promised under the Sixth Environmental Action Programme .
In the course of next year , there will be two such strategies which will be of great importance to our attitude towards these issues : recycling and use of resources .
In connection with these strategies , there will be the opportunity to review the whole of our policy in terms of looking at each individual waste stream .
Are we to continue to do this , and how are we to look at this issue in broad outline ?
It is important for us to take this major initiative , but we must do it in the right way and at the right time .
In my judgment , we must handle the problems via Integrated Product Policy and via the thematic strategies .
Before the end of the year , the promised revision of the specific targets for packaging and packaging waste will take place .
It is perfectly correct to point out that we need to review the whole of this issue in order to obtain a policy which will last for many years into the future and which will mean that we do not need to go chasing frantically after problems .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Insurance mediation
The next item on the agenda is the Report ( A5-0359 / 2001 ) by Mr Berenguer Fuster on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive [ COM ( 2000 ) 511 - C5-0484 / 2000 - 2000 / 0213 ( COD ) ] on insurance mediation .
Mr President , even at this unreasonably late hour , I am honoured to submit for your consideration the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on insurance mediation .
In my opinion it is a good proposal , on which the Commission should be congratulated .
Above all , it is a proposal that manages to find a balance between the various interests concerned .
In the area that it is intended to regulate , these interests include those of intermediaries , of insurance companies , and also , and this must not be forgotten , the interests of consumers , although these usually put less pressure on Members than the aforementioned interested parties .
All of these interests should be taken into account , and when I say that this proposal is a balanced one , I am referring to the fact that there is a balance between all of the various interests concerned .
Not to mention that the amendments tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs must aim to uphold this balance that the Commission has scrupulously maintained .
There are also other interests which are , in my opinion , less worthy of consideration .
I am talking about sectors whose main aim is to uphold the status they currently enjoy in their respective countries , which will be impossible to sustain when we attempt to produce a harmonisation standard .
If the aim of each country , or of each sector in each country , is that the forthcoming directive should not in any way affect the status quo , the only possible solution will , therefore , be not to have a harmonisation standard , or if it is required in an area such as this , that there should be no internal market in the specific sector in question .
This aspiration can disguise an attempt for the harmonisation standard to respond exclusively to the current model in a specific country ; or , put in more favourable terms , to suggest that Member States should not apply important parts of the directive .
Ladies and gentlemen , do you not think that these exceptions could render the harmonisation standard meaningless ?
Do you not realise that taking this route will cause problems for the internal market ?
The proposal for a directive included certain exceptions , and it is true that the report enlarges on some of these , but I think that these exceptions are within the bounds of what is reasonable .
The idea that those who sell insurance on behalf of travel agencies or veterinary surgeons have to be registered intermediaries should be excluded , for this falls within what is reasonable .
Even now , I firmly believe that the further extension of exceptions could end up in nullifying the effect of the directive or , to put it differently , could end up by limiting , to a certain extent , the creation of an internal market in insurance mediation .
I still insist , and please forgive me for doing so in this way , that the resultant report includes several special features that certain countries have to ease the adoption of the directive .
For example , amendments relating to the tied agent that were designed to find a solution to ease the adaptation of legislation in those countries in which there is currently no regulation in this field .
There are , evidently , other formulas , and one of these was the one set out in the Commission proposal , and another that consists of my personal viewpoint stated in my original report .
However , neither the original formula nor my original proposal would be completely satisfactory to a good number of my fellow Members , who hold different positions , which is why compromise amendments had to be tabled that , I think , should resolve the problem reasonably clearly .
I would like you to be aware , ladies and gentlemen , that the result that is being submitted for your consideration is the outcome of a compromise between different points of view that , when seen as a whole , are acceptable .
It is only for this reason and out of respect for this compromise that the Group of the Party of European Socialists has decided not to table any more amendments , with the exception of three that are simply of a technical nature , that aim to correct inconsistencies in the text .
Clear proof of this fact is the refusal to table any amendments such as those tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , that were subsequently defeated at committee stage and with which I personally agreed , because these are not only in line with the main points of my original proposal , but they also seek to provide better consumer protection , something with which I will always agree .
Mr President , I feel that , as Mr Berenguer Fuster said , the Commission proposal fills a large gap in the internal insurance market which has been created by the huge development in insurance and reinsurance transactions recently , particularly relating to the insurance of specific interests , and here I refer to the major industrial and commercial risks , while the market for private individuals and other smaller risks has been left rather to its own devices , resulting in a sort of free-for-all .
We know how sensitive insurance mediation is , and our directive concerns precisely the mediation aspect .
That is why we found the Commission ' s proposal both balanced and interesting , although possibly a little overcomplicated , which is why we have endeavoured to streamline it with a series of amendments - I am , of course speaking on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which has drafted its opinion - to make the sector which does not focus primarily on insurance rather more mobile and marketable .
There are , in fact , many entities , such as travel and tour agencies , whose main activity is not insurance but which do sell risk and life insurance as part of their business . Such transactions clearly lie outside and are not bound by the usual conventions of professionalism and honour , by the extremely stringent and far-reaching requirements , that is , which guarantee precisely that good faith and reliability and credibility that should be high priority in insurance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are four points I would like to address .
The first is that the insurance business is based on trust .
Trust has a dual basis : trust in the product on the one hand , and on the other , trust in the other party 's sales personnel and in their way of doing business .
It needs , then , to be said today that the absolute majority of all sales personnel and brokers do their work in a proper way ; otherwise the insurance business would not be flourishing and justifying the trust placed in it by its customers .
Secondly , I would like to thank all those who have worked on this report .
Thirdly , many States ' laws on insurance and banking already impose strict duties of consultation and information , which are binding also on brokers .
Insurers and credit institutions are subject to supervision and obligatory registration and to clear regulations on policy .
Quite independently of that , I share the directive 's desire to guarantee the creation of a high professional standard for insurance brokers , to establish a single register for cross-frontier operations and to secure a high level of protection for insurance enterprises .
Over and above what has already been said , Mr Radwan and I have tabled three amendments - Nos 57 , 58 , and 59 - in which we intend , firstly , to have it left to the Member States to decide whether to exempt insurance brokers dealing in commercial risks from the requirements of the directive ; secondly , to have the intermediary activity end with the conclusion of the contract , as is customary ; and thirdly , to make a clearer distinction between those who work as insurance brokers as their main occupation and those for whom this activity is incidental to another .
Mr President , the PPE-DE Group broadly welcomes this long-overdue overhaul of the original 1977 directive as part of the single market in financial services , which utilises the financial passport or single licence concept .
This involves minimal harmonisation , the setting of professional standards and consumer safeguards as well as mutual recognition between Member States , to enable brokers to enjoy freedom of establishment throughout the Union with rules to ensure prudential care for the good conduct of their business .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Berenguer Fuster , on his largely cooperative cross-party approach in committee , appropriate to a technical report which provides quality assurance to the consumer .
It is worth noting that approximately 95 % of European consumers use the services of insurance brokers and will be affected by this directive , along with 100 000 insurance practitioners in the Union .
The vast majority of areas of political difference were resolved in a series of compromise amendments , as well as those requirements due to the peculiar structure of the German industry .
I was delighted at the adoption of a large number of my own amendments , ranging from exemptions for the travel industry , to recognition of the role of the computer and the Internet and the future role of e-commerce for insurance , as well as safeguards for a three-yearly review of eligibility for registration , and protection for businesses located offshore outside the EU .
I hope this report will not increase the burden to intermediaries , in terms of cost or difficulty , or of conducting normal business practices , but will open up a competitive and transparent market throughout the 15 Union Member States , which ultimately , by providing volume and economy of scale , will provide real savings which will be handed down to the citizens of the Union .

Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Parliament for the efforts to complete its first reading of the proposal for a directive on insurance mediation .
I would like to thank in particular the rapporteur , Mr Berenguer , and also Mr Ferri , for the quality of their work which has resulted in the recommendation submitted to this plenary .
The proposal for a directive on insurance mediation , scheduled in the action plan for financial services , is a key text to achieve a true internal market in insurance , in particular as regards retail markets .
Insurance intermediaries play a fundamental role in the sale of insurance in the Community and their importance would increase with the emergence of more complex and sophisticated insurance products .
Although the internal market in insurance has been completed as regards insurance undertakings , especially concerning the prudential rules , insurance intermediaries continue to be confronted with several obstacles which prevent them from taking full advantage of the freedoms of the Treaty .
The proper functioning of the internal market is therefore hindered .
I am particularly pleased that Parliament agrees with the essential objectives of the Commission 's proposals .
It seeks to ensure that insurance intermediaries possess a high level of professional competence and that an intermediary , duly registered in his home Member State , may conduct his activities throughout the internal market .
The proposal also aims to guarantee the protection of customers by setting appropriate information requirements .
I now turn to the amendments submitted to the plenary session .
The Commission can accept the following amendments : Nos 1 , 4 , 5 , 8 , 9 , 17 , 28 , 30 , 37 and the second part of No 58 .
It can also accept either partially or in their spirit the following amendments : 3 , 7 , 11 , 21 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 29 , 32 , 44 and 51 .
Amendment Nos 15 and 16 may also be accepted in part .
The Commission is not , however , in a position to accept the other amendments tabled for the following reasons . Amendment Nos 2 , 10 , 13 , 14 , 46 , 47 , 49 , 52 and 57 aim to exclude from the scope of the proposal some activities such as those of travel agencies , veterinarians and persons acting on an occasional basis , and therefore these amendments cannot be accepted .
These exclusions would affect the sale of insurance products involving important risks and are therefore rejected .
The same reasons explain the non-acceptance of Amendment Nos 12 and 50 .
The Commission considers that the term " insurance intermediary " is defined in an appropriate manner .
The scope of the directive is well balanced .
Amendment Nos 15 and 16 are therefore not necessary since the definition covers all intermediation activities , including those carried out by electronic means .
The same applies to Amendment Nos 19 and 25 which relate to sub-agents and also to Amendment Nos 20 and 58 .
As regards the issue of " bancassurance " , all forms of " bancassurance " activities should fall within the scope of the proposal .
It is an increasingly important way of distributing insurance .
Amendment Nos 18 and 22 propose a definition of " bancassurance " activities which only takes account of one of the possible forms that " bancassurance " may take .
They are therefore rejected .
There are amendments relating to registration and professional requirements of insurance intermediaries .
Amendment Nos 31 and 56 would imply less strict rules to cover professional negligence of insurance intermediaries .
They would jeopardise the objective of ensuring an appropriate level of professional liability cover for insurance intermediaries in the internal market .
Amendment No 33 , 34 and 54 would affect the overall coherence of the proposal which is based on the principle of home country control .
Amendment No 35 and 36 concern complaint schemes and out-of-court redress mechanisms of the proposal .
Amendment No 35 is already implicit in the text of the proposal and is not necessary .
Amendment No 36 does not seem appropriate in the context of a directive since it contains a specific reference to a Commission recommendation which is not legally binding on the Member States .
Thirdly there are amendments referring to information requirements .
A key element of the Commission proposal is to ensure a high level of protection of consumers through the provision of appropriate information and advice .
Amendment Nos 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 55 , 60 and 61 would compromise considerably this objective .
Finally , Amendment Nos 6 , 45 and 48 which provide that non-registered persons excluded from the scope of the directive should comply with information requirements , would be extremely difficult for the Member States to implement in practice .
I am sorry to have talked so long about these amendments , but Parliament has a right to know what the Commission thinks .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
I have always had the childish ambition to have us finish at midnight .
Tonight we have missed it by only ten seconds .
( The sitting was closed at midnight . )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I have two observations with regard to the Minutes .
The first is the least important : on the first point , with regard to the votes on request for urgent procedure , the first point voted on was on the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
I was here and voted in favour , but this has not been recorded in the Minutes . I was here , and I spoke immediately afterwards .
I would now like to refer to the second point .
With regard to the Global Fund to fight HIV / AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria , yesterday morning a deadline for tabling amendments was set for 10.00 a.m. this morning , in order that the debate may be held tonight , probably at the last minute .
The political groups were working yesterday in order to be able to table amendments , and today I see in the Minutes that the item has been added to the agenda of Wednesday 28 November and that the deadline for tabling amendments has been set for Thursday 22 November .
I would like to point out , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , that we cannot work upon the text submitted by the Commission , that we were working on yesterday .
There is only one version available in one language , and , in addition to this , in this language there are different versions of the same text with various discrepancies between them .
Lastly , to give just one example , and I shall finish on this note , Mr President , it states that the Commission is proposing a single contribution of 120 million , yet it does not state whether these are euros , dollars , condoms or DDT .
I think that the Commission should provide a text that is correct , tell us which of the texts is the final version , and make this available in all of the official languages .
We will make sure your vote is recorded .
Regarding the question of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , the documents are not ready , as you correctly say .
That was the reason why it was put back to 28 November .
That will also give the committee some more time to deliberate on the matter and make sure that the text is correct .
That was the basis for the reasoning and you are quite right to raise it .
Mr President , as someone who has consistently called in this House for an early report from the presidency on the progress of our own staff reforms , can I be the first to welcome the fact that we received a letter from the President yesterday on this subject .
It was an undated letter but I assume it was issued yesterday .
However , I should like to register again my concern that we still need more information .
Mrs Fontaine says in her letter : " I believe the time has come to provide all Members with the fullest possible details " .
I am afraid this is not the " fullest possible details " , since half of it is a letter to Mr Prodi .
I should like you to ask the Bureau and the presidency to give us in this House , as soon as possible , a comparison of the proposed personnel reforms in this parliamentary institution with the reforms proposed in the Commission .
And bearing in mind that on 28 October the Commission adopted their new personnel strategy , can we please have an early debate in this House with Mr Kinnock about his reforms and with the presidency about their reforms , so that Members can be properly informed .
We must have a chance to debate this and to understand why the presidency of this House is proposing in one instance radically different changes to those proposed for the Commission .
I , along with many other colleagues , am concerned about that different approach .
Mr Harbour , your point is well made and well understood by the Bureau .
The House is sovereign at the end of the day .
I will certainly pass on your message in the strongest possible terms to the presidency , so that the matter can be resolved .
I am sure everybody is aware that there is an ongoing discussion within the Commission itself at the present time .
Until the overall situation is clarified Parliament cannot come to any firm conclusions itself .
I do not have the letter in front of me , but in it the President has pointed out that the Conference of Presidents and the Bureau were fairly unanimous in the point of view they have adopted .
Parliament is sovereign , as I have said , and the matter will be open for further discussion .
There is no doubt about that .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
European Research Area ( Multiannual Framework Programme 2002-2006 )
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports :
( A5-0376 / 2001 ) by Gérard Caudron , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the multiannual framework programme 2002-2006 of the European Community for research , technological development and demonstration activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research Area [ COM ( 2001 ) 94 - C5-0087 / 2001 - 2001 / 0053 ( COD ) ] ;
( A5-0355 / 2001 ) by Gérard Caudron , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the multiannual framework programme 2002-2006 of the European Atomic Energy Community ( EURATOM ) for research and training activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research Area [ COM ( 2001 ) 94 - C5-0171 / 2001 - 2001 / 0054 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before I begin my speech as general rapporteur for the Sixth Framework Programme on Research , I must first express my heartfelt gratitude to all those who have helped me in this difficult task .
As you know , this is an important programme . It has a provisional budget of EUR 17.5 billion , including Euratom .
I would like to thank the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies , the European Commission , Commissioner Busquin , Mr Westendorp , the Secretariat of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , the ITER Committee , the administrators of the different groups , my assistant Gaëlle Le Bouler , the shadow rapporteurs of the ITER Committee , the draftsmen of the opinion , the shadow draftsmen of the committees consulted and the group coordinators .
I think that I am now in a position to declare that together we have completed a truly remarkable task . I am sure you will all agree with me on this .
You will express your view when we vote . I am sure that the result will not be the same as the outcomes of the votes on the Fourth , and especially the Fifth Framework Programme on Research and Development .
I believe that the results of our work can largely be attributed to two guiding principles . Firstly , in my capacity as rapporteur I have always wanted to be the representative and spokesman for a broad majority in Parliament .
In addition , Commissioner Busquin was , from the start , willing to support the framework and the overall budget of the project .
In addition to this support , we have received many proposals for adjustment .
These have resulted from our wide-ranging consultation with the European research sector , European politicians and all the organisations and citizens with an interest in the European research sector .
I can personally list more than 250 meetings , talks and discussions on this project and this report since the beginning of 2001 .
Furthermore , I have tried to ensure transparency during work on this project . I have published all available information and views on the subject in real time on my website .
In recent months , this website has been visited more than 3 000 times per month , excluding the summer holiday period .
Clearly , all of us , myself included , have agreed to set up a genuine European Research Area and all the necessary structures , including the Joint Research Centre , on the basis of the Framework Programme on Research and Development .
We have agreed too that we need to act upon the idea of European added value , as proposed by the European Commission .
But , at the same time , we have all declared that we should take into consideration another aspect of added value : the added value of giving research a European dimension .
This supplements the accounting added value of the European Commission .
As I have already said , we should not allow there to be any perception or feelings of exclusion , and we should back researchers who believe that their work needs to be carried out at a European level .
All this translates into two new , secondary priorities . Firstly , there is the fight against major diseases .
This goes hand-in-hand with research on the human genome , with its anticipated results for health . Secondly , we need to consider terrestrial and maritime transport .
The objectives here are to improve links between different means of transport , and to improve flexibility , security , efficiency , and coherence . In this regard , the quality and improvement of the environment are important considerations .
So far as the functioning of the framework programme is concerned , there are proposals to ensure that there is a smooth transfer between the old instruments of the Fourth and Fifth Framework Programmes and the Commission ' s three new instruments . In addition , there is the fourth ' stairway of excellence ' instrument .
Further , all this translates into a compromise on the specific programmes involved .
The proposal is for a single programme with eight sub-programmes . This will increase coherence while providing sufficient scope for participation and adequate control .
There are also specific measures to improve professional life and mobility for researchers , while taking account of the requirement to strengthen the role of micro-enterprises and small and medium-sized businesses .
As regards the Euratom section , the majority of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy also agreed on the principles and the structure of the Commission ' s text , especially regarding the need to ensure security of energy supply , risk reduction , and the processing of nuclear waste .
Lastly , the majority of the Committee on Industry agreed on the importance of research on nuclear fusion . They also agreed on the need to construct an experimental reactor soon , and for it to be located in Europe if possible .
This is necessary so that we may have some chance of meeting our energy requirements in fifty years ' time .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament will today establish a firm and sound position after our first reading .
I am delighted that progress has not been hindered by what occurred on Monday evening . The situation where the adoption of my reports would have been dependent on the conclusions of the Temporary Committee on Human Genetics has been avoided .
By midday I hope that we will also reach agreement on ethical rules and on stem cell research on supernumerary embryos .
The vote today could also benefit the debate and votes to be held on the Fiori report during the November sitting in Brussels .
In this , we must be guided by common sense and tolerance and respect the views of others .
The result of the votes held by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on 16 and 22 October has already been noted by the ' Research ' Council of 30 October , judging by its final communiqué . A new ' Research ' Council will publish its common position next December .
I hope it will then be possible , through the codecision procedure , we will be able to reach a common decision by favouring informal discussions . I would not like to place a bet on our not needing to resort to conciliation .
We might or we might not .
However , I would like to reiterate this point : the sooner we finish our work in 2002 , the sooner partners working in the research sector will be able to prepare and so ensure the best possible transition to the Fifth Framework Programme .
Also , the sooner we finish our work , the sooner we will be able to develop international partnerships with candidate countries and associated countries , and pursue all our other international ventures .
I would like to finish where I began , by thanking all those involved in this splendid project . I call on the Commission and the Council to listen to us , and , more importantly , to ensure that they understand us .
Our demands are not unrealistic ; neither are we engaged in politics here .
They are proposals by European citizens , considered and debated at length .
We therefore call for them to be studied .
Further work will of course need to be undertaken when it comes to the final agreement , but for the moment we simply need to be free to define our own position .
I would like to conclude by reminding you of an objective set in January .
We set out to turn this work into an opportunity for a wide-ranging debate to strengthen the important link between science and society . We set out to convince people that , although science does not have all the answers , we cannot hope to tackle the world ' s greatest problems without science , research and researchers .
I hope that our work will have made a positive contribution in this regard . I also hope that it will provide the Commission and the Council with proposals from the European research sector which will form the basis of a Sixth Framework Programme on Research and Development for Europe in 2002 .
I really believe we should call it the Sixth Framework Programme .
The programme will be innovative , realistic , and effective .
It will be a firm foundation for the development of the European research sector , a sector we all support .
, draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , and also my gratitude for the debate he has stimulated .
He has really tried to make a reality of the wide-ranging citizens ' debate of which he speaks .
He has tried to involve many people , within and outside Parliament , and in research circles , in order to have an intelligent discussion here and prepare a good compromise .
From the point of view of the Committee on Budgets , I must say , I support the rapporteur , but I am being pulled in two directions , because I at the same time have to announce that my group has misgivings and will not vote in favour of this resolution in its entirety .
I am here , then , primarily playing my role as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
It has to be said on this point that the budget for this Sixth Research Framework Programme ranges between the right limits .
A slight increase was achieved , but at the same time the allocation was not exceeded , in other words the programme is , in budgetary terms , within proper and sensible limits .
I think we can achieve real European added value with this proposal .
We also had discussions with the Commission about possible simplification of the procedure , that also being one of our Committee 's concerns , so that approval might be granted more quickly .
The Commission has made good proposals on this point , and we are very confident that this speeding-up of procedures can be achieved in order that the partners in projects can access their funds more quickly .
At the same time , our side urged once more that proper account should be taken of the smaller project partners and that smaller projects should not fall by the wayside in a slimmed-down procedure , because it is in the sphere of the smaller projects that a lot of important work has been done .
There is one bitter pill for our group above all others to swallow , and that is the issue of renewable energies and the issue of the Euratom resources .
Speaking from my group 's point of view , I have to say that we have problems with the fact that renewable energies have not been developed as they should have been , and that too much has been approved , especially in the fusion field .
Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the Caudron report , I should like to offer the rapporteur our Committee ' s congratulations and thanks for the job he has done , which was not a simple one .
His report provides a balanced discussion of all the main arguments on which the European institutions should concentrate their attention as regards scientific research and the potential for technological and social development .
The Committee on Freedoms particularly stresses the need for the public promotion of research to be done with the greatest possible transparency and involvement of the citizens .
A European knowledge-based society , like the one the Union is proposing , requires not only huge-scale initiatives in literacy , including scientific literacy , for all the citizens but also an increasingly intense , active involvement of the citizens in decisions regarding the direction that investment in this field should take .
Non-specialist citizens , in other words , should not just enjoy or , as is often the case , suffer the results achieved by science , but should also join with the experts in deciding on the objectives that research should pursue .
We believe the validity of a European science policy should be measured especially on this criterion .
The Caudron report quite rightly addresses these aspects .
I believe the Caudron report also invokes the transparent and democratic nature of decisions on scientific research when , instead of invoking principles of natural law , which are , in fact , only held by certain authorities , it refers , in the case of the ethical problems of research , to charters of rights , the documents which have effectively been approved and sanctioned by our Institutions .
This means , for instance , in the field of stem cell research , respecting the feelings of a large number of European citizens by ruling out the production of stem cells for research , but allowing research to be conducted on those supernumerary cells that would otherwise be destroyed .
On this and other matters I believe we should go with the Caudron report .
Mr President , the European Commission is proposing an appropriation of EUR 17 billion , fully recognising the importance of research and technological innovation in Europe .
Unfortunately , research projects today often do not achieve the hoped-for success which would allow them to compete at an international level , and the European Union does not hold enough attraction to lure back the top researchers who have chosen to work abroad .

The new scheme should bring in some changes : firstly , concentrate financial aid on a restricted , specific number of priority subjects for Europe ; secondly , invite researchers to collaborate more closely ; and thirdly , increase the mobility of researchers by creating a working environment in Europe that is attractive to them .
These priorities form the framework for the 42 amendments tabled by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , many of which have been incorporated , for which I thank the rapporteur and the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , which is competent in this matter .
These amendments concern employment , health and safety at work , access to work for the disabled , small and medium-sized enterprises and European Community research centres .
With regard to employment , we have seen an amendment adopted which seeks to extend research to the development of operating systems and computer hardware in Europe in order to increase employment and stop us from being so heavily dependent on the United States and Japan in this area .
This is a key sector for the new economy and would entail considerable risks for the sake of economic and employment growth .
Then we asked for action in the field of health and safety at work , in order to encourage access for the socially excluded and disadvantaged , such as people with disabilities .
Research support for small and medium-sized enterprises has also been accepted with very favourable terms , it has gone up from 15 to 30 % , and the same may be said of support for JRCs , which are to receive EUR 725 million .
In conclusion , Mr President , I must move in favour of approval , since science and research are there to serve the people , for that right to life that no one is entitled to jeopardise .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has worked intensively on the research framework programme .
We have submitted many proposals on sustainable development , food safety and other subjects , which were , thankfully , generally adopted by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
We focused on medical research , as we believed that it was in this area that there was the greatest need for change to the Commission 's proposal .
The Commission 's suggestion that only biotechnology should be promoted in the health context is too narrow .
Other research fields , too , promise much for health and need to be supported .
I thank Mr Caudron , the rapporteur , for his commitment to this as well , and also the shadow rapporteurs , in particular Mr van Velzen , for whom this was also a matter for concern .
It is regrettable that the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy could not follow us as regards the ethical boundaries of medical research .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy spoke out clearly in favour of research and for the curing of illnesses , but also in favour of clear boundaries for the sake of human dignity .
In particular , our Committee demands the exclusion of exploitative research on human embryos from the research framework programme .
This ban is necessary not just because human life is involved , but also because we must counteract the danger of the female body being seen as raw material for industry .
Embryo research is not possible without women 's egg cells being made available , and the donation of egg cells puts a woman under great strain and at medical risk .
It is for this reason that many feminists , too , are opposed to exploitative embryo research .
As I have said , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy could not follow us down this road , and so , together with Mr Fiori , I have tabled an amendment that follows the line taken by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , which is also taken in the United States .
' Yes ' to stem cell research , but ' no ' to exploitative embryo research .
The Americans can be accused of many things , but not of being hostile to research .
I therefore ask for support for Amendment No 332 , tabled by Messrs Fiori , Liese and others .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Caudron for his report .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport welcomes it for a number of reasons .
It particularly welcomes the fact that the report deals with a number of matters which concern our committee . These include the technology and methods used to convert products and works into a digital format , the protection and development of our historic and cultural heritage .
We are also pleased that it deals with drug taking , as our committee is also responsible for youth and sports . Other areas of concern contained in the report include the history of Europe , distance learning and mobility for researchers .
I regret that digital cinema , the cinema of tomorrow , has disappeared from this list . It might have required specific research .
I hope that specific programmes will be able to make good this omission .
I would also like to say that I am delighted the life sciences have been recognised as a scientific subject and are not regarded simply as an instrument for other sciences .
The life sciences constitute a distinct discipline and the fact that the Sixth Framework Programme has recognised this is a great step forward .
Perhaps the first title of the seventh thematic area : ' Cultural and social research ' was the most appropriate .
I am sorry it has been changed to ' Citizens , democracy , social and political institutions ' .
I think the first title was better .
If we had used the title ' Cultural and social research ' , it might have been easier to include research on women , and not just research carried out by women , as in the paragraph ' Science and society ' .
Mr Caudron , I regret the fact that research ' on women ' and the thinking included in your intermediary reports were not retained in its final version .
I would like to finish on this point .
I have been involved in drawing up reports which have gradually transformed the notion of centres of excellence . The latter became the stairway of excellence .
We , the members of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , were very concerned that research should not be confined to an elite . Rather , when it comes to building the European Research Area , research should be shared amongst younger researchers , a range of relevant institutions , and universities .
I note that there have been adjustments here too .
I am glad that the paragraph ' Science and society ' has doubled . The matter of research ' by women ' is at the heart of this paragraph .
The Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities has an interest in this subject , but so does the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
Mr President , as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , I submitted a series of amendments which principally endeavoured to enshrine the principle of gender mainstreaming in the Sixth Research Framework Programme , which is in any case the largest programme , for which we are voting approximately EUR 17 billion .
Concentration on other topics has meant , as Mrs Fraisse has already explained , that there has been less research into gender issues and less emphasis upon opening science and research to the full range of people with the right potential .
In 1999 , 66 % of the research workers in the State sector and 72 % of those in higher education were men .
In only a few countries did the proportion of women exceed 40 % , and that was in Ireland and Greece .
Only in Portuguese higher education , with 53 % , was a balance achieved .
Women are particularly underrepresented , at 9 % , in academic teaching posts in Germany .
The highest levels were in Finland with 36 % .
It is therefore in the European interest and adds value if women are involved in research and teaching at every stage , from planning , via decision-making to project management , as well as in EU initiatives for prizes and competitions in all disciplines .
I had already demanded this in this House in connection with the McNally Report on women and science , and , in order to implement it , the Commission set up a Gender Unit , which now has some early successes to show .
Focused efforts have achieved a percentage of nearly 40 % of women involved in the EU 's research bodies and the same proportion receiving Marie Curie scholarships .
We must , then , build on the successes of the Fifth Research Framework Programme , one contribution to which might be the doubling of the budget in the ' Science and Society ' subdivision , and here , too , there is a need for research into gender issues .
One final remark : In my language , the entire draft has to be revised in gender-neutral language , because we are setting the course for the future , above all for young women scientists .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to address the rapporteur and congratulate him on the outcome , but also on the excellent working relationship .
You have found an innovative method , for which we are very grateful .
Needless to say , that also applies to the shadow rapporteurs , Messrs McNally , Piétrasanta and Plooij-van Gorsel .
We worked well together .
I should also like to extend a word of thanks to my own fellow MEPs who have invested a huge amount of energy in this dossier .
This is truly a joint outcome , and I therefore hope that the Commission , as well as the Council , is prepared to take this outcome seriously .
Indeed , we have developed a structure by means of which , within the restricted margins available to us , everything has become clearer .
More emphasis has been placed on bio-sciences ; a better link has been established between research on the human genome and related diseases ; far more attention has been devoted to a coherent package of industrial policy , information society , nanotechnoloy , as well as aviation and aerospace .
Additionally , food safety has been accorded considerably more attention .
Furthermore , unlike the Commission , we have given transport a much higher place in our list of priorities , alongside more attention for energy .
Agriculture is also more involved .
In my view , the package is looking better now all in all .
The budget is also of major importance in my opinion .
We have expressly adhered to our pledge to the Council that we would not increase the budget .
We have slightly shifted the priorities .
We would therefore make an urgent appeal to the Council to accept our budget now and not to start bargaining , for we will then have a war on our hands .
Next , we should be emphatically aware that although the EU ' s contribution to research in the Member States carried out by the national governments and industry is limited , it is still of fundamental importance .
If , specifically , the EU can play a complementary role , the added value will be significant .
Not for nothing did we include a fourth instrument to guarantee the smoothest possible transition between the Fifth and Sixth Framework Programme and to allow minor projects too to take place .
More than 15 % has been set aside for small- and medium-sized enterprises , and that too is one of our priorities .
The decentralisation of the Sixth Framework Programme is important , but it is just as important not to weigh down the newly integrated projects , centres of excellence , with an enormous amount of red tape .
That is why I believe our amendments are excellent .
One final point : we have struggled greatly with the ethical principles .
Indeed , on the one hand , it is important to create a framework within which research is to take place , but on the other hand , it is important , by means of further research , to create space for solutions to be found for existing illnesses with a genetic hereditary factor .
Our greatest challenge was to strike that balance , and I hope that we have succeeded in this .
Mr President , I thank the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , and Commissioner Busquin , who have both helped us to work efficiently , as have the shadow rapporteurs .
The Sixth Framework Programme is the first implementation of the European Research Area , which itself is a consequence of the Lisbon Summit and its wish for us to have a successful knowledge-based economy , because of the strong correlation between research and development and economic success - inadequate in most EU countries outside Scandinavia , I should say .
We welcome the emphasis on looking for European added value , not scattering the limited funds over the whole range of research carried out .
So I am glad that we are now targeting cutting-edge research , particularly in areas like nano-technology , which will be very significant in the future .
There are , however , some gaps in the proposals which we wish to see filled .
They include , of course , health , other than strictly post-genomic research , non-nuclear energy and land and water transport .
I come to international activities , because the research framework programme must look outside the EU as well .
It is essential that there is both earmarked money for international cooperative research - we suggest EUR 400 million - and mainstreaming across all the research , particularly on HIV / AIDS malaria and tuberculosis .
We must involve the countries that suffer from those scourges in the research .
The sums allocated in the Commissioner 's proposal for science and society were inadequate .
We propose to double the spending on science and society .
We do not think that having one specific programme with one management will lead to transparency and adequate monitoring .
I therefore hope that our suggestion will ensure that we are able to have both openness and good management of each individual part of the programmes .
Although we welcome networks of excellence and integrated projects , we must maintain more familiar mechanisms at the early stages .
We must at all costs avoid the creation of scientific cartels .
I am pleased with the new mission of the JRC .
I served on Mr Davignon 's panel and it is certainly consistent with the panel 's views .
As far as the Euratom section of the Sixth Framework Programme is concerned , I have very grave doubts as to whether the ITER project will be implemented and my personal view - this is not the view of the rapporteur - is that extra funding is not therefore needed .
It will be available in any case .
The framework programmes are one of the big success stories of the European Union .
Let us build on their past success .
Mr President , I would first like to thank Commissioner Busquin for the way these proposals were prepared , for listening to the views of others and for his excellent collaboration .
I would also like to extend my sincere thanks to Gérard Caudron . He listened attentively to all the political groups and to the shadow rapporteurs , and others .
We have worked very well together . I believe that he did everything he could have done .
Although there have been differences of opinion on some conclusions , the work was completed to a high standard .
My thanks also go to my fellow shadow rapporteurs .
In my opinion , this report on the Sixth Framework Programme on European Research is the big report of the moment , despite its faults .
It has European added value , it is innovative as the Commissioner wished , it has networks of excellence and integrated projects .
We have a lot to do .
We have also made significant progress on matters concerning young people , grants and women and preventing brain drains .
We cannot ignore all the innovative proposals in the Sixth Framework programme .
There are three issues of great concern to the Greens .
Firstly , the ethical questions .
We do not want the European Union to fund the modification of the human genetic inheritance and the creation of human embryos for therapeutic reasons .
We also want to see a ban on financing research using supernumerary human embryos and the stem cells of supernumerary embryos .
From what I have heard , I think all the political groups will reach a compromise on these points .
Secondly , we would like to see an assessment of the effects of new technologies , like electromagnetic radiation for example , on populations , on health and so on .
Thirdly , we would like to achieve a fairer balance between research on renewable energies and research on nuclear energy .
I would like to reiterate the sentiments of Eryl MacNally . We do not want to see an increase in the nuclear energy or the ITER project budgets .
That is very long term . We would however like research credits for renewable energy to be more on a par with those for nuclear energy .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I want to emphasise that I am not speaking on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
There are a good few of our members who have genuinely attended to this issue , who are on the way here to our debate today but who will not perhaps be in time for the vote .
I personally believe that we shall be adopting too many amendments .
If we examine research programmes and research issues , there is scarcely any research programme in the whole of Europe that is so driven by politicians .
That is in total contrast to , for example , the assessment made by Manuel Castells - yes , it is legitimate to call him a sociologist - together with the Finnish philosopher Pekka Himanen as to why Finland is successful as an information society .
In their perhaps otherwise rather vague book , they observe that our technology and innovation policy are successful because we have a complete and autonomous centre for technical development .
That is something which I think invites reflection .
In other contexts , it is usual to applaud Finnish innovation policy .
I think that a certain lesson can be drawn from this .
In addition , I want to emphasise an aspect of this proposal that particularly bothers me , namely that the social research proposed would certainly be allocated to the wrong place , under the Information Society DG .
Social research does not belong in that context .
I do not properly understand how this has happened .
We are also aware that interest in research issues has , to a very large extent , revolved around stem cell research .
Today , we can adopt a position on the Caudron proposal in peace and quiet .
I personally view the committee ' s proposal as being well balanced .
The committee ' s proposal also shows the modesty and respect that is required when we debate research issues .
I think that those who say that we should now concentrate first and foremost upon stem cells from adults are not showing the required modesty faced with this new area .
In the course of the work in the Temporary Committee on Human Genetics , I learned that we know extremely little .
We must adhere to the old principles and proceed further within the various frameworks .
Furthermore , I learned that the research projects for both forms of stem cells are dependent upon each other .
It must therefore be possible for them to be given the same priority .
That , I believe , is extremely important if we are to be able to move ahead as a successful society .
I hope that these comments are not too alarming , but that they lead to reflection on the part of all who are interested in our researchers ' really being able to carry out good research .
Mr President , the amount of EUR 17.5 billion of EU membership funds will be used in the next few years on scientific activities through the framework programme .
The size of this sum indicates how significant the matter in question now is .
Codecision procedure removes power from the Commission and brings it to Parliament .
In this matter it is particularly well-founded .
There are good grounds to support Mr Caudron ' s model on programme coordination and administration as well as informing and listening to Parliament in decision-making at levels more detailed than that of the framework programme .
The primary research areas selected by the Commission are well-founded as are also Parliament ' s complementary priorities , which are not all mere information technology and artificial intelligence .
The health of a human being depends on what he eats .
It is justified to use funds to research the whole of the food chain .
The new biotechnology involves the ethical foundations of all kinds of life , and therefore technology must also be complemented by results from human sciences .
Science must not be dependent on the ethics of big corporations , and that is why it must receive public funding .
When the health of the environment depends greatly on energy production , several adjustments made by Parliament endeavour to improve the research into new forms of energy .
It would be justified to direct more funds into the research of fusion energy than what the Commission is proposing .
There is need to build a new Tokamak for the joint use of all Member States and Switzerland , Canada , Japan and Russia .
When funding is cut , this important project is delayed , further delaying the opportunity to produce energy by fusion power , which even in the current circumstances is going to be postponed by as much as fifty years .
When the framework programme was drawn up , not enough attention was paid to the activities of the Joint Research Centre of the EU .
It will also use scientific resources .
During the coming five-year period its position within the research community of the EU and its Member States must be clarified ; research resources must not be wasted .
Mr President , I should like to express concern at the Commission emphasis on large integration projects , which would impact badly on small community-based enterprises as promoted within the framework of rural development programmes and research in the agricultural and associated food sector .
It is now clearly established that the EU-assisted programmes , such as Leader , have the potential to create sustainable employment in rural areas where more centralised programmes would have failed .
I do not have the time to concentrate on the need for ongoing research in the food sector and the potential of new technology in improving product diversification , quality and consumer satisfaction .
How soon can we expect a clear and definitive view on the potential or otherwise of genetic research as applied to practical farming ?
Delays in this area are leading to confusion on the part of consumers and may well be depriving European agriculture of the tools necessary for sustainability , quality and competitiveness .
What have we learned from the recent scares such as foot-and-mouth and BSE ?
Will we know what to do to avoid a repetition of the demoralising experience of a foot-and-mouth epidemic out of control ?
Finally , and not for the first time , I want to express my concern about research on human embryos .
This Parliament must exercise the most stringent controls in that area .
Mr President , the Caudron report is threatening to become problematic from a Christian-ethical point of view .
Controversial activities should not receive active support from the Union . Moreover , the community of values which , after all , the EU aspires to achieve , will definitely be at risk .
Intervening in life created by God is non-negotiable .
That must be the basic principle .
In this light , the funding of research activities on surplus embryos with Community money cannot be justified in any way .
Citizens would then be forced to contribute towards research which is punishable in a Member State such as Germany and which a number of national parliaments have declared themselves openly against .
Neighbouring countries of a Member State which apply less stringent rules find themselves facing a related dilemma .
A shift of European research to the relevant Member State undermines the effectiveness of the rules .
A situation should not , however , arise in which ethical differences are exploited as a competitive factor .
That could also lead to a brain drain .
In this respect , the establishment of one European Research Area will function as a catalyst . That is why I make a serious appeal to you to support my amendments .
They aim to prevent this .
Europe must commit to finding a solution to this pending cross-border issue .
Has the Commission looked into this ?
Finally , within the research framework of cross-border problems , it is not funding but cooperation which deserves a central role .
The funding of research into surplus embryos only complicates this cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I fundamentally welcome the Commission 's proposal for the Sixth Research Framework Programme , above all the Europe-wide coordination and the emphasis laid on basic research .
Two points cause me concern .
The first is that , when it comes to the definition of fundamental ethical principles , the mind of this House is divided between , on the one hand , banning embryo stem cell research outright and , on the other , permitting it .
Where the boundary lies between a mere heap of cells and a human life is something we all no doubt have to decide for ourselves .
It is a choice with far-reaching implications , one to be made on the basis of conscience .
I would remind you , though , that research on embryo stem cells is prohibited in several Member States , including Austria .
To use EU funds to finance research in one Member State which would be banned in another is unacceptable .
The second thing that concerns me is that research funds totalling EUR 1.2 billion are being made available within the framework of the Euratom programme , over two-thirds of which go to nuclear research .
Safety issues play only a subordinate role .
I consider increased research into non-nuclear energy sources to be imperative .
I regret that there is no reference to it in this report .
- ( EL ) Mr President , the European Union 's Sixth Framework Programme covers high-priority areas and areas of pioneering research from which we expect quantum leaps in science .
I should like to draw your attention to the pioneering area of research into the human genome .
This research is expected to have future applications in four areas of medicine : first , hereditary illnesses , secondly , the most common fatal illnesses , namely cancer , cardio-vascular and degenerative neural illnesses , thirdly , an understanding of the mechanics of various illnesses , which will lead to new , more efficient treatment and drugs and , fourthly , the prevention of disease .
New knowledge about human genetics will help us understand at which points genetic dynamics are vulnerable and open to environmental factors and pressure and the way in which we live , thereby allowing us to develop new strategies for the prevention , diagnosis and treatment of the illnesses which I have already mentioned .
Stem cell research may well have new applications in treating illnesses such as Parkinson 's disease , Alzheimer 's , leukaemia and many others .
However , the boundaries on research in these fields must be marked out if we are to avoid ethical problems .
This was the point of the amendment which I tabled together with Mr Nisticò and Mr Purvis .
This amendment will allow the pioneering research which I have described to progress while striking the balance needed in order to avoid ethical problems .
So we can look forward to the beneficial medical applications which this research promises .
I trust that the European Parliament will support the line being marked out and strike the right balance between progress and ethical considerations .
Mr President , I would like thank the rapporteur for his good method of preparation , in which he has been willing to take into account colleagues ' views .
Several of us Members have been concerned about the possibilities of SMEs to participate in the framework programme , because the Commission ' s original proposal does not make these opportunities concrete enough .
The Commission proposes so-called horizontal activities , in which it will be very difficult for small and medium-size enterprises to participate , at least at the initial stages .
Therefore it is necessary to make adjustments approved by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy to the direction that the already existing Craft programme arrangements will continue to take .
The same applies to preparation funds .
Enterprises have already become used to these measures , which have produced plenty of good results .
Why should a good arrangement be abolished ?
Amendment No 265 concerns this matter .
A share of 15 % funding from enterprises has been proposed .
Also this fact must be made concrete in the actual guideline funding schedules , when decisions on them are made at a later stage .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his hard work and for the many additions to the Commission 's proposals , particularly on health and disease and sustainable transport .
However , this was undermined in committee by what Mr Van Velzen has already referred to as the joint result .
The proposals on health and transport emerged very much weakened .
Our citizens will want to know why we want to spend more on space research than on sustainable transport .
It is not their priority .
On ethics in biotechnology , the proposals allow funding of research into the alteration of the germline of human beings .
This is unacceptable to mainstream science .
The Greens have tabled an amendment which is congruent with the position of most researchers in the field and this must be supported .
On stem cell research , the production of human embryos for research is unacceptable and it is very unacceptable to most of our citizens as well .
The Temporary Committee on Human Genetics has come to very useful conclusions here and its report should have been taken before this debate .
However , amendments have been tabled in line with its proposals and these must also be accepted by the House , otherwise we will be in deep conflict with our citizens .
As regards GMOs and plant genetics , the proposals that were adopted in committee would put genetically-modified foods on our table and will be forced on European consumers , quite contrary to what many want .
This is again a recipe for conflict and it was not in the Commission 's proposals .
Regarding energy , equivalent funding for renewables and nuclear is required .
We have allocated over EUR 1 billion for nuclear funding and nowhere near the equivalent for renewable energy .
This again is completely unacceptable to our citizens .
If we are not to have a conflict between science and society , which the Commissioner has been very anxious to avoid , we will need to revise these priorities .
For example , proposals on fusion are out of date .
Both the US and Japan are pulling out of this research completely .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have before us a very important text , the substance of which will not only determine how the European Union applies research in practice , it will also set the tone for guidelines and practices in all the Member States , especially those like Greece which , to all intents and purposes , have no national research programme of their own .
One of the weak points identified in research in the European Union is its poor application and yet the European Commission 's proposed overall budget does not respond to the need for a bold increase in funding and , unfortunately , the Committee on Industry , despite proposing research activities , has not increased the budget .
A second important point is orientation .
The draft before us leaves little room for free research which may not bring in results which can be directly applied in practice but which helps to increase our knowledge and acts as a basis for future applications .
This being so , we feel that the Committee on Industry 's proposal to reduce expenditure on so-called priority 8 is not a move in the right direction .
This does not , of course , mean that we disagree with the seven thematic priorities proposed .
The third major issue is who is to benefit from funding .
The structure of the proposed programme is such that it benefits companies , both directly and indirectly , because the guidelines are tailored to their needs .
In our view , corporate research should be funded from company profits , not the public purse .
We are also afraid that small research teams will have trouble finding funding , although the Committee on Industry 's amendments will help here .
One comment on the Euratom programme : whatever our reservations about the safety of nuclear fission , we need to be equally hopeful that the continuing debate will provide a long-term solution to the energy supply problem .
From this point of view , I welcome the fact that the Committee on Industry has recommended an increase in funding for the ITER reactor .
Finally , what worries me is that the so-called ethical issue has become much more important than it deserves and has even had a disorientating effect .
Public funding for research is no way to resolve this sort of problem .
It would be a serious oversight on my part if I failed to thank Commissioner Busquin and his staff and , of course , our rapporteur , Mr Caudron , and all the shadow rapporteurs on their tremendous work .
Mr President , Mr Caudron and Mrs McNally both mentioned the fight against AIDS , TB and malaria .
EUR 400 million have been set aside for this purpose , but the money appears in the budget under ' integration of European research ' in Amendment No 339 .
Could the Commission please tell me whether this means that the money can only be spent in Europe or whether it is possible to use this money to finance the pan-African malaria vaccine-testing network , which , unlike the EU , is ready to test the malaria vaccine now ?
If the EUR 400 million can only be spent in Europe , can the Commission tell me whether mainstreaming will make it possible to fund the African network ?
If not , I would urge Mr Van Velzen to reconsider accepting an oral amendment to Amendment No 339 , which would place the EUR 400 million under international activities .
We are discussing a research programme which will end in 2006 .
By then , if we do not finance the pan-African network , more than 400 million people may have died in sub-Saharan Africa and in other poor countries , and more than 50 years of development policy efforts are likely to be ruined by then .
This is extremely important , so even if Mr Van Velzen does not support this oral amendment , I hope that the plenary will .
Thank you , Mr President , and I should also like to thank the rapporteur . The Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development is of crucial importance for the Member States and for the Union as a whole .
Research ought to be aimed at development .
This is how we must follow up the declarations made at the Lisbon European Council . We were charged with turning the European Union into the most dynamic and successful economy in the world , whilst also aiming at full employment .
After all , what use would research be if we did not make that our common aim ?
In my view , the preparation and adoption of the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development provides the ideal opportunity to implement this conclusion of the Lisbon Summit and to give substance to the European Charter for small enterprises . Enterprises play an important role in disseminating scientific innovation .
I am therefore delighted that substantial resources , substantial compared to the immense requirements of other areas , have been devoted to growing businesses , especially small businesses and craft industries .
We must support and encourage research and innovation in SMEs , and also facilitate access to the best technologies , including those of the traditional sector too .
It will then be possible for the enterprises to respond to the challenge of full employment .
I should , however , like to refer in particular to the biotechnology industry , to which we must pay special attention because it is involved with the science of living beings .
Regardless of the stage of its development , no human being , whether an embryo or an adult , should ever be used as material with which to treat another human being .
Funding research into embryo stem cells or supernumerary embryos would be contrary to the principle of human dignity . This principle is affirmed in several of the founding texts of the European Union and more recently , in the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Furthermore , such research is now no longer required because encouraging results have been obtained through the use of adult stem cells to treat incurable diseases .
Mr President , in line with Lisbon and Stockholm Summit declarations and with the report of this Parliament on the future of the biotech industry , the life sciences are a top priority of the Sixth Framework Programme .
This priority is upheld in Mr Caudron 's excellent report .
Parliament must continue to be consistent and add its support to the progress which our scientists and researchers can provide .
Yet as representatives of the people of Europe , we in this Parliament must also define the limits which will provide an appropriate ethical context for this progress .
Genetic research promises much in preventing and curing many of man 's most dreaded hereditary diseases .
But genetic engineering for this purpose must not extend into eugenics .
Embryo research must not lead to the deliberate creation of embryos for research , though we may accept that early stage supernumerary embryos genuinely resulting from in-vitro fertilisation , from spontaneous miscarriages or from therapeutic abortions for the mother 's health , and which are destined for destruction in any case , can legitimately and ethically be available for research in Member States where there is strict regulation and supervision .
The amendment submitted by Mr Trakatellis , Mr Nisticò and myself - No 333 - seeks to restrict and define more exactly than the existing text where these limits lie .
I commend it to the Parliament .
Mr President , I will start by saying something about money .
The EUR 17.5 billion are in my view insufficient , above all when you consider the ambitious goals that Europeans are always setting themselves .
It is certainly far too little when you consider the imminent enlargement of the European Union .
These funds are one day to be invested for 25 or even more Member States , and that is not enough .
That , though , is how things are these days .
I hope in any case that the Council will approve at least these EUR 17.5 billion , or else , and here I agree with Mr van Velzen , there will be trouble .
European research policy is very much seen in terms of participation in the research programmes .
I want to vigorously urge the Commission to do everything possible to make the submission of applications and their processing easier , so that the researchers can spend their time on real research rather than on filling in forms .
My third observation is on fusion .
We wrangle about this over and over again , and I respect the different opinions that are held on the subject .
The only thing I cannot accept is that this research will not bear fruit for a very long time .
We urge the young to start early on providing for old age , even though , from a young person 's point of view , old age is a long , long way away .
We are talking here about the same sort of provision .
Whether a fusion power station is eventually built or not , is for those who come after us to decide .
We should , however , give them the option .
I have always considered it very important that the European Union should concern itself with highly sensitive questions that had formerly been beyond our scope , for example , new methods of detecting and removing landmines .
It is fortunate that we have had a programme of this sort within the European Union for a number of years , and it has achieved noteworthy successes .
My heartfelt plea is that this programme should be continued , ambitiously developed and coordinated , if possible , by a single office within the Commission .
I am thinking here of the Joint Research Centre , whose achievements to date deserve to be highlighted .
An attempt is similarly being made , incidentally , to involve European Union research in the elimination of weapons of mass destruction , be they nuclear , biological or chemical .
I would remind you that the Commission will be making a statement this afternoon about the banning of biological weapons , which has to do with the fight against terrorism .
In the former Soviet Union , today , there are still enormous stockpiles of biological and chemical agents that cannot be destroyed for lack of the necessary funds and often also of the necessary technology .
This is an opportunity for the European Union to do something for the security of Europe and of the world .
As far as bioethics is concerned , I urge support for the proposal by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , which simply takes account of the different understandings of the law on this subject in the Member States , and we as European legislators cannot supplant the Member States on this point .
Such a respect for sovereignty is reflected in this proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to endorse the congratulations and words of thanks to Mr Caudron .
Mr Busquin , the Sixth Framework Programme has the great ambition of establishing a European Research Area , and I truly hope that the small , yet excellent , research teams which we even have in the more peripheral regions will be able to play a role in this .
In European research , we must take a step forward both qualitatively and quantitatively speaking .
Female researchers must have a part to play in this and in the next few years , forge ahead to take up leading positions in the research programme .
Research which attempts to solve the mysteries of life remains important . That is not only applied research , but also fundamental research .
There is no doubt that bio-genetics will create new opportunities in future in the fight against incurable diseases , such as Alzheimer ' s , Parkinson ' s and some forms of cancer .
Within the parameters set out in the Caudron report , particularly in Amendment No 22 , and under strict ethical supervision , including that of parliaments , we are of the view that it must be possible to finance stem cell research within the Member States ' legal framework .
It is of the utmost importance for us to outline this ethical framework and for the European Parliament and the Member State parliaments to follow the developments in this field , for we must avoid at all cost that everything is allowed for some , as long as it is commercially viable , while nothing is allowed for others .
We must be led by our conscience to jointly outline this framework , even if we fail to see eye to eye on this matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the Italian radical members unreservedly support the Caudron report and congratulate the rapporteur on bringing such a difficult and significant task to a successful conclusion .
The task is significant because it opens new horizons for European research .
This is sorely needed , because our research is stagnating , our continent and our Union are not at the cutting edge .
By this , I mean scientific research and research in many other essential fields , not only scientific progress , but also employment , which are beneficial to the economy and to the progress of human kind .
From this perspective , we are particularly pleased with the position adopted by the Committee on Industry regarding research into human genetics . Tremendous progress has been made everywhere and more is being achieved every day .
Researchers and scientists are working away in laboratories . They are responsible individuals , not at all unbalanced , as many believe .
They hope very soon to make it possible for untold millions of human beings to escape a dreadful fate . These people would then be able to resume a normal life and regain their dignity as human beings .
Diseases such as Alzheimer ' s , Parkinson ' s , diabetes , cancer and cardiovascular disease constitute vast research areas still to be explored . I have in mind stem cell research in particular .
The Caudron report presents us with this new challenge , which is dealt with in depth .
Since Galileo , ever since time began in fact , scientific progress has always challenged the established order .
Indeed , given that it ushers in a new order , the one previously in place is bound to collapse .
Nonetheless , certain Members of this House have voiced their opposition to all this . They are trying to prevent what I believe is obvious progress .
In any case , even if Parliament rules against the report , progress will continue .
Clearly , millions and millions of human beings are at risk and threatened with death .
There is , however , a strong chance that these new technologies could produce cures or improved treatments .
This is why I say yes to the Caudron report , yes to the hope that European research may rise to the challenge presented by the United States and other world economies .
With this in mind , we should invest in European research capable of taking our values to even greater heights . Our scientists must be allowed to work in the most promising domain possible , namely embryo stem cell research .
Frankly speaking , this is the issue which will very shortly highlight the rift between us .
Ladies and gentlemen , the future is at stake here . It cannot be held up because it is already upon us .
Sooner or later it will overcome .
Mr President , I want first to express my thanks for the exciting , inspiring and business-like work in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
It has been a delight to participate in the work on the framework programme .
I also want to thank Commissioner Busquin for the way in which he began the discussion with new ideas about the European Research Area .
I have seen how the ideas floated by the Commissioner have taken root in the countries of the EU and created a new dynamic of a kind we had not known before and which I would to a large extent ascribe to the Commissioner ' s initiative .
I am very pleased about the opportunities under the framework programme also to involve countries which do not directly receive aid from the European Union , for example , even Iran and Taiwan can participate , to cite two extremes , if the countries themselves pay and if we find that they add value to the programmes .
That means exchanges involving young people in areas that are important for the future .
It provides the opportunity for new creativity and new understanding within research , something that will be very valuable , especially in the world of today .
With regard to nuclear research , I believe that Europe should promote this in areas which can contribute to our actively participating in the elimination of weapons of mass destruction , weapons grade plutonium , etc .
We have facilities .
We have knowledge that can be made use of .
The international mood today is such that there is now a possibility of having these things destroyed .
Let us make sure that they are destroyed , and allow Europe to take part in their destruction .
Finally , I hope that the Commissioner , together with his Director-General , will take the lead when it comes to the simplification that is necessary if small and medium-sized companies , together with university departments , are happily able to participate in the programme without experiencing financial difficulties .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for the Sixth Research Framework Programme is an ethical minefield .
Amendment No 22 , providing for Community funds for embryo research , is utterly unacceptable , being a flagrant offence against human dignity .
Embryos must not be degraded to the level of being research material .
Embryo research is banned in four Member States , including Germany .
We must not permit the use of Community funds to finance something that is punishable in these Member States .
Even research on embryo stem cells would offer an incentive to create even more surplus embryos , and we decisively reject it for that reason .
The proposal even offers support to germline therapy .
This would mean the European Parliament distancing itself , politically and scientifically , from the rest of the world , for nobody in the scientific community is demanding or promoting germline therapy , far from it , they are calling for it to be outlawed .
So I ask you to let us clear these ethical mines from the research framework programme and make the programme we adopt a responsible one .
Mr President , first of all I too should like to thank Commissioner Busquin and the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , for the excellent work that has been done with a view to the approval of this Sixth Research Framework Programme .
This document is , I believe , so excellent and innovative that it is almost a sin that the debate in Parliament should concentrate on ethics and the use of stem cells , important though that issue may be , while losing sight of all the novel , highly significant elements present in this Sixth Framework Programme .
I believe that identifying the eight priority thematic areas for research is an innovative , important and positive idea ; there is , however , a danger that small and medium-sized European enterprises might be excluded from the identification of areas structurally more suited to large businesses .
Mr Caudron ' s proposal of the instrument of the stairways of excellence seems to me to be a valid compromise , and I therefore agree with it , although I still ask the Commission and the Commissioner always to pay the greatest attention to the requirements of small and medium-sized enterprises .
The danger that European research funds might end up being monopolised by large companies , which , by definition , are those that perhaps need them least since they patently already have the capacity to propose and run research programmes , is still very real .
If , however , we wish to build that knowledge-based society that was sketched out in Lisbon , research must permeate our whole society and therefore impinge , first of all , on small and medium-sized European enterprises .

Lastly , to conclude , a remark on the Euratom programme : I agree with the appropriations proposed in the report ; we need to give the green light to the ITER project , which must not , however , be confused with the nuclear power schemes we know today .
Here we are talking about research and the future of clean energy .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Commissioner Busquin for his extraordinary commitment and for the enthusiasm he has managed to raise in the European Parliament for the creation of a European Research Area .
I should also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , as well as the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Van Velzen and Mrs McNally , for their contributions and the respect they have shown towards those individual Members who have sought to improve this framework programme with their amendments .
The text originally proposed by the Commission has been considerably supplemented and rejigged , now both specifying more clearly the research priorities in Europe in the various sectors and rejigging the initial financial architecture .
With regard to the biomedical sector , I must express my satisfaction with the EUR 500 million increase given to biomedicine , not just for genome and post-genome research but for all research aimed at adding to our understanding of the molecular mechanisms at the basis of diseases as well .
I should like once again to affirm a fundamental idea already expressed by Mr Trakatellis , which is that no research in Europe can be more important or deserve greater priority than that which concerns people ' s health and their physical and mental suffering .
That is why I now ask Commissioner Busquin , on behalf of the whole scientific community and of a number of Nobel prize-winners , such as my friend Renato Dulbecco , Rita Levi Montalcini and John Vane , to maintain this increase in funding for biomedical research for the next five years .
Through scientific research we can at last , thanks to new technologies , combat terrible , hitherto incurable diseases such as cancer , AIDS , Alzheimer ' s , Creutzfeld-Jakob disease , heart disease and so on , not least by using advanced technologies , as specified , for instance , in the Trakatellis , Purvis and Nisticò amendment , which embodies a good balance that should gain the consensus of the whole House .


Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking Gérard Caudron for his difficult work .
As we might say in German , it is easier to guard a sack of fleas than draw together the different interests in this House , and I would therefore like to express my sincere thanks for his successful efforts in this regard .
With the research framework programme , we want to make a contribution to enhancing the competitiveness of European industry .
We want to underpin and support our European policies through research .
However , we also want to bring research closer to citizens .
I am pleased , therefore , that in this latter area , we have been able to make some improvement to the Commission 's proposal through three important steps .
As part of this process , it is important , in my view , for us to ensure that research complies with the principle of sustainable development as set out in Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Gothenburg Council Conclusions .
We must bring ecological criteria into line with social and economic criteria , and so it is only right and proper that research should be subject to this principle too .
This is reflected in a number of the amendments relating to energy and sustainable transport .
I also think it is important , and necessary , to interconnect research and society , firstly by examining every research project to determine the effect of research on society : in other words , by carrying out technology impact assessments , and secondly , by actively including citizens in the research dialogue and strengthening this dialogue between research and society .
It is only right and proper , in my view , for us to increase the available resources in this area .
The third building block to bring research closer to citizens is undoubtedly to enhance the opportunities available to SMEs , universities and small research institutions for participation in this process , as they , of course , offer great potential for innovation , and many people , many Europeans , are involved .
We must therefore ensure that the processes are simple , transparent and speedy , and above all , that those who are rejected also receive a response which signals that researchers are taken seriously .
If we are able to realise these three dimensions : sustainability , dialogue between research and society , and an effective approach to SMEs , then , I am sure , research will find a place not only in the minds of Europeans , but also in their hearts .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to begin by thanking the Commissioner for his outstanding work .
Of course , I would also like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Caudron , for his two excellent reports .
I would like to express my appreciation of the positive and constructive cooperation within the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy as well .
I too found this a very enjoyable experience , thanks , not least , to the sterling work carried out by our shadow rapporteur .
I would like to raise two issues .
Firstly , genetic research : genetic and biotechnology offer great opportunities in medicine and the environment , and it is certainly right to give massive support to these areas at European level .
However , as soon as human embryos become the subject of research , I believe that for ethical reasons , clear limits must be set .
Some Member States , including Germany , have banned the use of human embryos for research purposes , and this naturally includes associated activities such as the cloning of human life .
I think that our consideration and respect for other Member States make it incumbent on us to exclude activities which obviously raise serious issues of ethical responsibility from joint European research funding , and I therefore urge this House to vote for Mr Posselt 's Amendment No 334 or Mr Liese 's Amendment No 332 .

The second issue which I would like to address briefly is fusion research .
I wish to voice my clear support for the funding of fusion research .
I believe that nuclear fusion can be developed as a future-proof technology .
It produces virtually no carbon dioxide emissions which impact on climate .
It also produces very little in the way of radioactive waste , and in particular , in contrast to nuclear fission , has no significant harmful effects over the long term .
In this respect , we Europeans should take the opportunity afforded in this area , in which we have a unique status worldwide - to continue appropriate research . We should not cut the budget but leave it , at least , at the level originally proposed .
Mr President , as someone who suffers from a neurological complaint , to wit Parkinson 's disease , I am naturally biased in this matter , but I am a little shocked by the frequent use of terms like ' unacceptable ' and ' dignity ' applied to people who wish to find a solution through medical research to the terrible problems facing those who suffer from neurological disease , such as Alzheimer 's , motor neurone and Parkinson 's .
There is no dignity in dying of motor neurone disease and there is precious little dignity in suffering from Parkinson 's either .
So I want to commend to the House the view of the sufferer as well as the view - if there is to be one - of the person who is concerned above all about preserving the embryo .
If I thought that an embryo had the same human rights as a child or an adult human being , I would not , of course , not be in favour of anything that meant the destruction of human life .
But the laws of our Member States by and large accept that there is a difference between an embryo , a fertilised egg and an adult or child who is already a human being .
The human rights of the one are not quite the same as the human rights of the other .
That is what the law says in most of our Member States .
I do not believe that the founder of the Christian religion , who set great store by healing the sick , would inhibit those who simply want to cure sick people .
I cannot believe that this is the intention of the Christian ethic .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin , of course , by congratulating the rapporteur Mr Caudron .
I know from experience how much work is involved in bringing a framework programme to a conclusion , at least in draft form .
We will now formally adopt this programme today or tomorrow .
It is a time for great words , and great words are needed .
I would also like to take this opportunity to express my thanks for the cooperation with the Commission .
Paper does not blush , however .
We will have a good programme , but the work is only just beginning .
What are we going to do with all these objectives set out on paper ?
How will we achieve these goals ?
At the moment , this is written not so much in the stars as in the heads of the civil servants or , indeed , the Commissioner .
We therefore urgently need more precise details of this entire project .
We urgently need the specific programmes .
That is the first point .
We also urgently need further cooperation with the Commission if these specific programmes have to be amended by this House .
The second point is this : there is no sense in allocating EUR 17 , 18 , 16 billion - the figure has not yet been finally decided - if these funds are not used where they are most needed , that is , in the universities , in industry , and in the SMEs .
It is therefore vital to ensure that the rules governing participation in this framework programme are practicable , in line with the realities of the research world , and meet the needs of companies seeking to develop their innovations on the basis of this funding .
After all , we should not forget that research and innovation are not ends in themselves .
The purpose of research and innovation is to bring products to market and improve our competitiveness .
This can only be achieved if there are significant levels of participation , if the allocation instruments are transparent , and if everyone , from Finland to Sicily and Greece , knows what his or her position is .
The real work therefore starts here , not only for the Commission staff but also for us .
After the framework programme means before the next framework programme , but , above all , it means during implementation .
This House must therefore look very closely to determine how much continuity exists between the Fifth and Sixth Framework Programmes , how reliable the instruments used by the Commission are , and how this money is spent .
We will also carry out an ex post audit .
Thank you very much . I look forward to further years of cooperation .
Mr President , I am in favour of research .
We all want to find cures for illness and I am sure that in each of our families we have personally experienced the sadness of incurable disease .
Over the past year in the Temporary Committee on Human Genetics and Other New Technologies we discussed various ways of finding answers to these medical problems .
We voted last week to support the funding of uncontroversial stem-cell research using placenta , umbilical cord and adult stem cells .
We voted with cross-party support to ban funding of research resulting in the destruction of human embryos , any kind of cloning , the use of surplus embryos and germline intervention .
The majority , therefore , in the temporary committee , whose aim it was to draw up ethical guidelines for the European Union , rejects the research funding suggested in the Caudron report .
EU funding should not be promoted for controversial research , banned in four Member States , my own country included .
Respect for the dignity of the human person is a fundamental principle upheld in all European and international agreements .
I urge that we do not desert this principle .
Many citizens , myself included , believe that there is a more acceptable , ethical and moral way forward than the one which leads us to destroy one innocent human life in order to cure another .
I urge you to reject the funding suggested in the Caudron report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , research policy is one of the areas in which we clearly need more involvement by Europe .
Munich is one of the most modern locations for research in the European Union , and Franz Josef Strauss set a course 30 years ago which has ensured that there is still an aerospace industry today .
As a location for research , Munich has never suffered from the fact that research policy has always set clear ethical limits .
On the contrary , these clear ethical limits include banning research on embryo stem cells , the import of embryo stem cells and the creation of embryos for research purposes , for such techniques are nothing but cannibalism .
Even if human life is saved through the killing of other human life , I believe this is ethically unacceptable .
It is cannibalism .
I am delighted that in all its decisions since 1988 , since the Ghergo report , the European Parliament has adhered to this position by a clear majority and that the German Bundestag 's Study Commission adopted this line , also with a clear majority , on Monday evening , referring in this context to the Fiori report which we adopted last week by a substantial majority in our Committee on Human Genetics .
I think it would be most regrettable if this important , high-quality research framework programme were associated with any attempt to undermine the European Parliament 's clear ethical line on embryo protection and the protection of human life .
I urge to you to vote for the Scallon / Posselt amendment , and if this is not adopted , to support the Liese / Fiori compromise amendment and reject all the other amendments on this issue .

The European Parliament 's reputation is at stake : a reputation associated with its position , for more than 10 years , at the forefront of those who strive to protect human life .
Mr President , the sixth framework research programme is a serious and fundamental attempt by the European Union to achieve its strategic objectives , that is , to become the most competitive knowledge-economy based area in the world over the next ten years .
It will also help it to benefit from progress being made in other corners of the world , while helping it to contribute towards the development of mankind .
We all have to meet this challenge , at both European and national level . This means bold funding for research in all sectors , coordinating research at European level , in contrast to the current fragmentary approach , and disseminating it throughout the economic and social fabric .
Our success in achieving our political and development objectives will depend directly on how we use the results of research for the benefit of the health and quality of life of our citizens , full employment and social cohesion .
I should like to focus on the need for research in the social sector .
Our development depends first and foremost on the viability of our social model .
The social agenda which we have adopted and are currently applying is the basis for this policy .
Economic and social change has led our economy and society into an impasse .
Ageing , widespread poverty and social exclusion , large numbers of accidents at work , the need to successfully integrate large groups of citizens such as the Roma , the need to integrate the disabled into the job market , the constant need to help women enter the job market , new risks to employees ' health and our increasingly multicultural society in Europe are such that we need scientific research on which to base our policy over coming years .
This will encourage European countries with no tradition of social research , which are the very countries which face the worst development problems .
Finally , I should like to stress the need for public information and consultation on all our research objectives .
Research in all sectors , from biotechnology to social research , is carried out a long way from the ground , in closed laboratories or study firms .
Our citizens are unable to read the articles not just in scientific journals , but also in the broadsheets .
We need to make an effort to ensure that information is provided on a systematic basis .
Mr President , the report and the framework programme have been extensively modified since they were first presented to this Parliament .
Citizens should be aware of this extensive transformation , so that they can see the good cooperation between the institutions .
I think that this is due , to a large extent , to Mr Caudron ' s flexibility and capacity to listen , and this is also true of rapporteurs from other political parties , such as Mr Van Velzen , who has been listening throughout and welcoming the amendments and various suggestions from all Members .
I have never worked in a committee where all requests have been treated in this way and incorporated .
I would like this spirit to be maintained throughout the implementation process , because it is clear that this is a European project that needs to continue growing and expanding .
I also have to say that this journey has been carried out on the basis of a policy that aims to reduce work , reduce the work of the committee and to create fewer projects , but larger ones , and Parliament has been able to break down this centrality with regard to large projects , large companies and various research programmes that are essentially covering work that on many occasions is quasi-public with regard to the large research centres or large industries , such as the aeronautical industry .
Parliament has been able to open this project up in more directions , extending its range of priorities to territories that , up until now , were not covered or that were not considered important .
There are various innovations which citizens should be aware of : one of these , the most important one in my opinion , is the introduction of a fourth instrument .
Introducing a fourth instrument means opening the door to smaller projects , facilitating the entry of SMEs and making the European Research Area a possibility , for Europe comprises many small States and Research Centres .
The average European team has no more than six people , whilst an American team consists of 24 people .
Europe needs protection measures and incentives that are suited to its dimensions .
Europe is still a collection of individual initiatives .
For this very reason , the escalier d ' excellence seems to be very effectively set out in Amendment No 305 .
We have also introduced important aspects of relevance to culture .
Cultural heritage belongs to the world of non-renewable resources .
When the tomb of a mediaeval King disappears , with its costumes and clothing , or when we lose track of a wrecked ship at the bottom of the sea , new technologies have to be used to recover these relics .
Architecture , engineering , the structure of buildings , are all in the realm of science .
We have supported the safeguarding of cultural heritage and we think that the European Union should also continue to do so .
Mr President , honourable Members , we have reached a critical point in the process of adopting our new framework programme on Research .
The European Parliament ' s opinion at first reading does indeed constitute a milestone along our way .
I would like to add my voice to those who have congratulated Mr Caudron , the rapporteur .
I should like to say to him in all sincerity that the quality of the report and the spirit with which he has imbued it , the energy and the work he has put in are all exemplary in the context of such a difficult task .
As Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl pointed out , it was a complex task but Mr Caudron brought it to a successful conclusion and I would particularly like to thank him for that .

I also wanted to emphasise that this work was the product of a joint effort and the shadow rapporteurs from other groups were involved in this .
I shall not name individuals but I am sure you are all aware of those who have made a constructive contribution to the task in hand over the last few months , as I mentioned earlier .
I have in mind also , of course , the rapporteurs of the various committees and obviously , the ITER Committee as a whole , and its Secretariat . They were also involved in the work .
I do believe that what we have before us is a high quality joint endeavour .
In this connection , you will be aware that a number of amendments have been tabled .
I shall not attempt to outline the Commission ' s position on each individual one because I would need the floor for two hours .
You will find the relevant information in an exhaustive table to be lodged with Parliament ' s clerk immediately .
Generally speaking , I should like to emphasise that the Commission has widely supported the opinions of the ITER Committee . It is a statistical operation and could perhaps be queried .
In fact , however , out of the 334 amendments the Commission has accepted 248 as they stand , in part or in principle .
That equates to three-quarters .
You will be able to study the explanations given for each amendment , and the reasons why others cannot be accepted . This can be because they are already there in the proposal .
It is important to be aware of that .
I would therefore simply like to present to you the Commission ' s positions on major issues as defined in the context of the amendments adopted by the ITER .
I shall refer to the structure of the framework programme , its scientific and technological content , the instruments for its implementation , the overall budget and its distribution , and the ethical issue .
In conclusion , I shall say a few words on the management of the programme , because , as we have emphasised , this is clearly the key issue .
As regards the structure of the framework programme as a whole , the Commission shares Parliament ' s views as expressed in Amendment No 36 tabled originally by Mr van Velzen .
I am delighted that Parliament and the Commission are of a single mind concerning the concept of a single specific programme for all the main thematic areas . This should result in multidisciplinary coherence and a strategic vision of research in Europe .
The arrangement also allows for Parliament to closely monitor the implementation .
Each of the eight priorities will in fact have a separate budgetary line on which Parliament will be able to exercise its budgetary control .
With regard to the scientific and technological content , most of the amendments , namely Amendment Nos 30 to 294 , relate to the scientific content .
We wish to signal our agreement with a series of suggestions by Parliament concerning priority numbers 2 ' Information society technologies ' , 3 ' Nanotechnologies ' , 4 ' Aeronautics ' , and 7 ' Citizens in the European knowledge-based society ' .
We have in mind for instance Mrs Schroeder ' s amendments concerning respect for privacy in the field of information technologies , and also the Committee on Employment ' s amendments on research to support the Lisbon objectives .
Most notably , the Commission agrees to reorganise the content of priorities 1 ' Genomics and health ' , 5 ' Food safety ' , and 6 ' Sustainable development ' , along the lines suggested by Parliament .
As regards priority 1 , namely broadening the scope to include the study of the genomes of all living organisms and strengthening the elements of medical research , particularly regarding cancer , in two separate sections along the lines suggested by Mr van Velzen and particularly in the spirit of Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines ' and Mr Caudron ' s amendments , we can accept all that is involved .
I should also like to respond to Mrs Sandbaek ' s comments on poverty-related diseases and immunisation against AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria . Clearly , provision has already been made for this , as Mrs McNally pointed out .
Such provision is within the framework of international policy , and the technological platform for AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis is exactly in line with the spirit of Mrs Sandbaek ' s question . That question had indeed already been dealt with .
As regards priority 5 , the agricultural research aspects linked to food safety will be strengthened , in keeping with a number of the amendments suggested by the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on Fisheries .
Mr Pietrasanta ' s and Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl ' s amendments will also be taken into account in priority 5 : Food safety
Priority 6 will be restructured as suggested by Mr Caudron , Mr Lange , Mr Hyland and Mr van Velzen .
There will be three distinct sections encompassing issues related to the environment , transport and energy .
Renewable energy will , of course , be included in the chapter on energy . A number of specific aspects of various forms of renewable energy will be emphasised .
The Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Transport also expressed themselves in favour of a change of this nature .
The sustainable development priority will therefore be subdivided into three sections dealing with these three aspects .
Before turning to more general points , I should add that the Commission also accepts or takes into consideration a number of amendments concerning both content and general policy .
By way of example I could refer to Mr Glante ' s amendment on the involvement of the candidate countries , Mrs McNally ' s amendment excluding research into weapons and Mr Linkohr ' s amendment on research linked to security matters which could be dealt with under the title of research into emerging themes and in the framework of the Joint Research Centre .
We also have small and medium sized enterprises very much in mind .
Mr Rovsing and Mr Carraro quite rightly reminded us of their role this morning .
Clearly , small and medium sized enterprises will have a specific role to play in the next framework programme .
As regards the instruments , the Commission broadly endorses the approach enshrined in Parliament ' s amendments .
The basic thought is indeed to make it possible for the more classical instruments currently in place to be used alongside the new , more integrating instruments for a specific period .
That was in fact what Mrs McNally proposed .
Hence the Commission ' s suggestion in its proposal on the rules of involvement , to resort to specific targeted actions and coordination actions under the heading of the stairway of excellence envisaged by Mr Caudron , the rapporteur .
The proposal will be in line with at least the spirit of this idea of a stairway of excellence .
Nonetheless , it is essential for the new instruments to remain the main priority tools for implementing this part of the framework programme . Only through their structuring effect will a genuine European Research Area become a reality .
Concerning the Budget , I should like to thank the Parliament for having gritted its teeth and demonstrated budgetary realism by remaining within the limits of the Commission ' s proposal . In real terms this represents a 17 % increase as against the overall budget for the previous framework programme .
I think I already mentioned how significant this is inasmuch as the figures proposed by the Commission were arrived at following a needs assessment and in the light of the financial perspective and the possibilities provided under heading 3 of the internal budget policies .
We believe that the Member States will adopt this same approach at Council as it is a logical , coherent and reasonable way forward .
As for Parliament ' s proposal to increase the global envelope by EUR 100 million , that is not a substantial additional amount .
Nevertheless , we feel we should retain the decisions already taken , in order to avoid inter-institutional trading .
The Commission therefore wishes to retain the initial global position of EUR 17.5 billion in the interests of interinstitutional consistency .
We shall then have to consider how to deal with the fusion issue .
In connection with the latter , it would be wise to demonstrate flexibility when interpreting the principle of reserved use of EUR 200 million for ITER .
All activities relating to ITER are , in fact , concerned , not simply with the construction of the machine . In this way it will be possible to maintain the potential for present and future research .
It would also be wise to interpret fusion in an even more positive manner .
I have taken Mr Linkohr ' s image on board with pleasure .
It is however the case that in the next twenty years very interesting research will be conducted also on materials and on how to effect magnetic confinement . This will be in addition to still more wide-ranging research , going beyond fusion and relevant to the development of new technologies in a whole range of other sectors .
This therefore is the type of presentation we are aiming at . Furthermore , it is in line with what was voted for at the ITER Committee .
I should now like to say in this connection , that jointly with the Member States , the Commission will set up a working group charged with setting targets in the less distant future , taking 2020 as a guide .
This is a long way off , but in a sense 2020 is also quite close .
Such an initiative would bear considerable fruit too . Indeed , a number of Member States broadly supportive of the 2020 end date for material essential to fusion put just such a proposal to Council .
As for distribution of the framework programme budget allocation , the Commission will support the general direction of the guidelines proposed by Parliament .
This follows almost inevitably from the Commission ' s acceptance of the amendments to content .
Clearly , if we accept amendments to content in certain areas we must , of course , fund them .
When research extends to areas which were not anticipated at the outset , the budget must , of course , keep in step , otherwise it will fall to a critical level .
Nonetheless , the scope of the adjustments we envisage is less extensive than what Parliament proposed .
This is so as not to go beyond real needs insofar as they can be calculated , but also so as not to completely starve of resources the activities under the so-called eighth priority .
Additional information is called for and we shall provide it .
Why not risk depriving these activities of resources ?
The reason is that such activities are of considerable significance .
In particular , they concern research relevant to the reform of the common agricultural policy . This is one of the major aims of Community policy .
It is important in itself and increasingly so in the context of enlargement . Also involved are the implementation of policy on fisheries and the epidemiological aspects of public health , security and justice .
These are all issues which cannot be dealt with appropriately under the heading of other priorities . The latter are more specific and come under what could be described as more clearly targeted research programmes .
This represents a field of action , an effort to support research and development areas related to community policies . Adequate funding must be made available .
I also have in mind Mr Verheugen ' s call for support for all policies relating to enlargement , notably in the area of life sciences .
With regard to ethics , we did consider the amendment adopted by the ITER committee in the report drawn up by Mr Caudron .
We are quite prepared however , to consider the amendments tabled at plenary .
This is indeed a sensitive issue . The text the Commission proposes to insert into the decision specifically excludes from Community funding research aimed at creating human embryos purely for research purposes or in order to create stem cells .
This is in addition to excluding research into human reproductive cloning , and research aimed at modifying the human genetic heritage .
As I understand them , these amendments are also intended to exclude the transfer of cell nuclei amongst other processes .
I refer to the amendments tabled by Mr Nisticò , Mr Trakatellis and Mr Purvis .

I trust I am not trying your patience .
I should like to make two last points . Firstly , coordination has not been given the importance it deserves .
Mrs Maes , I do believe that the coordination of national programmes is a key element in the construction of a genuine European Research Area , and I mean national and regional programmes .
You will be aware that we issued a communication on ' regions and research ' , and EUR 400 million will be allocated to it .
This may be used to support coordination activities , particularly in a number of clearly identified areas to which several of Parliament ' s amendments refer .
I can tell you for instance that childhood diseases and diabetes are now included under the framework of coordination of national policies .
I have in mind the amendment tabled by Mr Nisticò , Mr Fiori and Mr Bowis .
The same applies to seismic risk , with Mr Caudron ' s and Mr Nisticò ' s amendments , to fossil fuels and maybe also to ecosites and Mr Piétrasanta ' s amendment .
I am not however sure that the latter will be adopted .
Clearly , there is action with regard to coordination of national policies .
I shall now refer to management .
The management of framework programmes has come in for criticism and rightly so . The Court of Auditors is one of these critics .
In particular , it had criticised the complexity of management .
We are therefore firmly committed to a single aim in this regard : to simplify management for the scientific community , and for small and medium sized enterprises .
Simplifying , however , also means limiting constraints and accepting a degree of flexibility out of regard for public money and the observations made by the Court of Auditors .
We shall therefore prepare the proposal .
We have taken the initiative with the new instruments .
In particular , the issue of rules of participation is very important and you will be called upon to determine them .
I should say to Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl that we are currently engaged in a debate on these rules with the players in the scientific community , enterprises and Parliament .
That is our next task .
In conclusion , I should like to thank Parliament . I believe an important task has been concluded .
As a result , it will now be possible for us to move towards the European Research Area that I am sure we are all aiming to create .
Thank you for your work and for your contribution .
( Applause )
Thank you for your speech , Commissioner Busquin .
I believe everybody here would like to thank you just as warmly for the very proper manner in which you have conducted your relations with our institution .
Mr President , since the Commissioner has now indicated that he will be adopting so many of Parliament ' s amendments , I have one pertinent question for the Commissioner .
Does that also mean that you will now first be fine-tuning the specific programmes which you have drafted earlier before they can be discussed in Parliament ?
Obviously , it follows that in the next few days specific programmes will be adjusted to bring them into line with any amendments adopted .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
EU / Latin America relations
The next item is the report ( A5-0336 / 2001 ) by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on a global partnership and a common strategy for relations between the European Union and Latin America [ 2000 / 2249 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , on a point of order , I would like to bring to your attention , and I hope this will not take up part of my speaking time , that I have received no news relating to the absence of the Commissioner responsible , Mr Patten .
I was wondering whether the presidency had received any news of his absence and if it could provide any information .
I cannot see the Commissioner here , which is very strange because he always comes to debates on foreign policy when he can .
I would like to know whether the presidency or the Commission have any information that justifies , as will surely be the case , the absence of the Commissioner responsible , Mr Patten .
Mr Salafranca , from the point of view of the presidency I cannot answer your question .
The Commission is , however , present in the person of Commissioner Bolkenstein , who will , of course , speak on behalf of the Commission at the end of the debate .
I do not know whether Commissioner Bolkenstein intends to answer your question straight away .
Commissioner .
Mr President , my colleague , Mr Patten , is at present in New York attending the General Assembly of the United Nations .

I hope that Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra will take this as sufficient apology for his absence and that he will be happy with the answers I give him and other Members in the debate that follows .
I shall certainly do my best .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkenstein .
I think Mr Salafranca , like the rest of us , has been given a clear and satisfactory answer .
Mr President , I would like to thank both yourself and also Mr Bolkestein for his kindness and his cooperation .
I naturally understand the reasons he has given for Mr Patten ' s absence .
As you all know , the Heads of State and Government of the European Union , some time ago , in June 1999 , decided to form a strategic global partnership between the European Union and Latin America .
More than two years have passed since that date and the truth of the matter is that we have to admit that no great progress has been made in reaching this objective set by the Heads of State and Government .
This , Mr President , is precisely the reason why the European Parliament has wanted not only to discuss , but also to adopt an own-initiative report in order to add fuel to the debate on the next summit , the second of the Heads of State and Government , which will take place next spring , and present a document that could offer a strategic vision with regard to these relations , in order that the European Union will not arrive at this summit empty handed , at least with regard to the responsibility of our institution .
I would like , in the first instance , to praise the spirit of cooperation that the political groups have shown me during the production of this report , which has been approved by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy by an overwhelming majority ( 48 votes for , 0 against and 2 abstentions ) .
I would also like to thank the committees who were asked to give their opinion for their cooperation .
In this report , Mr President , we are asking for something of fundamental importance : that is that , just as the European Union has a common strategy for relations with Russia , with the Balkans , with non-EU countries in the Mediterranean or with the Ukraine , it should also have a common strategy for relations with the countries of Latin America .
This strategy , Mr President , in my opinion , should involve three aspects : in the political sphere , a revision and updating of the biregional agenda ; secondly , a renewal and updating of political dialogue at ministerial level ; and thirdly , the constitution of a transatlantic , Euro-Latin American assembly , through the signing of a Euro-Latin American charter for peace and the implementation of a Euro-Latin American political and security partnership .
In the economic , financial and commercial field , Mr President , we think that the European Union should complete the agreements that are currently under negotiation with Mercosur and Chile .
These agreements need to be concluded in a balanced fashion and , naturally , as quickly as possible , depending on their own merits .
We think that there can be no distinction , at least from the European Union ' s point of view , between first- or second-class countries or groups of countries .
For this reason , we are asking the Commission , in the medium term , to put forward some negotiation guidelines with the aim of reaching new agreements with the Andean Community and with the countries in Central America .
I am talking , Commissioner , about the short and medium term , given that in the short term we believe , here in the European Parliament , that the facilities granted by the Community Generalised System of Preferences have to be maintained .
In the same respect , Mr President , we are asking for the implementation of a global interregional association agreement that can give institutional support and total geographical coverage in relations with the subcontinent , in order , amongst other things , not to be second rate when compared with the developments that are being made in the United States .
We are also requesting the creation of an area of shared prosperity through the strengthening of regional markets between now and the year 2010 .
I would like to add , Mr President , that it is a shame that there should only be one country in Latin America which , although we have diplomatic relations with it and apply the Community Generalised System of Preferences to it , is not linked to the European Union by means of an agreement .
I am , naturally , referring to Cuba .
For this reason I think that - in the spirit of the doctrine of the European Union in general and in the spirit previously adopted by this Parliament in the Newens report in particular , we should seek a formula which , within the framework of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , would allow us to progress in order to find an institutional formula in our relations with this country .
In the social and cultural field , Mr President , we are proposing an emphatic and ambitious development cooperation policy in the social , culture , education , emigration , internal affairs and justice fields , with a whole series of concrete initiatives , that I will not explain here right now for lack of time .
Mr President , I believe , and I think that my fellow Members believe the same , that the commitments made at the Rio Summit and the whole strategy formulated around the new commitment with Latin America should take shape as quickly as possible and give a strong impetus to relations with this region , although this should not be done to the detriment of economic sectors and the civil society .
The next summit of Heads of State and Government will have to result , in our opinion , in a palpable success , sending a clear message with regard to this new European commitment with Latin America .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra on his clear and comprehensive report .
It is indeed time for the European Union to revise its strategy on relations with Latin America .
There is still a great deal of room for improvement , especially in the field of economic cooperation , and for us Socialists , this also includes Cuba , a country with which we must finally commence negotiations on a framework agreement , without any preconditions .
Economic cooperation must include and take account of appropriate social and ecological minimum standards ; after all , we do not want to worsen the social inequalities in Latin America but help to defuse them , for these countries are still marked by massive variations in social conditions .
There are wealthy industrialised enclaves surrounded by regions with crippling poverty .
We therefore also call , in the field of structural development , for measures to achieve sustainable economic development which promote SMEs in particular .
Above all , wherever it is necessary and appropriate , the groups concerned and civil society , especially indigenous ethnic groups , must be included from the planning stage onwards .
This applies especially to the Puebla Panama project .
The European Union should only participate in this project on the basis of clearly defined substantive agreements .
Technology and knowledge transfer , but also the opening of the European market to the partner countries ' products , are further steps which must be taken quickly .
This House wants an equal economic partnership with the citizens of Latin America , not just with a handful of major corporations .
Mr President , the terrorist attacks of 11 September have finally brought it home to us that global crises have global consequences and that the European Union can no longer afford any eurocentrism .
This does not mean downgrading the importance of EU enlargement and the stabilisation of the Balkans ; it simply means that the Rio process must not suffer the same fate as the Barcelona process or the policies on the Mediterranean .
It should not take a terrorist attack for us to give relations with these marginal areas of Europe or the Latin American region , a region which has strong historical and demographic links with Europe , the attention they deserve .
The European Parliament 's own-initiative report by Mr Salafranca is therefore timely , coming as it does in advance of the Rio follow-up summit in Madrid in May next year .
We need to develop a strategy and give greater priority to our policies on Latin America at every level in order to combat poverty on this continent , consolidate democracy , tackle organised crime and drug trafficking , and , finally , to protect our economic interests .
The conclusion of the association agreement with Mexico has had a positive impact on the European business presence in that country , which has benefited both sides .
The association agreement with Chile will , we hope , be signed in Madrid in May .
Unfortunately , the negotiations with Mercosur are not progressing as smoothly . I hope that in this context , the Commission and the European Parliament will do their utmost to overcome the hurdles concerning Argentina and Brazil .
Free trade is not a one-way street , and more or less concealed protectionism should be a thing of the past .
We must also increase awareness of the Latin American region .
The establishment of a Centre for European and Latin American Studies would be a welcome step .
What Latin America needs , however , are not only association agreements but general strategies to promote an investment-friendly climate , and this can only be achieved if there is political stability and an end to capital flight .
Not every dollar earned should be transferred directly to Miami .
Mr President , the Salafranca report comes at an opportune moment .
The implementation of a global partnership and common strategy with Latin America , driven by Europe , is something that has always been worthwhile , but now more than ever , since 11 September , when international relations are clearly in a state of upheaval .
This strategy and partnership driven by Europe comes at a time when a partner , in a different region , is going through difficult times , of which we are all aware .
However , as Europeans , we should have clearly defined ideas .
The partner to which I am referring will get through its bad patch over time and will once again turn its attention to Latin America .
It has a right to do this , but Europe has values and interests that are not always the same as those of the United States .
We only have to mention the mere existence of Mercosur or Alca or , simply , the different positions we maintain with regard to areas such as the death penalty or the Permanent Court of International Justice .
With regard to the objectives of the common strategy that have been mentioned , it is laudable , of course , to aim for the implementation of a Euro-Latin American area of peace and stability , in addition to the signing of a peace charter , a task that in my opinion would be difficult to achieve , but not as difficult as reaching equivalent objectives , such as those sought by the Barcelona process for Euro-Mediterranean cooperation , whose execution has not so far made it possible to solve the Middle East conflict .
On the other hand , I applaud the intention of sharing prosperity through the creation of a free trade area by 2010 , or thereabouts .
However , I would like to allude once more to the Barcelona process in order to warn that the process that we are hoping to achieve for Latin America should take account of inequalities , that is to say , the different economic weight of the partners , because this could lead to trade being free for all , in theory , but , in practice , being subjected to the most onerous of burdens , that is to say , true inequality that as we all know can be widespread throughout Latin America .
This could mean that our supposed free trade will become nothing more than a slogan .
So , if our intention is to create a partnership between members who are supposed to be equal , when it is obvious that they are not , it is important that we can resort to a fundamental instrument .
I am referring to a genuine development cooperation policy , which is the only thing that can minimise , although I fear this will not happen before 2010 , the enormous socioeconomic differences that exist today between the European Union and Latin America and even between Latin American partners themselves .
Lastly , I would like to remind the ultra-liberals that not only is development aid compatible with free trade , but that it requires it , except when free trade is understood to be solely based upon cynical and even cruel inequalities .
On occasions , decent trade is not possible without efficient and transparent development cooperation providing the basis for a free , but fair , game .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can only express my hearty congratulations to Mr Salafranca on the thorough work he has done .
It is true that to give real substance to all that was decided in Rio de Janeiro by the first Summit between Heads of State and Government of the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean , the solemn declarations must be made concrete by transforming them into facts , strategies and opportunities that can give new life to the dialogue between the European Union and Latin America .
We should not be surprised , then , that the Salafranca report states firmly that the only way the European Union can establish a genuine , bi-regional strategic partnership is to launch a new joint strategy with force and determination , and that the best time to do so may be precisely at the Madrid Summit in May 2002 .
It is right , therefore , to lay the foundations straight away and to find the simplest instruments that can be most readily understood by the citizens of both the European Union and South America .
The creation of a single EU-Latin American Transatlantic Assembly will be most welcome ; it must have the broadest remit , including , particularly , the fight against poverty and social exclusion , and the fight against drugs and organised crime , and it must also focus greatly on the basic sector of education , culture and free trade which , as the previous speaker pointed out , must come about without generating inequalities .
The strategy , as the rapporteur suggests , could be one of a single bi-regional solidarity fund , clearly identified and thus more easily controlled .
But apart from the technical financial instruments , what is fundamental is that there should be clear political will , that we should take on a greater burden , that the Union can and must commit itself to implementing a strong development cooperation policy .
The historical , cultural and blood ties that link so many Europeans to Latin America mean that whenever one of us is in Latin America , Mr President , we feel at home .
These ties impose a moral as well as a political obligation on us to continue to uphold with renewed vigour the specific nature of Europe ' s role , which is based on the strength of those values that have been at the root of our project for integration .
It is also for these reasons that , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , I confirm our full support for this report .
Mr President , the common strategy on Latin America is a strategy that may contain highly novel elements for Europe in this ever more complicated world .
This novelty will be seen in the way the relations between Europe and Latin America are to be organised around three themes : the first is the debate on the rules of the game in the process of globalisation and , particularly , the question of democracy and the reduction of poverty ; the second is the question of regional political integration ; and the third is the joint management of major environmental crises .
In this sense , although we in our group support the general approach taken by the Salafranca report , it contains a few elements which we believe still reflect a view that does not give enough attention precisely to the novelty of the issues we should be responding to .
In particular , my group strongly questions the emphasis placed on the commercial dimension of relations between Europe and Latin America , especially the need for them to be subject to the current rules of the World Trade Organisation , rules which are widely challenged not only in Latin America but in Europe too .
Secondly , we do not agree with the a priori positive assessment of the Puebla-Panama plan , which is a plan for large infrastructure works which will have considerable social and environmental impact .
Before the European Union joins the financial community in contributing to the success of this plan , as called for in the report , I think we should carefully assess this impact .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate and thank Mr Salafranca for his report , which is very comprehensive , well-written and apt , because it is only when the enlargement process has been completed on paper , that we realise that there are still two issues that have yet to be resolved : Euro-Mediterranean strategy and this matter of Latin America .
And it is precisely Latin America , with its growing organisational process , that offers more possibilities and at the same time has international repercussions that we should view positively .
The influence of the European Union on Latin America within the United Nations in terms of finding peaceful solutions for conflicts , is , my view , a cause for hope , when compared with the militarisation and aggressive use of force practised by the United States at this time .
I think that this issue is both important and appropriate , and Parliament is showing us that we are working in real time .
For this reason and without reservations , our group will be supporting Mr Salafranca ' s report .
We do not agree upon certain , very specific , issues , but we will deal with these when the time is right .
We are thinking here of the inclusion of Cuba , which for us is of fundamental importance , and also the choice of a peaceful solution of the Colombian conflict , which is what the European Union wants to see .
Mr President , the countries of Latin America and the European Union have a cultural basis in common , which greatly facilitates the mutual relations between our peoples .
Despite , however , certain promising prospects opened up by the first EU-Latin America-Caribbean Summit held in Rio de Janeiro in 1999 , along the lines of a strategic partnership on an economic , social and ecological level , the concrete results so far achieved have been far from satisfactory .
The reasons for this shortcoming are varied in origin and responsibility for it lies in different places .
For the part that lies with us , there seems at times to be a kind of European self-inhibition , perhaps due even to the geo-strategic primacy , and not only that , of the United States throughout the American continent .
As we know , the countries of Latin America are confronted with joining the American free trade area , which may happen from 2005 onwards ( so we are nearly there ! ) .
Now that there is a clear need to establish strong partnerships on the international scene , now more than ever , since the end of the Cold War , the European Union must not shirk any of its responsibilities or the challenges placed before it .
One of the most important is precisely that of being able to define coherent joint strategies and endow them with effective political content .
Thus the proposals presented in this own-initiative report by Mr Salafranca , whom we congratulate on his excellent work , deserve all our support .
Not only because they explain and list practically all the aspects that have to be taken into consideration in a joint strategy to intensify EU-Latin American relations , but they also deserve our support because they come at just the right time , prior to the preparations for the second Heads of State and Government Summit to be held next May .
Mr President , it seems to me that something is sorely missing from the report we have before us .
I refer of course to the Native Americans , and by that I mean the indigenous peoples of this subcontinent . We tend to overlook them all too often , because they prick our conscience somewhat .
How can we discuss relations with that part of ' Latin ' America and fail to refer to these people ?
Where it did not wipe them out , our so-called civilisation reduced most of them to poverty .
In its opinion , the Committee on Development and Cooperation has , quite rightly , highlighted this omission .
To take an example , item 50 of paragraph g of the report envisages a financial contribution by the Union to the Puebla Panama plan .
How can such an idea be entertained when the plan covers areas with a majority Native American population , in Chiapas and Guatemala , yet the American Indians have not been consulted ?
I would be hard put to vote in favour of this report .
Mr President , the establishment of a common strategy between the European Union and Latin America , as decided in Rio de Janeiro in 1999 , is a matter of justice that will finally give the appropriate dimension to interregional relationships that have historically been undervalued .
The Socialist Group in the Committee on Development and Cooperation agrees with the objectives set out in the resolution proposed by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , for which I would like to congratulate Mr Salafranca .
In our opinion , we need to increase the content of the political agenda and deepen dialogue at all political and institutional levels , within the framework of a true partnership .
We think that the signing of association agreements with the Andean Community and Central America is necessary , with the aim of creating a Euro-Latin American free trade area .
We also consider , however , that we need to give priority to the resolution of development problems in many Latin American countries , where there are 200 million poor people .
We are particularly concerned about the Andean area , Central America and the Caribbean .
In the Andean area , instability , institutional violence , problems of drug trafficking and the management of migratory flows have to be dealt with from a global perspective , that integrates development cooperation , trade liberalisation , institutional transformation , human rights and the rights of indigenous peoples in particular .
The creation of a Euro-Latin American area of peace and stability has to be founded upon the principles of human rights , democracy and the fight against drug trafficking .
In Central America , aid to social development and the fight against poverty have to take precedence over any other initiative , such as the information society .
To do otherwise would be to put the cart before the horse .
I would also like to make a special reference to the Caribbean and , specifically , to Cuba , as have other Members this morning .
Cuba is not part of the Cotonu Agreement nor does it have an institutionalised relationship with the European Union .
We think that development potential in Cuba , where , for some time , European companies have been investing , and the situation of its people merit treatment from the European Union that goes much further than the indifference it has shown to this country until now .

Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Salafranca on his magnificent report and also Mr Kreissl-Dörfler for his opinion , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on this subject .
The Salafranca report is , generally speaking , very comprehensive and quite ambitious .
I am only going to make one point , relating to paragraph 60 , referring to the need for the Commission and the Council to provide adequate funding ; and I would like to relate it to the report presented to us yesterday by the President of the Court of Auditors on economic management in the year 2000 .
In this report , in paragraph 5.5.8 , something very serious is pointed out : that more than 25 % of commitment appropriations allocated to Latin America in the year 2000 could not be used , because of administrative shortcomings .
It was not made very clear in the Court of Auditors report whether administrative shortcomings were restricted to those countries receiving Community aid or the Community ' s administration itself .
In response to the Commission , a series of measures have been referred to which would prevent this taking place this year or next , and Mr Salafranca himself refers to another issue , which is the need for extra personnel in the Directorate-General for Latin America .
Some time ago the Director of this Directorate-General told me personally , and I am talking about more than ten years ago , that the Directorate did not need more money , but more staff .
I still have no idea whether this particular bottleneck has yet been resolved .
Finally , one of the proposals put forward by the Commission is to strengthen delegations ' decentralisation functions .
I would also like to insist upon something Mr Salafranca has also stressed , which is that a very large country in Latin America with which we have a privileged relationship , Ecuador , still has no delegation , despite previous agreements and commitments made by this Parliament and the Commission itself .
Mr President , in the time available , as Mr Salafranca will understand , I would like to concentrate on paragraph 7 of the resolution on the urgent and overriding need to keep support for the peace process in Colombia as a priority within this strategy .
In particular I want to state two points .
First , that the pledge made by President Pastrana personally to this Parliament on the dismantling of paramilitary groups has not been , and is not being , honoured .
So say the UN special representative on human rights , the Mexican observer commission and the relations of ten fishermen killed in Santa Marta , and of the 18 people forced face down on to the ground and shot dead by paramilitaries in Buga within the last month alone .
This is a continued gross abuse of human rights and , as my own UK ambassador has said , in these troubled times the guerrillas and the paramilitaries are both terrorist groups and should be combated through all means as part of the current anti-terrorist programme .
We feel that particularly due to the killing of the British backpacker Jeremy Parks on 28 October .
The Belgian Presidency rightly included action against paramilitaries as one of its four priorities in Colombia , in August of this year .
Could the Commissioner please tell us in his reply what progress is being made as a result of the pressure that is being applied .
Secondly , we support Commissioner Patten 's proposal for a peace laboratory at Magdalena Medio .
It is a major contribution towards the peace process , in contrast to the American military aid in Plan Colombia , which we have roundly condemned .
But this Magdalena Medio region has been subject to an incursion by those same guerrillas .
They are there , threatening campesinos that they must plant coca or they will die .
They are there running their own businesses , having their own taxes and they want to co-opt NGOs to ensure that our European money goes to them to undermine the peace process rather than to support it .
I call on the Commissioner now to show how he will introduce control and verification mechanisms so that our European money will achieve progress in the peace process , and not be abused by the paramilitaries to undermine our very aims .
Welcome
I should like to extend a welcome to a delegation from the Mercosur joint parliamentary commission .
The delegation , headed by its acting president , Mr Washington Abdala , is composed of twelve members of the upper and lower houses of Uruguay , Paraguay and Brazil .
During this visit , the delegation members will take part in the fourth interparliamentary meeting between this joint parliamentary commission from Mercosur and the delegation for relations with the countries of South America and Mercosur .
These meetings began in 1996 .
Relations between Mercosur and the EU are going through a very important period , since the negotiations for a free trade area have reached their sixth round and are proceeding at a fast pace .
On behalf of the European Parliament , therefore , I welcome this delegation and express this Institution ' s support for a profitable outcome to the negotiations .
EU / Latin America relations ( continuation )
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra for his excellent report .
I should like to express my recognition of the arduous task that he has undertaken , namely to synthesise the different aspects of our relations with Latin America .
This report looks forward in an ambitious effort to give more vitality and further impetus to our already intense relationship with Latin America .
The report takes a comprehensive approach to the objectives that should be pursued within the wider scope of our relations and the Commission completely shares this focus .
Political , economic and cooperation aspects cannot be dissociated from each other if we want our relationships to develop in a balanced way .
In this context , one of the major advances in recent years has been the establishment of a strategic bi-regional association , agreed upon at the first summit for Heads of State and Government of the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean .
The report underlines the importance of the priorities decided upon at the summit and uses them as a springboard to propose specific objectives in the political , economic , social and cultural fields .
In the political field , we support and share the desire to enlarge our bi-regional political agenda and to update the ministerial political dialogue .
Political dialogue is the central instrument for structuring and giving content to the strategic association .
This strategic association builds on common values which include diversity , tolerance , humanism and solidarity ; it should allow both regions to assert their common positions and converging interests on international and multilateral issues of great transcendence .
Many of these issues are addressed in the report and some of them , such as the prevention of conflicts and the fight against terrorism , have just taken on a new meaning .
In the economic , financial and commercial field , I cannot but share your wish that the negotiations in progress with Chile and the Mercosur conclude with success as soon as possible .
The entry into force of the agreement concluded with Mexico is already having a very positive impact on our commercial relations and on our investment .
But I believe that we should be careful about using the same schemes that we are applying to Mercosur , Chile and Mexico for other regions of Latin America .
We should always take into account the particular characteristics of each region , its level of economic development , the structure of its commerce and the level of regional integration which it has reached .
For this reason , we have undertaken a thorough study of our present and future commercial relations with Central America and the Andean Community .
On the basis of that study we shall be able to decide how to continue developing our economic and commercial relations with those regions .
Turning now to the cooperation issues dealt with in the report , I should start by mentioning the positive impact that the implementation of the external aid management reform will have .
The new programming and management mechanisms will increase the coherence , complementarity and efficiency of cooperation programmes .
I should also like to make it clear that the emphasis on social aspects - in particular health , education and the fight against poverty - is a priority for the Commission too .
We are currently promoting a forum for an exchange of ideas between the different actors in civil society on issues relative to social equity , so that its conclusions may be submitted to the Madrid Summit .
Social equity should be central to the dialogue between Heads of State and concrete initiatives in that field ought to come out of this summit .
I am grateful for the support given to Commission initiatives in the fields of education and culture .
Before the end of the year , the Commission intends to adopt an ambitious scholarship programme so that postgraduate Latin American students can complete their studies in Europe .
I am equally grateful for the support of the rapporteur and this Parliament for the programme aimed at enhancing the participation of Latin America in the information society .
I hope I have made it clear that the Commission shares the majority of the objectives set out in the report and that we very much appreciate the quality and ambitious nature of the proposal it contains .
I nonetheless wonder whether it is necessary to adopt a common strategy to achieve those objectives .
We must bear in mind the dynamic nature of our relations .
That dynamism results to a large extent from the vast array of regional and sub-regional mechanisms available to us .
These allow us to develop a flexible political dialogue which is easily adaptable to current circumstances and priorities .
The vitality of our relations is largely the result of our decision to move forward on the basis of a strategic association built upon a relationship between equals .
The priorities of that strategic association are defined by the Heads of State and Government of both regions .
I therefore believe that before launching any new initiatives we should ensure that the process we have just started continues to develop and builds progressively on the present dialogue and association relationship .
I should like to thank Parliament for this valuable contribution .
With reports such as this , Parliament continues to present a clear vision of what our relations should be with a region which is developing closer political and economic links with the European Union .
Finally , I am fully aware that some questions were addressed to Mr Patten .
I am sure he would like to provide written answers to the questions from Mr Medina Ortega in particular , but also to those from other speakers , and I assure Parliament that it will receive a full reply within the next few weeks .
Mr President , my sense of nobility obliges me to respond to the positive and constructive speech by Mr Bolkestein .
As rapporteur , I would say to him that I almost did not miss Mr Patten ' s absence .
I would also like to express my thanks to all of my fellow Members .
For reasons of accuracy , I would like to refer to a point that has been made in this debate that the great omission from this report was the failure to mention indigenous peoples .
I would like to quote directly from paragraph 27 , which " calls for the new common strategy to make education , health and culture its priorities and to provide for targeted measures in support of those Latin American countries which require them , with particular attention paid to ethnic minorities and indigenous groups " .
Therefore , to say that there has been an omission , when we are asking that the maximum priority within the new common strategy be given to indigenous peoples , seems to me to be a clear contradiction , although , naturally , I respect the opinion of all my fellow Members .
Thank you , Mr Salafranca .
I am afraid the Member who made this observation is not present and was therefore unable to hear what you said , but he will certainly be informed .
Shipbuilding
The next item is the report ( A5-0373 / 2001 ) by Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on a temporary defensive mechanism for shipbuilding [ COM ( 2001 ) 401 - C5-0393 / 2001 - 2001 / 0153 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning a temporary defensive mechanism for shipbuilding is extremely important , for shipbuilding is a strategically significant sector in the European Union .
I would like to take this opportunity to present the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which , regrettably , does not coincide with that of the rapporteur .
I wish to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , for her outstanding work , especially in view of the very short time available to her .
I would therefore like to thank her , even though she has difficulty in accepting the legality of this proposal .
Naturally , my Committee has examined this issue and concludes that the right legal basis has been selected and that the concerns regarding the proposal 's legality are unfounded .
I therefore wish to comment briefly on the content of the proposal and the report .
It would be remiss of me , however , if I omitted to mention the constructive cooperation with the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
I think we have put forward a sound proposal .
I very much hope , too , that the Commission will adopt the amendments proposed by this House .
The conclusions of the Industry and Energy Council of 5 December 2000 , in accordance with the 1998 Council decision , confirmed the ending of operating aid for shipbuilding from 1 January 2001 .
However , it was pointed out at the time that if the negotiations with Korea failed , the Commission could adopt a different position after a review .
We must recognise that Korea has failed to honour the 2000 agreement in terms of price discipline and subsidies .
The Commission therefore had to examine whether , in the event of the failure of negotiations with Korea , which continues to violate current trade agreements by granting state subsidies , a temporary defensive mechanism should be proposed for European shipbuilding .
The proposal has now been submitted because the negotiations failed , and the proposed defensive mechanism must be evaluated .
From the Committee 's point of view , the proposal is inadequate , as it is restricted solely to container ships and tankers for transporting petroleum products and chemicals ( excluding stainless steel tankers ) .
The proposal allows operating aid of 6 % and , in special cases , of up to 14 % .
A dispute settlement procedure is also to be initiated before the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
These aid measures are to be applicable only until the conclusion of proceedings , that is , until 31 December 2002 at the latest .
We believe that the European Parliament should maintain its position that a dispute settlement procedure should be initiated .
However , this proposal on a temporary defensive mechanism is in need of improvement , since the three segments referred to only account for 20 % of European shipbuilding .
Yet almost every segment in the European Union is affected by Korea 's unfair competition practices .
In particular , those categories of ships which will also be the subject of the complaint to the WTO must be included .
Only then will our message to Korea be clear and convincing .
In this respect , Commissioner , I believe that your support for Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 and 6 is essential .
The duration envisaged is also inadequate , in our view .
We therefore propose that the defensive mechanism should be applicable at least for the duration of the current Regulation on aid to shipbuilding , Regulation 1540 / 98 , which expires on 31 December 2003 , or possibly until the conclusion of the WTO proceedings .
As the European Parliament , and as the European Union , we must not allow unfair trade practices to damage European business and put jobs at risk . Otherwise , these unfair practices will emerge in other sectors too , impeding growth and threatening jobs .
At the same time , however , we must strike a careful balance between justified defensive mechanisms and anti-market protectionism benefiting certain sectors through State aid , which impedes fair competition .
I believe that the Committee 's proposal takes account of these concerns . I would ask you to support the draft report , and I appeal to the Commission to state its willingness to adopt the amendments .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of the draftsman of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , Mr Valdivielso de Cué , not because he does not support the report , but because he cannot be here today .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy supported the proposals put forward by Ms Randzio-Plath by a very substantial majority : 39 votes in favour to 9 votes against .
The intention is to send out a clear signal against South Korea 's dumping policies , which in recent decades have driven European shipbuilding to the brink of collapse by maintaining subsidies and benefits for companies in receivership .
For a year now , we have pursued a policy which aimed to reach agreement with South Korea .
A protocol to this effect was drawn up on 5 June 2000 .
South Korea did not honour it .
In December 2000 , we agreed to appeal to the WTO panel .
South Korea did not respond .
For this reason , the Commission quite rightly decided in July that temporary assistance of up to 14 % may be paid by the national authorities , not from the European purse , for a specific number of ships until the end of 2002 .
This is the issue today .
In line with Ms Randzio-Plath 's proposals , we want to extend the categories of ships to include ferries for trains , persons and road vehicles , as well as natural gas and petroleum gas tankers , and we want to extend the term until 2003 ; in other words , we are in favour of a two-year period .
We ask you to endorse this draft report and clearly reject the Liberals ' motion which calls for the entire draft report to be dismissed .
South Korea has the solution in its hand .
None of us wants long-term subsidies .
However , this is our only opportunity to exert pressure on behalf of the European shipbuilding industry on this difficult issue .

The debate is now suspended and will be resumed this afternoon at about 4.45 p.m. , after the debate on the international situation in which the Commission will take part .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Vote
The next item is the vote .
Procedure without debate :
Recommendation for second reading on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 70 / 220 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States on measures to be taken against air pollution by emissions from motor vehicles ( 11253 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0474 / 2001 - 2000 / 0211 ( COD ) ) .
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0364 / 2001 ) by Erik Meijer , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on action by Member States concerning public service requirements and the award of public service contracts in passenger transport by rail , road and inland waterway ( COM ( 2000 ) 7 - C5-0326 / 2000 - 2000 / 0212 ( COD ) )
Mr President , I have an oral amendment to Amendment No 75 .
After the vote on Amendment No 130 : President .
Unfortunately Mr Fatuzzo , that means that Amendment No 75 falls .
Mr President , it is not ' unfortunately ' , because what I wanted is contained in that amendment - it concerns pensioners .
( Laughter and applause )
We aim to please .
Before the vote on the draft legislative resolution :
Mr President , I should like to ask you to postpone the vote on the legislative resolution further to yesterday ' s communication by Commissioner de Palacio that she would not accept what is now being decided upon by a large majority in Parliament .
In my opinion , we should set aside some time to consult further with Mrs de Palacio on this matter , because if we do not , although she may present a draft regulation in a few months ' time , the regulation will be in a form different from that which has now been accepted by Parliament .
That is why I propose postponing the vote on the legislative resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my side has admittedly lost in a key vote , but the process must continue .
We must now ensure that the Council forms an opinion .
If we prevaricate and postpone this issue , the Council can continue to hide behind its inaction .
I therefore propose that we reject the rapporteur 's motion and now hold the final vote so that the ball is the Council 's court .
We still have the second reading and the mediation process .
A delay at this point will not help : we want to move forward on this issue , and so I ask you to reject Mr Meijer 's motion .
Mr President , I wish to endorse Mr Jarzembowski 's remarks for another reason .
The plenary has substantively amended a Commission item by a large majority .
The Commission must also accept , for once , that this House may substantively amend a Commission item .
I am therefore in favour of continuing the process .
( Parliament rejected the proposal to postpone the vote )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
President .
Before we move on I would like to congratulate Mr Poettering who I understand has just been re-elected leader of his group .
( Loud applause )
Report ( A5-0354 / 2001 ) by Georg Jarzembowski , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision on market access to port services ( COM ( 2001 ) 35 - C5-0078 / 2001 - 2001 / 0047 ( COD ) )
Before the vote on Amendment No 47 :
Mr President , now that we have adopted Amendments Nos 48 and 49 , I would like to ask the Liberal Group whether Amendment No 47 automatically lapses .
That is my question , as we have agreed that the Commission must put forward appropriate proposals .
I assume that Amendment No 47 now lapses .
I think it lapses but if the Liberal Group wants to support me I am very happy to receive their support .
( Laughter and applause )
- ( NL ) Mr President , unfortunately , the rapporteur is right .
I thought that my amendment was far superior , but I accept that , as his amendment has already been adopted , it makes no sense to vote on mine .
However , I would point out that the Commission has stated that his amendment is not accurate whereas mine is .
Amendment No 47 falls .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0359 / 2001 ) by Luis Berenguer Fuster , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on insurance mediation ( COM ( 2000 ) 511 - C5-0484 / 2000 - 2000 / 0213 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , I should like to make a point about the PPE-DE recommended voting list .
There was a mistake in Amendment No 8 as a result of a mistake in the original draft , which has now been corrected .
So Amendment No 8 should be supported by the PPE-DE Group as a recommendation .
Similarly , Amendments Nos 57 , 13 , 46 and 47 have a mistake in the English language translation which renders it nonsensical .
The word ' by ' should be replaced by ' to ' in the relevant paragraph ( c ) .
The rapporteur , Mr Berenguer Fuster , supports me on both counts .
We will ensure that the language versions are corrected and correspond to one another .
Mr President , Amendment No 55 , rather than being an oral amendment , in fact adds text that must have been forgotten , since this text does not appear .
Therefore , the following words should be added to the end of the text of Amendment No 55 : ' will have to give the name of these insurance companies ' .
Are there any objections to that oral amendment ?
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
Mr President , in my opinion , Amendment No 60 is not incompatible with Amendment No 41 and can be voted on as an addition .
I would like to hear the opinion of the proposing group .
Mr President , this proposed amendment works perfectly well as an addition , and can therefore be voted on as an addition .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
President .
Colleagues , we shall only vote now on the two Caudron reports .
The remaining items will be held over to the vote tomorrow .
Mr President , we are in the middle of taking a vote .
I merely wanted to point out how absurd these foreshortened sessions are , without a Friday .
It is never possible to deal satisfactorily with the agenda .
( Sustained applause )
Mr President , due to the large number of votes outstanding , I urgently request that we begin early enough with the votes tomorrow morning ; otherwise , we will not be able to deal with everything .
Mr President , it was announced that Amendment No 35 would not be dealt with as it does not concern all the language versions .
However , it relates to the introduction of gender-neutral language throughout the proposal , and I would ask you to ensure that gender-neutral language is used in the entire research framework programme .
We will ensure that all the terms used are gender-neutral .
Before the vote on Amendments Nos 322 and 333 :
Mr President , as I understand it , adopting the Committee ' s amendment on the same issue invalidates the other two amendments .
It refers to the same paragraph .
I am sorry . I cannot agree because we are voting on additions .
Mr President , the principles included in the Caudron report are exactly identical to those in the amendments tabled by Messrs Liese , Nisticò , Fiori and Trakatellis , except that in those amendments , one more element has been added , namely the fact that we must also take account of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child .


That is the only point added , and I therefore hope that our socialist friends , as well as others , will vote in favour of this amendment .
Thank you for that clarification .
Do you agree , Mr Caudron ?
Mr President , I agree with what Mr van Velzen has just said .
He is right about that minor addition .
We can therefore vote on it , and I vote in its favour .
Thank you .
The rest comes later , once we get to other parts of Amendments Nos 332 and 333 .
All we are voting on is that section at the moment .
Mr President , I think the rapporteur wants to comment .
Mr Caudron , Mrs McNally is reading your mind .
I certainly wished to comment . When one is seated in the second row one can be seen more easily than when one is rather further away .
Concerning the three parts , the rapporteur ' s opinion is to vote for the first and the second .
He does however advise voting against the third part , contrary to a note sent to the presidency . As is abundantly clear , the third part clearly states that work should concern stem cells from embryos or foetuses resulting from spontaneous miscarriages or abortions undertaken to safeguard the health of the mother .
That is outdated wording .
I am indeed sorry . It does appear that in this debate we are reworking the debate on abortion and this is causing me considerable concern .
Mr Caudron , you are possibly confusing two parts .
We are voting at the moment on part 3 - stem cells .
You have raised the issue of embryos at this point .
We are only voting on the stem cells aspect of this amendment at the moment - section 3 of the amendment .
No , Mr President , I am not mistaken . It is indeed in Paragraph 3 , in the last part of Paragraph 3 .
I am not referring to Paragraph 4 .
To be absolutely clear , it is the words : ' to ensure the mother 's health may be funded ' .
Yes , Mr President , that is the part I did not wish to be voted on .
At least I am clear now .
Before the vote on amendment 330 : Turmes ( Verts / ALE ) .
Mr President , this amendment is about technology assessment .
In principle all the groups agree , but our amendment is a bit rigid on the financial implication .
It says : ' a minimum of 3 % ' .
So I propose an oral amendment which will read : ' activities in all thematic areas should be supported only if a certain percentage of the respective project is used for technological impact assessment ' .
That is very clear .
Are there any objections to that oral amendment ?
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment ) Amendment No 33 :
Mr President , could I perhaps invite the rapporteur to present his oral amendment to 335 ?
It was agreed with the rapporteur that the word ' and ' would be replaced by ' or ' .
That is an extremely minor oral amendment , and I know that the rapporteur is in agreement with this .
Do you mean ' fish or animal ' , or is it ' new or improved ' ?
Mr President , my reaction will indicate how much work I put into this report .
The draft oral amendment tabled relates to the second part of Amendment No 335 , ' new or improved races ' , and I feel it is indeed more appropriate to use ' or ' rather than ' and ' , because the human race could not really be subsumed under ' new and improved races ' .
Alright , ' new or improved ' .
Are there any objections to that oral amendment ?
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment ) Amendment No 320 :
Mr President , as regards 320 , I can go along with the proposed addition concerning quality as regards nutrition . I cannot however accept the deletions contained in this amendment .
If those who tabled the amendment agree , I can accept the addition to the text .
Do the Greens accept the oral amendment as an addition ?
( The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance accepted the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0355 / 2001 ) by Gérard Caudron , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the multiannual framework programme 2002-2006 of the European Atomic Energy Community ( EURATOM ) for research and training activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research Area ( COM ( 2001 ) 94 - C5-0171 / 2001 - 2001 / 0054 ( CNS ) ) .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
President .
That concludes the vote .
Report Meijer ( A5-0364 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , we have approved the new regulation on action by Member States in the liberalisation of public transport services by rail , road and inland waterway , in order that this may be consolidated as a new single European market .
And , with regard to this , our Parliamentary Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has tabled various amendments aimed at preserving aspects relating to the environment and sustainability in the transportation market , such as the rational use of energy and the fulfilment of standards on the control of emissions which contaminate the atmosphere , greenhouse gases , noise , etc , as well as giving priority to alternative forms of transport which make a better contribution to the much hoped-for reduction in traffic congestion .
We have argued for the need to defend the quality of transport services , whether these be run by public or private companies , and we have stated that social conditions with regard to the health and safety of employees in these companies should be closely linked to the quality of services offered .
We also think that liberalisation should not lead to an abandonment of the idea that passenger transportation is a social instrument and which supports the weakest groups in society , such as schoolchildren , trainees , pensioners and those living with some kind of disability , all of whom should continue to be protected through restrictions on ticket prices .
Ticket prices should be standardised in order to facilitate the integration and interoperability of different transportation methods , including cross-border transportation , where timetables and service networks also need to be coordinated .
Transport should be cheap and available throughout all regions , and should also guarantee a service to less populated and less prosperous areas at moderate prices .
Finally , it is not acceptable to liberalise urban , suburban and regional transportation whilst remaining , as some governments are , opposed to the liberalisation of state transportation , as for example the passenger railways .
Although it should be controlled , this market should be open to free competition throughout the EU .
Mr President , I express my personal satisfaction , as a Member and as the representative of the Pensioners ' Party , for the approval of amendment 130 in this document , which regulates public service in transport by rail , road and inland waterway throughout Europe .
Amendment 130 was tabled by the Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , whom I thank for tabling it , and voted on before the oral amendment , which , like the Greens ' amendment , sought to extend the possibility of granting free travel on public transport to pensioners .



I therefore thank all the Members who voted for it , particularly the European Members of the Northern League - Mr Gobbo , Mr Borghezio , Mr Speroni - and of course above all the Members of the Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left who tabled the amendment that has been voted on , and also all those , notably including the socialists , who voted for it .
. ( FR ) We consider this draft regulation to be a real threat to the urban public passenger transport service in that it abolishes the freedom to manage our territorial communities .
Calling this fundamental principle into question in many Member States , possibly even going as far as constitutional recognition , is detrimental to free choice and , more importantly , to the free organisation of local public services , thus affecting service itself .
However , we can only agree with the exclusion of long-distance rail services due to the exclusive rights without compensation that apply to them .
We also approve all the amendments aiming to preserve the social clause .
However , for reasons of safety and coherent management , which would be jeopardised by the division of the lines , we consider the inclusion of local rail services within the scope of the regulation to be unacceptable .
That is why we propose that this text , which is neither acceptable nor desirable for the continuity of the local public passenger transport service , be rejected .
. ( FR ) For ages , governments all over Europe have been closing rail services to the benefit of private companies throughout the road transport sector , leading to the tragic accidents in the Mont Blanc and Saint-Gothard tunnels and the tremendous human and social cost of all , more ' normal ' , accidents .
Today , the road networks are at saturation point , so some private investors are turning to rail in order to make new profits there , aided and abetted by both the European authorities and national governments .
Neither users nor the general population can expect to benefit from the privatisation of public services .
Nor will workers in the sector , who are denouncing and fighting privatisation and its devastating effects on employment and working conditions .
It is true that the rapporteur is concerned about the damage done by unbridled liberalisation and suggests the possibility of opposition by local communities . However , he is nonetheless among those who see privatisation as a fait accompli and the dismantling of public services as inevitable , and who are only trying to regulate the process somewhat .
As we are in favour of the development of public transport both on international routes and in regional and local networks , we do not want to support the dismantling of public services directly or indirectly , since this dismantling , even if it is regulated , is detrimental to users and to workers in the sector , and constitutes a severe social decline .
That is why we have not voted for this report , and we would say once more that public services everywhere must be designed and implemented to respond to the needs of the user , not to make money for private companies .
This report seeks to improve the Commission ' s proposal , which , despite its name , effectively seeks to privatise passenger transport .
Although important proposals have been approved , and we voted for them , the fact is that the introduction of competition may jeopardise established rights for users , such as travel passes , and for staff , something that has not been sufficiently safeguarded in this report and will certainly be even less so in Commission and Council practice .
Thus , even greater obstacles to user mobility may be created , although certain proposals approved by Parliament along different lines are to be welcomed .
Furthermore , there is no proper guarantee of coordination between the various means of transport , and adequate answers are not given to those users located in less profitable areas : private companies may consider them unprofitable and then cancel services there .
Lastly , the vote against the legislative resolution is also justified on account of our fears regarding the implementation of the Commission ' s position and the consequences for staff and users , which may jeopardise a quality , low-price service .
It should also be noted that , although the Commission is backing the privatisation of transport services , part of these services will continue to be supported by public money , which is unacceptable .
The proposal clearly states that its aim is to develop competition in the field of transport provision .
Contrary to what it states in several places , everything shows that within the framework of so-called ' regulated ' competition , the results of opening up the market have not been positive , and nor has the efficiency of services improved .
Quite the opposite .
The overall process of liberalisation runs counter to improving the service for passengers , to improving working conditions , to respect for the environment , traffic safety and a regional planning policy that is not imposed by market restrictions .
We are stating our opposition to any liberalisation of transport , and our support for maintaining the status of transport as a public service , and for cooperation between public companies at European level .
We are against any State aid being allocated to private operators who are not , moreover , prepared to make the necessary investment in infrastructures .
What is more , we are in favour of the immediate re-nationalisation of all the private railway lines and networks in Europe and in favour of the re-nationalisation / municipalisation of urban and local transport .
The underlying problem is that it is impossible to compromise with market logic .
When it is applied , it is to the detriment of another logic , that of public service , which explains why we have voted against this report .
Report Jarzembowski ( A5-0354 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , open access to the port services market and equal opportunities in this field are not only appropriate but also a requirement of the Treaties on which the European Union is founded .
Regulation and control are needed in this particular field to ensure that no State provides financial assistance to its ports , since this is a serious threat to free competition between Community ports .
However , there are certain aspects which should not be exclusively regulated by the EU .
Member States and their constitutional bodies with competencies in this field should maintain their capacity to include their own specific standards for the invitation to tender for contracts for supply of port services and for the protection of workers affected .
Additionally , pilotage , mooring and the handling of cargo , including stowage and trans-shipment , since they are compulsory services , should not be included in the Community Directive liberalising port services , but their regulation should remain under the control of the Member States and their port authorities , for reasons of the safety of maritime traffic .
In an airport , there would be chaos if there were more than one company providing air traffic control .
In a port , there should only be one authority for pilotage and one for mooring , for the same reason .
As you know , Mr President , I was born in Genoa and lived in Genoa until I was 21 .
I admired the port of Genoa every morning when I looked out over the city , since I lived in a very well-known district up high , from where I could enjoy precisely this beautiful view over the port of Genoa , which is nonetheless a very busy port , like so many in the European Union .
Well , in this document , which regulates the organisation of the port , port services and safety , I would like to have found greater commitment and greater financial involvement by the European Union so that all the ports in Europe without distinction , northern European ports and Mediterranean ports , could be financially supported just as our competitors in South Korea do with the shipyards in their country .
We , too , should help our ports and our shipping .
Opening up port services to competition , at least in the way proposed by the Commission , will have a number of serious , adverse repercussions :
a ) on the quality of port services and the standards applied , because they will have to compete and will recruit unskilled staff ;
b ) on working conditions and the employment prospects of port workers , thereby jeopardising their health and safety , curtailing their vocational training and undermining their skills ;
c ) on the safety of transport by sea and the environment , due to the generally lower standard of services provided .
Although the Committee on Transport 's motion represents an improvement , with the amendments adopted , it is still thinking along the same lines as the Commission and has even reduced the scope for public-sector controls , which is why I voted against it .
The generally-worded title of the Community directive before us conceals an important step towards the privatisation of ports , especially the services which they provide , such as pilotage , towing and docking ships , loading and unloading and storing goods and moving passengers .
The aim is not to improve the port services provided ; it is to sell off yet another publicly owned sector to big business and hand a complete infrastructure over to the private monopolies so that they can make use of and profit from it .
The unavoidable consequences will be a reversal in labour relations and rights and a tragic drop in safety standards for workers , for passengers on board ships and in the services provided .
We want to stress from the outset that we are opposed and completely reject both the directive and the Jarzembowski report .
We refuse to be party to a line of thinking that accepts privatisation as inevitable and endeavours to rescue a few individual services .
On the contrary , we steadfastly support the argument for public port services and ports whose operations are integrated into an overall development plan which develops the potential of each country , supports the economy and employment and guarantees the safety of human life in port and at sea .
These are highly sensitive issues for Greece , with its large number of island complexes and its sovereignty in the Aegean , a sensitive area from the economic , social and national security standpoints .
We would also point out that multipurpose ports such as Piraeus , which support and serve the shipbuilding and repair industry , can only do their job efficiently if they remain in the public sector .
This endeavour is more than infuriating or provocative .
It is an attempt to intervene in the operational unit itself , that is , the port , and to prohibit it from doing what any enterprise does , that is , from operating as a single entity .
It breaks up and imposes internal competition between services provided by the same service provider .
At the same time , the directive talks about prerequisites for ' public services ' but leaves them at the mercy of the private sector .
The Communist Party of Greece is fighting , alongside the workers , for uniform , 100 % public-sector port services , so that they are able to operate , develop and connect with other sectors of the economy .
If we want properly operating ports , safety , coordination and development , we need to support a single , vertically-integrated service , with each activity helping and supporting the other .
Otherwise , the smooth and efficient operation of the sector will be at risk , any attempt at coordination will be doomed to failure and safety will be thrown to the winds because it will be subject to the laws of profit and competition and will have to rely upon the goodwill of the enterprises .
That is why we voted against the Jarzembowski report .
The draft report presented to us is unacceptable in its current form .
First , because it provides a confused response to the fundamental questions of competition between European ports and financial transparency in the allocation of grants to these ports .
But also , and in particular , because the indiscriminate liberalisation of all port services constitutes a dangerous threat to safety , the environment and employment .
To safety , because opening up to competition highly specialised services such as piloting , requiring specific skills adapted to each port , carries the potential risk of seriously jeopardising the safety conditions in which these professions are exercised .
To the environment , because liberalisation does not allow it to be taken into consideration sufficiently .
On these two points , the report and the directive contradict the ' maritime safety ' and environmental risk reduction reinforcement policy launched by the European Union following the Erika disaster .
Lastly , such liberalisation poses a threat to employment , because opening up port services to competition , in particular those employing the most staff , such as freight handling , carries the risk of plunging the European ports into a dangerous downward spiral with regard to social benefits .
This tendency would be unsustainable in areas that are often vulnerable or in labour market areas that are already severely affected by industrial restructuring .
I cannot , therefore , approve all the provisions that would lead to port services being opened up to competition with no compensation or safeguards .
That is why I voted for all the amendments aiming to exclude port services such as piloting , mooring and freight handling from the scope of the liberalisation proposed by the directive .
As these amendments have not been adopted , I voted against the report .
. ( FR ) First of all , I would like to thank both our rapporteur for the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , Mr Georg Jarzembowski , and the Committee as a whole for the high quality of their work .
I have several reasons for voting against this report .
To me , voting against this report means first of all rejecting the liberalisation of intra-port services , that is to say going against the obligatory privatisation of handling and mooring services .
As piloting is the only intra-port service to have been recognised as an obligatory public service and as an activity requiring great care with regard to safety , it is the only intra-port service that will continue to be controlled by the Member States , and that will , therefore , be excluded from the scope of the directive .
I simply cannot comprehend , however , that mooring service providers , who provide an internationally recognised service of general interest by providing indispensable assistance both with regard to prevention in the field of environmental protection and in implementing the best possible level of safety , will from now on be subject to competition .
To me , voting against this report also means rejecting liberalisation between ports , that is to say , rejecting competition between ports , competition which can only have disastrous and harmful effects , with regard to both the quality of services rendered and the working conditions themselves .
Voting against this report therefore means arguing for increased cooperation between ports , recognising that ports are a full and complete factor in regional planning and that as such , they must not be subjected to competition that could lead to their eradication .
These , in short , are the two main reasons that have led me not to deliver a final vote in favour of this report .
. ( FR ) This proposal to liberalise port services is of immediate concern to us due to its potential practical consequences .
We feel it is completely inappropriate to seek to open up all port services to competition regardless of their type , given that some of them , due to their specific obligations , are of a public service nature .
Apart from national differences regarding the very concept of public service as applied to port services , optimum safety must be ensured in all Member States . They alone can define and control this by means of public service tasks , professional qualifications , restrictions or the definition of their activities .
The economic logic in favour of users must never take priority over safety in the widest meaning of the word : personal , environmental or material .
Therefore , we consider that this proposal must exclude all services that are of a public service nature according to the standards of each Member State , be they piloting , mooring or other services .
This is not the case , so we are voting against this text .
. ( PT ) Our vote reflects our position on a deeply controversial report , which has not been accepted by any sector of port services .
As we know , the Commission proposal seeks to open up major areas concerned with port safety to competition and does not guarantee workers ' rights .
Although the report itself contains some positive references , it retains negative aspects that give some backing to the Commission ' s position .
For countries like Portugal , this proposal could have highly detrimental effects on a sector that has already been affected by other , equally detrimental measures , and we have therefore voted against it .
. ( FR ) Having attacked public rail transport , Mr Jarzembowski , the rapporteur , is now attacking port services .
The logic behind this , which is still the same , is a direct result of the process of liberalising telecommunications , transport , energy and postal services .
This involves placing the organising bodies , infrastructures and professionals carrying out public service tasks , often in a public context , under the yoke of the market .
Three hundred European Union ports and all port services such as freight handling , piloting , towage , mooring , embarkation and disembarkation services would be affected by this directive .
However , a recent opinion poll confirmed by the success of the European dockers ' strike of 6 November shows that these proposals meet with the mass rejection of port service workers .
The long amendment war that took place within the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism may have meant for now that competition will no longer be within ports but between them , but these results are not satisfactory .
Moreover , because we demand that public service obligations regarding safety , regularity , continuity , quality , price and harmonisation with the system that is most favourable in terms of social protection for port workers and respect for the environment , be fulfilled , we have rejected the Jarzembowski report .
. The majority of British ports are well run and prosper because private operators have taken over from cash-strapped local authorities and are running the ports as successful businesses .
The proposed European Commission directive to increase competition in port services in the EU threatens to reverse this .
It would leave British ports vulnerable to takeovers similar to the takeover of various electricity firms by Electricité de France .
It would impose unnecessary bureaucracy on an already highly competitive and successful UK ports market .
It would threaten the independent , commercially based and subsidy free nature of British ports .
I would like to see private operators exempted from the scope of this directive .
. ( FR ) Mooring services are a general interest service as recognised by the judgment of the Court of Luxembourg of 18 June 1998 .
Within this context , the port authority may require mooring services to handle any safety problems with no obligation for remuneration .
Mooring services provide all ships with the same quality of service , due to an extremely extensive knowledge of the port in which the service is provided .
The permanent nature of the service , the professional qualifications of the workers , their knowledge of the specific local features and the essential role played by mooring services in port and maritime safety make this activity an essential determining factor in environmental protection .
The deterioration of the merchant fleet as a whole and the increasing over-use of frequently faulty boats and equipment show the extent of the essential role to be played by mooring service providers in years to come , due to their technical skills and wide knowledge of their place of work .
Mooring services , like piloting , must therefore be excluded from the European directive , and that is why the group of the Greens has voted in favour of Amendments No 66 and 67 of this report .
) , in writing . ( NL ) Mr President , the introduction of the port package has clearly given European port policy a new lease of life .
The report on market access to port services has caused a great stir in the European Parliament , not least because the European Commission proposal predominantly deals with competition within ports .
The wish from the EP , dating back to 1997 , to reach a Regulation on competition among ports has been completely overlooked .
In this connection , a request has been made for clear rules on financial transparency and State aid in the port sector .
The Dutch People ' s Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) within the ELDR Group wants to guarantee more transparency for government funding and has asked the European Commission to present a proposal to this effect prior to the entry into force of the present directive .
Otherwise , we would start to question the directive ' s added value for European ports and their users .
Opinions in my group are divided as to which services should fall within the scope of the directive and which should not .
The VVD backs the rapporteur where he wants to limit the directive to the technical-nautical services .
However , in our view , pilotage services should be included in the directive .
Cargo handling services are by their very nature land-based and do not belong in this directive .
Furthermore , port authorities and users are required to make relatively sizeable investments in infrastructure and superstructure .
The tendering of the cargo handling aspect will mainly lead to red tape .
This administrative burden is not proportionate to the result and creates uncertainty within investing authorities .
It also creates an obstruction for urban planning authorities of the local councils , to which most ports in the Netherlands still belong .
The VVD is against including the cargo handling services in this directive .
. ( FR ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work on this highly sensitive dossier .
Unusually , the division here has not been political but national , and the compromise brokered is generally positive .
This directive was necessary because port services must be opened up to competition and European ports require European legislation on port services .
If competition is encouraged , it is essential that it be organised by an appropriate framework .
However , account must be taken of the specific nature of each activity .
I am thinking of piloting and mooring services in particular , since these , for safety reasons , must continue to be governed by the port authorities .
This method of management works very well in France and even if these activities are open to competition in other European countries , I am in favour of their current exclusion from the scope of the directive .
These are port services of general interest .
If these services are kept within the scope of the directive , the concept of port authority loses all meaning .
On the other hand , I approve of the liberalisation of freight handling , since this is a commercial service and opening it up to competition should be synonymous with increased employment .
Lastly , I have supported the provisions in favour of greater transparency in financial relations between ports and Member States .
In the name of legal certainty and fair competition between European ports , it must be possible to subject grants paid by national authorities to detailed inspections .
Report Berenguer Fuster ( A5-0359 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , I voted for the regulation of insurance mediation .
I take the opportunity to hope that the European Union will also soon regulate the mediation of public insurance .
' What is public insurance ? ' you will ask , Mr President .
Naturally it means social security and sickness benefit .
In this area too , citizens have the right to be properly informed about what the public sector offers them for their future lives as pensioners , and how much they must pay now , as workers , in order to have a pension tomorrow .
Moreover , the information service for workers and pensioners about their right to a pension should be regulated throughout Europe , to enhance it in every possible way .
Cross-border insurance mediation will increase consumers ' options to choose between various insurance providers .
The directive proposal we have in front of us now allows insurance intermediaries to operate also in other Member States .
When making choices between various providers , EU citizens must nevertheless be confident that we , as European legislators , guarantee consumer protection by making sure that persons practising insurance mediation are highly qualified .
The report on the insurance mediation directive , which we in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs have been working on , is generally satisfactory .
We ensure that insurance intermediaries have the necessary professional competence , liability insurance or other equivalent insurance as well as adequate financial capacity .
Any insurance intermediary must also be a person of good repute , who has not been made bankrupt .
Simultaneously , however , we must ensure that EC regulations do not cause any unnecessary bureaucracy .
Our committee has made several amendments , which according to the opinion of expert advisors clearly make the directive more sensible and give Member States the option to make decisions in consideration of national circumstances .
We have achieved compromises , which the majority of Member States in the Council seem to be inclined to support .
It is important not to apply the directive to any persons whose principal professional activity is other than insurance mediation .
By this I mean in particular , travel agencies , who also offer their customers travel insurance as part of a travel package .
They make the customer ' s life considerably easier and in Finland , for example , they are under the supervision of the authorities .
In connection with travel insurance accident insurance is also often sold , which include provision for compensations in the event of death .
It has been very beneficial to specify that these are not life insurances referred to in this directive .
It would also have been more beneficial not to apply the directive to intermediaries , who work under the responsibility of their insurance company , or for whose activities the company is responsible on the basis of international legislation and for whom the company also provides appropriate training .
As it unfortunately has been impossible to allow part-time agents , who act under the responsibility of their company , to be totally excluded from the directive , it nevertheless is good to relax the registration liability in the way our committee has proposed .
The relationship of Amendment Nos 14 to Amendment Nos 13 and 6 remains unclear , because Amendment No 14 allows for example travel and animal insurances to be totally excluded from the directive , while in other sections intermediaries providing those insurances are excluded from registration liability only .
If further amendments are still allowed , I would like to propose that Amendment Nos 18 and 22 be removed .
Insurance mediation by banks is no different from the rest of the mediation activity , and would not need regulation of its own .
Report Caudron ( A5-0376 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , what is this subsidiarity that is talked about so much in the European Union ?
Subsidiarity , you tell me , Mr President , means that one should act at a European level when that gives the greatest advantage and the greatest benefit to all the citizens of Europe .
So how should we carry out scientific research in Europe ?
With fifteen different projects from fifteen different States , which tomorrow will be fifteen plus the twelve that are joining , which makes twenty-seven , or would it not be better to have a single research fund ?
Is it better to make a single decision on how to spend the money of all twenty-seven European Union Member States , the 15 current ones plus the 12 candidate countries , or to leave twenty-seven different chapters of the budget ?
We should decide to have a single European research fund .
Mr President , I voted against the report , as some of the outcomes of the vote are incompatible with my own ethical and moral views .
Furthermore , I cannot understand why only marginal approaches exist for research in agriculture and forestry even though it is vital , for the future of agriculture and forestry , to set the necessary research priorities in this area in particular .
. ( FR ) This report is completely in line with the policy of the European institutions , where it emphasises aid to employers under the pretext of research and where it aims to strengthen the link between research and private interests , even if it sometimes cloaks this link in ecological or regionalist attire , according to fashion .
Nor is this report free of concessions to certain obscurantist ideas , whether religious or otherwise .
As for the budget for the Sixth Framework Programme , this penalises , in financial terms , research units whose work has been judged not to be a priority as it has little potential for profitable use by the private sector in the short or medium term .
The only reason we have voted in favour of this report is that we do not want to prejudice certain research strands supported by the report , which are seeking to make scientific , medical or technological progress , and nor do we want to risk depriving researchers in the public sector of the funding they need .
We have also adopted all the amendments that could represent progress in relation to the current situation .
. ( PT ) Despite the efforts of the rapporteur and most of the members of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , there is no guarantee that there will be no discrimination against countries and regions whose business structure does not have the economic ability to take part in programmes aiming at the rapid transfer of knowledge in technological innovation , even though there may be scientific resources .
Thus the efforts to ensure cohesion enshrined in the Treaty will not be enough to combat the loss of competitiveness that this will entail .
The assumption behind the aims of the Lisbon strategy was full employment and exclusion , and not the opposite .
Without being able to share in knowledge and take part in programmes , the less favoured regions will be left a long way from economic and social convergence .
. ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report .
I am a long-time supporter of research work at European level .
I am also pleased by Parliament ' s stated desire to create and develop this interdisciplinary Community area .
In France , in particular , we are seeing a worrying drop in the number of researchers .
As a result of disappointing national policies , the most talented researchers often go abroad and only too rarely return .
The measure included in this report on the mobility of researchers and assistance with returning home will also , I hope , help to compensate for the shortcomings of some governments .
Stimulating research also means ensuring an independent training policy based on existing competences at European level .
Although the task of the legislator may be to provide a framework for research , there is a risk that this will be too restricted .
A Europe of discovery must also be fostered and work on biotechnologies , which represent the future , should be encouraged .
Similarly , the fundamental European research at the heart of the competitiveness of our industries and the substantial work undertaken by small and medium-sized enterprises and industries , whose input we know to be necessary to discovery and innovation , must also be supported .
Research also affects the everyday life of all Europeans and priority areas , such as food safety , the fight against the major serious diseases and improving public health , show the desire to associate research and wellbeing .
I am also pleased to note the support that is proposed for the development of research into childhood illnesses , a field in which national policies have often failed .
That is why I call on the Commission to publish proposals on paediatric medicines .
Research and development are of crucial importance if Europe is to become a continent characterised by economic growth and sound welfare .
International competition , especially from the United States , increases the need for new and intensified research efforts .
In its proposal in connection with the Sixth Framework Programme , the Commission has identified several important problems and research areas which Europe needs to concentrate on .
Obviously , it is important that Europe ' s researchers cooperate and that research efforts are coordinated to some degree .
It is also very important that we should not only make it easier for researchers to travel but also facilitate the distribution of research results .
What worries us is that the framework programme involves a very considerable centralisation of research .
Major resources are being invested in a small number of selected areas .
Research is thus being directed in an unfortunate way because the Member States ' own research routes will be governed by the Commission ' s priorities .
For small countries with limited research budgets , the EU is thus in danger of becoming one of the main bodies that funds research , something which would give rise to an unfortunate degree of centralisation .
As liberals , we applaud the principle of independent research .
From the point of view of efficiency , independent research has shown itself to be far superior to politically directed research .
In the long run , societies which provide researchers with large room for manoeuvre when it comes to choosing subjects and methods achieve better results than societies in which the politicians determine the direction to be taken by research .
The principle of the independent pursuit of knowledge has , for centuries , strongly characterised research in Europe .
Universities and other institutions of higher learning have an important role to play in cooperating with industry and the public sector , but their most important task must not become that of taking orders from the latter .
We believe that the Sixth Framework Programme would give rise to undue centralisation of independent research .
We have therefore chosen to abstain from voting on the Caudron report .
- ( FR ) As a member of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and of the Temporary Committee on Human Genetics ( ' Bioethics ' ) , I have attached particular importance to this report , in its two main aspects :
the conditions for support granted to research in Europe , and
the ethical framework within which the European Parliament plans to conduct it .
As the amendments show , the essence of the debate concerned the part relating to ' ethics ' applied to biotechnologies .
Insofar as the majority of votes approved the instrumentalisation of humans by authorising the use of human embryos , in this case conceived within the context of the treatment of infertility by in vitro fertilisation , to the detriment of the promotion of human dignity and integrity , I consider that the ethical framework adopted by a majority at first reading gives a negative tone to the report as a whole , including the technical provisions .
In conclusion , despite good technical provisions , the supposedly ' ethical ' provisions mar the report as a whole by failing to respect human life .
Various Dutch fellow MEPs have made statements in the media to the effect that the Liberal Group refuses to prescribe ethical limits for scientific research .
Our voting behaviour has proved that this is nonsense .
First of all , adopted Amendment No 41 has a liberal pedigree .
It demands that both during the implementation of the programme and for the results , the ethical basic principles , such as protection of human dignity , data and privacy are adhered to .
Additionally , with regard to stem cell research , the guidelines drawn up by the ESF ethical committee must be observed .
Furthermore , our group wanted to adopt Amendment No 22 of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , which prevents funding being channelled into research activity aiming at human cloning for reproductive purposes , the creation of embryos for research purposes and eugenic modifications in the genetic heritage .
Unfortunately , the restrictive text of Amendment No 322 has been adopted in which therapeutic cloning has been ruled out .
We regret this , precisely because therapeutic cloning offers genuine opportunities for patients suffering from Alzheimer ' s , Parkinson ' s , AIDS or diabetes .
We have therefore abstained from the final vote .
Report Caudron ( A5-0355 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , I was very young , I must have been ten or eleven , when someone gave me a beautifully illustrated Walt Disney book .
Its title was ' Our friend the atom ' , and it was illustrated in that marvellous way that Walt Disney used to illustrate his universally famous works , as we might call them .
I was fascinated by that science book , which was so well explained to a young person like me .
Since then I have been in favour of nuclear energy and so I have voted for this document , especially because it promotes study and research into the nuclear sector in Europe , which , in my view , we should increase further .
Mr President , I view the expiry of the Euratom Treaty as an opportunity for Europe to phase out nuclear energy .
Yet today 's vote on the Euratom programme has endorsed follow-up funding for nuclear research .
This is set out in Amendment No 12 , for example , which provides funding for research into the safety of existing reactors ( with priority for reactors in the candidate countries ) , as well as reactors of the new generation .
In other words , it safeguards future nuclear power plants .
Yet research should be targeting non-nuclear energies , especially renewable energies , in order to make a contribution to the progressive phasing-out of nuclear energy in Europe .
This is why we rejected not only Amendment No 12 but also the entire Euratom programme in today 's vote .
. I warmly welcome this report by Gerard Caudron , which recommends changes in the allocation of spending to the Commission 's proposal for the EUR 16 bn research budget .
It is high time that the programme 's health research agenda was broadened to include more common diseases : most people have had contact , close or otherwise , with diseases such as cancer , degenerative diseases and cardiovascular diseases .
By allocating money to research these illnesses , the EU would be seen to be working for real causes that affect real people 's lives .
The ethical , legal and social aspects of research issues are increasingly important , if not as important as actual research .
Therefore , by calling for the funding in these areas , the committee is showing an awareness of the importance of these modern-day issues .
The call to allocate money to the information society demonstrates a real commitment to substantiate the Union 's stated ambitions laid out at the Lisbon so-called dot-com summit , to make the EU one of the most competitive and dynamic economies in the world .
There is no other option : if the EU wants to become a credible global player in the new economy and the information society , substantive amounts of money should be invested in this domain as soon as possible .
Finally , the allocation of money for research should always be informed by a consideration for the environment .
By funding research into renewable energies , this report shows itself to be balanced and environmentally sound .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.51 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Madam President , during this afternoon ' s vote , there was unfortunately some confusion with regard to the Jarzembowski report .
The view adopted by my group was that if cargo handling was not included in the directive , we would vote against it .
We thought that that was the case , but that appeared not so .
Hence the confusion .
It was our group ' s intention at the end , during the final vote , to vote in favour and not against , as we did , and I should like to have this minuted .
Mr Sterckx , we gladly note your group ' s wishes .
International situation
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the international situation .
Mrs Durant , President-in-Office of the Council , now has the floor .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , since the attacks on 11 September the international situation has entered a serious crisis .
The purpose of my statement is to update you on the crisis and inform you of the initiatives that the Council has taken and will take further .
I will therefore concentrate on the question of Afghanistan , which lies at the heart of the current crisis , after which I will also discuss the situation in the Middle East .
With regard to Afghanistan , when the Council found itself faced with an emergency situation it reacted with determination and clarity .
At its meetings of 21 September and 19 October , the European Council defined the framework of the European Union 's action , which comprises two main elements . The first is solidarity with the United States and support for the actions taken as part of its legitimate defence and in compliance with UN Security Council Resolution 1368 , on the understanding that these actions must be targeted and endeavour to spare the civilian population .
The second is to contribute to the anti-terrorist coalition formed under the aegis of the United Nations .
In late September , the troika visited Pakistan , Iran , Saudi Arabia , Syria and Egypt , where it had in fact met the Arab League leaders .
Recently , it visited countries in Central Asia .
The EU-Russia Summit of 3 October and the European Conference of 20 October were an opportunity to discuss the action to be taken at international level .
The November meeting of the General Assembly will offer a further opportunity to reinforce this coalition .
In concrete terms , the European Union 's strategy towards Afghanistan follows five broad lines : attaching priority to emergency humanitarian aid , the central role of the UN , the quest for a just and lasting internal political settlement , the importance of a reconstruction plan for the country and , lastly , the need to give the stabilisation plan a regional dimension .
It should be noted that the General Affairs Council of 17 October in Luxembourg and the informal summit of 19 October in Ghent clearly approved these five strategy lines .
With regard to emergency humanitarian aid , to date we have mobilised some EUR 320 million to deal with the crisis of the refugees and displaced people and with the effects of the famine .
The main difficulty is access to the people in need , which requires full cooperation from Afghanistan 's neighbouring states .
The presidency has taken various steps to that end .
With regard to the release and distribution of the aid , there is close cooperation between the Member States ' cooperation agencies , ECHO and the various international humanitarian organisations , such as the HCR , the World Food Programme , the ICRC and the many NGOs .
The second strategy line is the central role of the UN .
The European Union recognises the United Nations as the sole body with the international legitimacy to seek an internal political solution .
The United Nations will also have a determining role to play in the implementation of a reconstruction plan for the country .
The European Union therefore supports the UN Secretary-General and his representative for Afghanistan in their efforts .
It is also most interested in the plan that has just been submitted by Mr Brahimi , the UN Secretary-General 's Special Representative .
The Council is coordinating its efforts with a view to deciding how best it can contribute to the implementation of this plan .
On the question of an internal political settlement , the European Union believes it is important for the future Afghan authorities to be elected by the Afghans , for them to be representative of the ethnic groups on the ground and for them to respect and promote human rights , humanitarian rights and the rule of law in general ; finally , they must refuse to cooperate in any way with terrorism and maintain harmonious relations with neighbouring states , thereby contributing to general stabilisation .
For the time being , the European Union prefers not to openly advocate any one solution over another , leaving this to the Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General and to the Afghans themselves .
Regarding the reconstruction plan , in the light of internal political developments in Afghanistan , the European Union believes it is urgently necessary to draw up a reconstruction plan for the country .
It wishes to be involved , together with many other actors , including the donor countries and international organisations .
It also believes that this will be a long-term undertaking that will require a long-term commitment by those participating in the plan .
With regard to regional strategy , the European Union believes there can be no lasting peace in Afghanistan unless a regional approach is taken .
In other words , Afghanistan 's neighbours , together with certain other powers in the region , must be convinced that peace in Afghanistan will also be to their advantage .
Legitimate account must also be taken of these states ' security concerns , so as to avoid any further repetition of the foreign interference that has so often undermined Afghanistan and fuelled its internal conflicts .
The European Union regards the following countries and international organisations as having an essential role to play in any regional strategy with regard to the Afghan question : Pakistan , Iran , India , Uzbekistan , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan , China , Russia and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference .
Obviously we cannot discuss the latest developments . Events have speeded up over the last few days with the capture of Mazar-I-Sharif and Kabul .
These events show that the Taliban regime and the terrorist networks are gradually losing control of Afghanistan .
They represent another step towards achieving the international coalition 's objectives , namely to root out the terrorist networks .
During these crucial hours for Afghanistan 's future , Mr Verhofstadt , the President-in-Office of the European Council , reiterated the Council 's position yesterday , namely that there will be no stability in Afghanistan until a government can be established that is stable , legitimate , democratic and representative of all ethnic groups .
This government will also have to adhere fully to the principles of human rights .
He also pointed out that the United Nations must play a key role in helping the Afghans to form a government .
The European Union intends to support the United Nations ' plans to that end and strongly urges the Northern Alliance to contribute unreservedly to these efforts .
Moreover , the EU is prepared to help Afghanistan draw up and implement a vast reconstruction plan , a vital guarantee of a return to peace .
This project in no way affects the priority given to emergency humanitarian aid , which the Afghan people now need more urgently than ever .
Finally , the President-in-Office of the European Council stressed the regional dimension of the Afghan issue .
While the Afghans must , of course , themselves decide who will govern in the future , at the same time , all the other countries in the region will have to feel reassured by this new Afghan government .
It is with this in mind that the President of the European Council , accompanied by the President of the Commission , will be visiting India and Pakistan on 23 and 24 November .
With regard to the Middle East , the European Union continues to be deeply concerned by the situation there .
The violence and lack of trust between the different parties have prevented a resumption of the political dialogue that should begin with the implementation of the Tenet plan and the Mitchell report recommendations and should conclude with a just and lasting solution to the conflict , based on UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 and the principles set out in Madrid and Oslo .
As part of its strategy of relay diplomacy , the European Union , whether in the form of representatives of the Member States or of the Council , is always present on the ground .
Thanks largely to the activities of Mr Solana , the High Representative , Mr Moratinos , the Special Envoy , and several European ministers , after many false starts , the Peres-Arafat meeting finally took place on 26 September .
Unfortunately , the Israelis and the Palestinians did not succeed in this renewed attempt to call a ceasefire .
The Euromed Conference held in Brussels on 5 and 6 November was an opportunity for a wide-ranging exchange of views on the question of the stability and security of the Mediterranean region .
It allowed the participants , amongst other things , to take a further step towards resuming a high-level dialogue that could , eventually , restore the trust that would be needed before negotiations on the final status could resume .
The President of the European Council and the President-in-Office of the Council will be heading for the Middle East again this week .
They will be accompanied by the President of the Commission and by Mr Solana , the High Representative , whose important role is acknowledged by all the parties involved .
This mission , which comes under the mandate the informal Council of Ghent entrusted to the Belgian Presidency , will offer an opportunity to remind the parties , once again , of the European Union 's clear position on the goals the final negotiations must seek to achieve .
These are , for the Palestinians , the constitution of a viable and democratic State and an end to the occupation of their territory ; for the Israelis , the right to live in peace and security within internationally recognised borders .
The European Union will also point out that the quest for a global and lasting peace in the region means taking due account of the Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese aspects of the conflict , which must be resolved on the basis of the same principles .
To conclude , as you can see , up to this point the European Union has not stinted its efforts to seek a rapprochement between the various points of view in the Middle East and it will continue along this track for as long as is necessary .
Furthermore , the European Union continues to keep a very close watch over the development of the situation in Afghanistan and throughout the Central Asian region .
As a member of the anti-terrorist coalition , it will continue its action to combat all forms of support for international terrorism .
Madam President , Mrs Durant , ladies and gentlemen , as you know the situation in Afghanistan is changing very quickly .
Every hour brings its fresh share of dramatic news .
The military strategy against the Taliban has proved successful .
Yet it is important to emphasise that despite the encouraging developments of recent days , the task is far from completed .
The military campaign has not yet achieved all its objectives and we have always made it clear that we regard humanitarian and diplomatic issues as vitally important .
In the light of what has happened , we will have to redouble our efforts in this regard .
Moreover , even greater efforts will have to be made to establish a broad-based government for the Afghan people .
As Mrs Durant emphasised , we strongly support the process conducted by the United Nations , under the aegis of Ambassador Brahimi .
Furthermore , we must exploit the new military situation and intensify our humanitarian efforts .
The Commission is playing an active role on both these fronts .
Last week , Commissioner Patten met Mr Wolfensohn , President of the World Bank , and this week he has held talks with Ambassador Brahimi in New York .
The Commission will cooperate closely with the World Bank and the other parties involved with a view to evaluating the needs and contributing to the reconstruction work in Afghanistan .
The Commission does not propose to speculate at this moment on the exact amounts of money involved .
First of all the international community will have to assess urgent needs and , in consultation with the Afghan people , define exactly what is needed .
Meanwhile , we are trying to ensure that the EUR 52 million in aid allocated under the ECHO programme for 2001 and the EUR 22.5 million earmarked in 2001 for displaced persons will indeed reach those who need it .
In addition , thanks to the World Food Programme , we are now providing EUR 23.5 million in food aid , that is , about 36 300 tonnes , and we are granting the NGOs EUR 4.5 million for supplying the population with food , seeds and tools , that is , a total of EUR 100 million in aid this year .
Furthermore , we have already decided , at the very least , to maintain these levels in 2002 .
As you know , the Commission has spared no effort since the events of 11 September .
As you also know , in the space of a few days we presented new measures to combat terrorism in Europe and , in particular , proposed a common definition of acts of terrorism , a European arrest warrant to replace the cumbersome extradition system now in force between the Member States , more stringent rules on money laundering and , lastly , legislative provisions to ensure that the assets of an individual or an organisation can be quickly frozen throughout Europe as soon as they are identified as a potential source of finance for terrorism .
Moreover , the Commission hastened to take measures to improve aviation security , ranging from access to the cockpit to luggage checks .
At the same time , the European ministers jointly decided that the Member States should try to protect the airlines from the worst consequences of 11 September , for instance , by giving them insurance cover against acts of terrorism , something the commercial insurance companies were no longer offering , while avoiding a war of subsidies , which would distort competition .
The European Union is also distributing massive humanitarian aid both within and outside Afghanistan .
The Union and its Member States have already mobilised EUR 310 million to alleviate the sufferings of the Afghan people .
This effort , which only the United States has surpassed , has largely gone unheeded , but it has already saved lives .
Furthermore , the ECHO humanitarian aid office has been remarkably diligent in acting on its undertakings .
Under the aegis of President Romano Prodi , the Commission is also involved in crucial diplomatic efforts ; Mrs Durant has already described Mr Prodi 's itinerary over the coming days and weeks .
This clearly shows that Europeans want to take a balanced , international diplomatic approach .
As you know , in the days immediately after the attacks , Mr Chris Patten , accompanied by Mr Louis Michel , the Belgian Foreign Minister representing the Belgian Presidency of the EU Council , and Mr Solana , travelled to Pakistan , Iran , Egypt , Saudi Arabia and Syria .
Wherever they went , the message they heard was the same : mankind as a whole must unite in the fight against terrorism .
They discussed the need for closer cooperation within the region .
The Union has already taken an important trade decision by improving the access of Pakistani exports to Europe and we hope we will soon be able to conclude a free-trade agreement with the six Gulf Cooperation Council states .
Furthermore , we will be putting forward proposals on the conclusion of a trade and cooperation agreement with Iran .
We will also play our full part in the efforts to relaunch the peace process in the Middle East , not only by giving financial support to the Palestinian Authority , which is beset by enormous difficulties , but also by trying to ensure the implementation of the Mitchell report that the European Union co-signed .
As Mrs Durant pointed out , this week Mr Peres and Mr Arafat both attended the Euro-Mediterranean Conference held in Brussels .
As you can see , the European Union is pursuing a common foreign policy , but this is not a single policy .
Each country , each institution , draws on its own assets and pools its own resources for the sake of the common cause .
The action the individual Member States decide to take underpins the common effort , and vice versa .
The fact that the Member States take independent measures , especially in times of crisis , is not a sign of failure on the part of the Union . It illustrates the very nature of the Union .
In conclusion , let me tell you , on behalf of the Commission , that we are all aware that the events of 11 September have changed the parameters and we have recognised that the attacks on New York and Washington were attacks not only on the United States but also on every free and open society .
The threat is a common threat , which is why it needs a concerted response .
The European Union , and the European Commission in particular , are making their full contribution to this common objective and we intend to continue along these lines .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the day before yesterday , an aeroplane crashed over New York , and once again , we all held our breath because we were afraid that it was another terrorist attack .
Thankfully , it was not an act of terrorism , although it was a truly horrific incident .
However , Monday 's fears show that terrorism is affecting our lives and that we cannot simply continue with ' business as usual ' .
We must therefore make it clear that we regard terrorism as an enormous challenge , an intellectual , political , economic and , indeed , a military challenge .
I welcome your comments , Madam President-in-Office of the Council .
They tie in precisely with the keywords which I have written in my notes : we must dismantle the terrorist networks .
This is the task now being undertaken in Afghanistan .
We have all seen the pictures , which show the joy on people 's faces in Kabul but also the dead bodies , obviously the victims of massacres . We therefore appeal to the Northern Alliance , which was led by Ahmed Shah Massoud , a responsible leader whom we welcomed here in April , to conduct itself in Afghanistan and in Kabul in a way which demonstrates that it is a good representative , also for human dignity and a better future for this suffering country .
What we now need , and I agree with the President-in-Office of the Council on this point , is action from the United Nations .
I welcome the fact that our American friends are involving the United Nations in this way .
However , what we also need , and the European Union must play a key role here , is an alliance , a coalition for the reconstruction of Afghanistan .
We must not repeat the mistake of the 1980s and 1990s , when we left Afghanistan to fend for itself . We must give Afghanistan our help .
The European Union 's role throughout this conflict , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , has been rather pathetic .
Of course , the military issues are primarily national issues .
We are not yet at the point where we , Europeans , can genuinely take on a joint role .
However , I am extremely embarrassed by the conduct of some of the European Union countries over recent weeks .
First of all , there was a tripartite meeting during the informal summit in Ghent , and then there was the meeting in London .
I must say that I found this embarrassing .
We do not have any self-appointed chiefs within the European Union ; we have a European Union with a Council Presidency and a Commission .
In London , the representatives , even the President-in-Office of the Council , invited themselves , and I found that especially embarrassing .
Great Britain , France , Italy , Spain , Germany , the Netherlands and the Belgian Presidency attended the meeting in London ; Greece , Portugal , Austria , Finland , Sweden , Luxembourg , Ireland and Denmark did not .
I would have expected the Belgian Presidency , which I hold in high esteem , especially the Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt , to protest about this meeting , as it should have been the presidency 's task to invite Member States to a meeting of this kind instead of having to request an invitation to go to London .
I hope that different procedures will be adopted in future and that this kind of division within the European Union will not happen again .
Of course , we have to learn from our mistakes .
I hope that we will learn from these mistakes as well .
From our group 's point of view , it is essential that we act jointly , not only at the level of intergovernmental cooperation .
We want joint action from Europe , and we expect resolute and courageous action from the Council Presidency in this context too .
We will support the Council Presidency if it responds in this way , and we will also support the Commission .
Mr Busquin , I call upon the Commission , its President and all its members : please make Europe 's voice heard !
The Commission must get involved ; it must state its opinion , and it must not simply accept what we have witnessed in recent weeks and months .
We have a chance if we take this resolute stance , and I can say on behalf of our group that we will be resolute in our support for the Council Presidency and the Commission if the shared interests of the European Union are stated clearly .
We call on you to take this action .
If you do so , you can be sure of our support .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , little more than two months after the attacks of 11 September , we have all understood , including the United States , that , in order to confront global terrorism , we need to create a policy with many dimensions : military , security , intelligence , humanitarian , I would add cultural , and others .
And we need a common will : that of the coalition , whose framework or basis is the United Nations .
The news over recent days confirms that hope is beginning to come to Afghanistan , and we must state one thing very clearly : the primary victims and hostages of the aggressive fundamentalism of terrorism have been the Afghans , and particularly , the Afghan women , because it is they who have suffered most from this situation .
This is demonstrated by the television pictures we are seeing of women , and men , but particularly women , who can now move around with their faces exposed .
That is my first point .
We now have the obligation , through the United Nations , to seek a political solution to the Afghan situation , firstly , and to the whole complex problem of Central Asia .
The European Union must continue to cooperate in terms of humanitarian aid and cooperate with the UNHCR in order to deal with the problem of the refugees and displaced persons , and also so that , under the auspices of the United Nations , there is a plan for stability and future democracy in Afghanistan .
Secondly , we must continue to intensify our action , so that the European Union can respond to terrorism .
Police cooperation is improving .
Just yesterday , eleven people from Bin Laden ' s network in Spain were arrested in my country , and this is happening every day in other countries of the Union .
In general , we are guaranteeing the rights of people who want to fight our democratic and pluralist system , and this is to our credit , but it causes problems .
And in Parliament we are trying to move ahead quickly , together with the Commission , to create a common anti-terrorist policy .
We must continue in that vein .
Thirdly , we note that we lack the capacity to act jointly in a military sense .
Up to a point , we have compensated for that lack by means of other policies , but that does not justify this vacuum in the security and defence policy .
Rather than looking back to see who was at the meeting in Ghent , or , bringing to mind that old film , ' Guess who ' s coming to dinner ' , working out who was in London and who was not , what the European Parliament has to say to the Council and the Commission is that we want the security and defence policy to be included in the Treaties .
I will take this opportunity to say to the Commissioner that my group , and , I believe , the whole of Parliament , hopes that the Commission , using its powers as guardian of the Treaties , and also its powers of initiative , will take a clear approach in relation to Laeken and the Convention by raising these issues .
We will support them in that and , in this way , we will be able to overcome the current situation : updating our security and defence policy , updating the Petersberg tasks and stating it jointly .
That must be our response .
I would like to make a final comment , Madam President , on an absolutely essential point which we were able to raise in the Euro-Mediterranean forum , which followed the forum held by the Council , where we were able to speak with our colleagues , parliamentarians from both sides of the Mediterranean .
We heard voices - Arab , Israeli and European - agreeing that we have to continue working , and the European Union is playing a central role for the first time , in order to create an Israeli State with secure borders together with a Palestinian State which also has secure borders .
This is the only possible basis for a stable solution in the Middle East .
We , in Parliament , must therefore decisively support the work of our representatives , both here and in the Middle East .
Madam President , the war in Afghanistan is clearly now producing military dividends , as has been seen in the past 48 hours in the extraordinary scale and speed of the collapse of the Taliban , although they still remain potentially very powerful in large parts of the country and the terrorists they have been succouring remain hidden from view .
However there are aspects of the war and not just the terrorist aspect which have been kept hidden and one group I should like to mention - to which , Madam President , you paid tribute on Monday - is the journalists who paid the ultimate price to tell us the story .
We know so little about modern war and we are so excluded by the powers-that-be that without the commitment and professionalism of journalists we would know nothing .
We need to reiterate that debt of gratitude .
What we know from the comparative success in Mazar-i-Sharif and now in Kabul , and even reports of the front line extending to Kandahar , is that new challenges are presenting themselves .
The international coalition - particularly the United States and not least its President - has assumed that the Northern Alliance is in some ways biddable , that it will do certain things and not others .
So we were told with some certainty that it would not take Kabul .
But it is there .
It seems to me that it is not quite so biddable as many in the coalition suggested or hoped .
It makes all the more urgent the diplomatic initiative to generate respect for the rule of law and a stable governmental process , even if not yet a stable government .
It becomes more urgent because new freedoms are emerging even as I speak , as we can see in the television pictures from Kabul .
But we also hear of new fears , because Afghanistan has a brutal history and the brutality was not just the work of the Taliban .
So there is a great need for urgency .
The second challenge is the humanitarian one , which preceded the war but has been compounded by it .
Now that there is a larger swathe of territory not subject to Taliban control , we must visibly and urgently assess what needs to be done and be present on the ground .
Our support for the humanitarian effort needs to be translated into practical action .
The Commissioner spoke of extraordinary amounts of money , which I think he said were largely unrecognised .
Unfortunately Europe 's contribution is often unremarked in these situations , and we have to have a visible presence on the ground and show our solidarity , not just in the military campaign but also in the humanitarian effort .
I have two final comments .
One concerns the Middle East .
I salute the quiet but effective diplomacy of Mr Solana and his colleagues , the Belgian Presidency , the Commission and others , because , while America has been looking in another direction , we have managed to de-escalate the worst of the tensions , a necessary prelude to the Mitchell process which is the path to a viable peace .
Colleagues have referred to the European security and defence policy .
My group is strongly in favour of it and welcomed the moves in that direction .
We thought that was what ESDP was , until we discovered recently at Downing Street that it is European security and dining policy .
Madam President , I should like to hear your comments on the European security and dining policy , which runs counter to the concept of a European security and defence policy that is for all and not just for some .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I shall confine my contribution to Afghanistan .
It is extremely difficult to question the military course of affairs because the situation is so extremely fluid .
I should nevertheless like to ask one question in this connection , namely with regard to an element which , in my view , will remain high-priority for the foreseeable future .
It concerns the idea of sending a UN peace-keeping force to Kabul to ensure that the situation there does not get out of hand .
Has the Council discussed in any way or at any time the fact that European countries , or the Union perhaps as a whole , would make a contribution to the UN peace-keeping force , or does the Council hold the view that it would be best if this UN peace-keeping force were to comprise representatives from Muslim countries only ?
In other words , is future involvement by the EU provided for in this UN peace-keeping force ?
I should now like to turn to the humanitarian aspect .
It is clear that there are still many needs and it is also evident that the invasion of large parts of Afghanistan by the Northern Alliance enhances the prospect of granting this aid .
Does the Commission know whether at the moment , or over the next few days , all aid which the Commission wishes to grant is being delivered promptly and adequately , or are there still obstacles ?
If so , what are they ?
Finally , I should like to touch upon the political and diplomatic dimension .
My group fears that the politicians will be trampled underfoot by the military .
The fact of the matter is that the military conquests have preceded the political ones .
My group is concerned that finding a political solution could be frustrated or perhaps even made impossible if the Northern Alliance continues to advance southwards .
I know that the European Union and the EU Member States , alongside UN representative Mr Brahimi , are involved in finding what you refer to as a stable government .
What is the EU ' s specific involvement at the moment , and in the next few days , in finding this political solution which , in my view , takes priority over anything else ?
This might well be higher on the list of priorities than a military solution .
If no political solution is found , any military invasion could well be in vain .
I should like to finish off with a comment on London .
I am not so much concerned about the fact that countries that make military contributions , and that want to discuss this , meet in London .
What does worry me is the fact that the agenda of London also featured the Middle East policy .
I would ask you , among others , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , whether Middle East policy is drafted in London or in Brussels .
Mrs Durant , Commissioner Busquin , let us not disguise our pleasure at once again hearing the sound of music on the streets of the Afghan capital and a woman 's voice broadcasting on Radio Kabul .
It does us all good to read the sense of liberation on the faces of the Afghans and the rout of some of the most obscurantist and cruel oppressors the world has seen .
Let us however , without further ado , take a good look at all the aspects of the situation today , to make sure that our hopes are not soon overshadowed by a new nightmare .
Firstly , the fighting is , alas , not yet at an end .
The Taliban have regrouped in southern Afghanistan and near the border with Pakistan , where they will go to any lengths to try to save , at whatever price , the remnants of their power and capacity to inflict harm .
It would be a disaster if they managed to gain support for their deadly cause from Pashtun groupings , who might feel rejected by the new leaders of Afghanistan .
As for the various rival factions that make up the Northern Alliance , we must beware of idealising them .
The way women are treated in some of the provinces under its control gives real cause for concern .
Furthermore , its past conduct , only five years ago , and the disturbing information we have received from Mazar-i-Sharif unfortunately suggest that there is a risk that sooner or later they will embark on a bloody settling of scores in the reconquered territories .
Experience shows that what were once effective aids to military action can turn into serious obstacles to a political solution .
From the outset , the political issue has been the determining factor .
Secondly , we must look at the distress of the Afghan people , exhausted by five years of terror , months of drought and misery , followed by five weeks of intensive bombing .
The UN estimates that seven and a half million people are at risk of famine in this devastated country .
In fact , Mr Lakhdar Brahimi , the UN Special Representative , has repeatedly called for a rapid end to the war for this very reason .
What the country does need , however , is emergency aid and development aid on a large scale .
For let us not forget that international opinion was mobilised specifically in order to neutralise the terrorist networks , to cut off the sources , mainly financial , that feed them and also to destroy the social and political breeding ground on which they thrive .
To date , we have certainly not achieved this just and ambitious aim and any failure to find a political solution to the Afghan problem would only take us further from attaining it .
This explains the role that an international player such as the European Union , and particularly the UN , must fulfil through its Member States , as well as within the framework of our relations with the American leaders and with the countries of the region . This will enable a political solution to be found that comes from all sectors of Afghan society and from Afghanis who , until now have been the chief victims of the Taliban , must now be among the agents of change .
It is high time this martyred population was offered stability , dignity and peace .
Madam President , there is a taboo word that I have not heard mentioned in this hour of debate and which I do not hear in the negotiation meetings held in Rome or Peshawar , in Islamabad or New York .
It is a taboo which I , or rather we , intend to confront : women ' s participation , the substantial participation of women in the provisional government of Afghanistan .
The United Nations Secretary General hopes for an ethnically balanced transitional government .
The Council , in the person of Mrs Durant , has told us she hopes for a fair and lasting composition .
But what justice are we talking about ?
What balance are we talking about ?
Millions of Afghan women have not only been the primary victims but have also been the major architects of non-violent opposition all these years throughout the world .
You know them : they are the women from Negar and RAWA ; they have been here in the European Parliament ; they were the ones who ran the country before the Taliban .
They made up 40 per cent of the medical staff , 50 per cent of the teachers , 70 per cent of the administration , while the men were off making war .
Yet around the negotiating table I only see men with beards , some longer , some shorter , but I have not seen any of those fantastic women we have met any more .
Well , I know very well that I will be greeted with smiles and grins everywhere .
I know very well how I felt when faced by those smiles in ' 97 and ' 98 , when this Parliament and the Commission were , to my knowledge , the only institutions that supported the campaign ' A flower for the women of Kabul ' in 1997 .
This courage of ours - of yours , ladies and gentlemen - I believe should continue .
Now , enough of the gossip , the discrimination , the exclamations of ' women , poor things ' !
No , enough of that !
We want Afghan women to take on conspicuous political responsibility in the reconstruction of their country in the transitional government .
I know this will not be enough ; I know public opinion needs to be mobilised .
Therefore on 24 November we are promoting a day of fasting throughout the world , a world satyagraha , precisely so that women can at last form a part of this provisional government .
I hope this proposal of ours will not be received with the usual derision .
Often , those who concern themselves seriously with human rights have much greater vision , application and objectivity than those who always believe they know it all and think that the world today can go on simply with the traditional Realpolitik .
Things are not like that .
The human side , people are the architects of their futures .
What future can there be , however , without half of the population ?
Therefore : 24 November , world satyagraha day , so that women can form part of this provisional government .
Madam President , last April , when we received Commander Ahmad Shah Massoud in this Chamber , he told us that the fall of the Taliban regime was inevitable given that the Pakistani government would find itself unable to provide it with any political and , in particular , military aid .
All that Massoud asked of the international community and the European Union was to exercise effective diplomatic pressure on Pakistan to stop it from interfering in any way in the domestic affairs of Afghanistan .
He was counting on his awareness of the Afghan people 's exasperation with the Taliban when he predicted that it would rebel , including in the largely Pashtun southern territories .
He assured us that he had set up an Alliance network throughout the country that would guarantee the establishment of a broad-based government of national unity .
The speed of events over the past 48 hours has surprised only those of our learned experts who , without ever having been on the ground , professed that the anti-Taliban Alliance was made up only of a bunch of warlords who were just as barbaric as the Taliban themselves , and even more dangerous because inspired only by a hunger for power that would inevitably trigger new quarrels among themselves .
Echoing the anxiety shown in Islamabad , these same experts , totally certain they are right , are still spreading the word via the media that the Northern Alliance represents only a very small percentage of the opinion of the Afghan people , who are supposedly still attached to the peace that only the Taliban have managed to bring them .
The jubilant popular demonstrations in Kabul , the rebellion now underway in Kandahar itself , the signs of the return of thousands of refugees suffice to show that these prophets of doom were misled .
The Members of this Chamber who had the intelligence to listen to Massoud will certainly rejoice .
Yes , the situation remains politically fragile .
It is up to the international community , and within it the European Union , to help establish this united government , which the former king , Zahir Shah , is willing to support .
Yes , we must also give the Afghan people all the material aid it needs to recover from a disastrous humanitarian situation , in which , as Mr Wurtz said , we fear for the survival of 1.5 million Afghans who are at risk of famine and for the health of more than 6 million who are now at risk of serious malnutrition .
We hoped that the Council and the Commission would be prepared to give undertakings along these lines without delay .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner for confirming this .
Madam President , Afghanistan is currently going through a time of uncertainty that will prove crucial for the future .
The end of the Taliban dictatorship opens the door to a process of democratic reconstruction , which , however , is still far from a foregone conclusion .
We will probably see Islamist guerrilla warfare on the Algerian model , against which massive bombing is pointless and will have to be halted .
The European Union must adopt a strong and clear stance for , as Mrs Emma Bonino and Mr Francis Wurtz said , Afghan women must not be sacrificed in the process of political reconstruction .
The participation of women is the key to the lasting reconstruction of Afghanistan .
They will have to be present as from the first negotiations and will have to participate in a new government as from the first day .
That is the only solution that can guarantee the protection and respect for the rights of women and all human rights .
The European Union could not endorse a proposed government that did not take account of this crucial dimension .
The integration of women is also a first step towards democracy .
Unfortunately , this democracy cannot accommodate warlords who have proved guilty of repeated human rights abuses , a wide range of acts of violence and who , whatever side they are on , are more concerned with defending their ethnic group than with the future of their country .
We must put an end to the reign of impunity .
The Afghans must be represented by a mixed , democratic government that represents all the ethnic groups and respects human rights .
Madam President , recent events have demonstrated to the world that the military strategy being pursued by the American government in Afghanistan is working .
The removal of the Taliban from power in Afghanistan is a legitimate objective .
The Taliban is harbouring Osama bin Laden , an international terrorist who has committed heinous acts of terror , not only this year , but in recent years too .
Harbouring terrorists is a crime in itself .
The fall of key strategic cities in Afghanistan this week will certainly help in the process of eroding the power of the Taliban .
But much work remains to be done if the Taliban are to be defeated in the near future .
They are a military force to be reckoned with and they have extensive military experience .
I hope that the Taliban regime can be defeated and replaced by a broader alliance of political groupings in Afghanistan .
This is not going to be an easy task , but it must be vigorously pursued as a military option .
Under UN Resolution 1373 it is incumbent on us all to ensure that those involved in perpetrating such vile acts of terrorism in America last September are brought to justice .
We too must prevent further terrorist attacks , and this can only be achieved if the international community continues to work closely together .
One issue which clearly needs to be addressed in the context of the war in Afghanistan relates to the humanitarian needs of the Afghan people .
The international community , under the auspices of the United Nations and through the European Union , must bring forward a visible and viable strategy to guarantee that humanitarian supplies are delivered to the Afghan people .
A visible humanitarian strategy must be an absolute priority if the Afghan people are going to be able to live through a very cold winter .
There must be a safe and consistent delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need .
This can only be carried out with the involvement of the international community and key non-governmental organisations .
In time the United Nations and the European Union should be given positive roles as new political structures develop in Afghanistan .
We must all play our part in guaranteeing that international terrorism is defeated .
Clearly , a multi-faceted approach is needed if we are to guarantee that the roots of international terrorism are tackled head-on .
In conclusion , it is very important that we reiterate the message that the war against terrorism is not a battle against Islam .
There are millions of Muslims living within the Union who are fully integrated within our societies and who contribute positively to the development of the European Union .
The European Union as a political entity is a friend , and will always be a friend , to the Muslim people .
We must reaffirm this message at every opportunity .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it has been shown that the strategy pursued in Afghanistan by the coalition against terrorism is the right one .
It has also been shown that this is not merely a matter of hunting down terrorists , but also liberating a nation from a government which is far from popular among its own people .
This has been shown quite clearly , and I think we should say so in all frankness in order to make it clear in this way that we have nothing against an Islamic people ; on the contrary , we want to work with it to build a future in freedom .
Of course , this also means , and this is borne out by Afghanistan 's history , that we should work together with its own government and respect its decisions , and that it is not our task to involve ourselves in the details .
I think this is also extremely important if the task of creating a government of reconciliation in Afghanistan is to be mastered successfully .
Here , the European Union must take an active role with its conflict prevention and civilian crisis management capacities and help organise the reconstruction of the country on this basis , as long as this is what the parties involved want .
In more general terms , the events of recent weeks have shown that in the areas where the European Union functions effectively , it can make a significant contribution .
I do not believe that the coalition against terrorism would have operated as effectively in the Middle East without the European Union and the visits by its troika .
On the other hand , we must acknowledge that in the military field , where we are particularly weak , we have continued to rely heavily on bilateralism and directed solutions . I think it is clear that in all areas of security and defence policy , we must move more resolutely towards a community approach .
It must become clear that even the larger Member States , which think they still have a role to play , actually had no influence on all the strategies which have been enforced . We must therefore accept that we will only have a role to play if we act jointly , if we achieve our common goal of establishing a 60 000-strong rapid deployment force by 2003 , and if we underpin our conflict prevention and crisis management capacities credibly with this third component .
I also think that this must , to a substantial extent , be discussed in the light of Laeken and in the context of the post-Nice process .
Time and again , when we are active in the foreign policy field , we see the extent to which our inadequate structures prevent us from bringing our full weight to bear .
I am thinking in particular of the frequent organisational chaos in the Balkans and the competition not only between Solana and Patten but also between the parallel structures which were established and which , as experience has shown , work against and not with each other .
These structures must be rationalised , perhaps in the hands of the Commission with their own legitimation via the Council .
In my view , these are the lessons we have learned from the last two months , and we should call on the governments in our countries to respond appropriately . I believe it is necessary , in the interests of the future viability of our nations , to cultivate this community method to a greater extent in future in the field of foreign and security policy too .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I hope you will forgive me if I go over my speaking time by half a minute .
Since Mr McMillan-Scott is not here , we could possibly steal half a minute of his time .
First of all , I should like to say that , unfortunately , the objective of the fight against international terrorism has not been achieved with the fall of Kabul nor will it be by a possible fall of Kandahar soon .
We must , of course , focus on many other criteria .
Of major importance are , naturally , the tracking down of terrorist cells in , inter alia , Europe , the freezing of financial sources of international terrorism and the whole discussion , also in our society , around the question as to what groups are , in fact , active in our society and how we can call a halt to their activities .
In my view , a large number of conditions must also be created in Afghanistan in order to be able to remove this kind of breeding ground for international terrorism .
A multi-ethnic government is logical , but we must also manage to find a special solution for Kabul , of course .
Peace must be established with the countries around Afghanistan to ensure that an area of stability and peace is created .
The refugees must be able to return home and a massive amount of money must be invested in the reconstruction of Afghanistan .
Finally , we must ensure that a government is put in place that respects human rights .
That is a total package .
The causes can be found indirectly in the Middle East .
Although that is not the case , that argument is being used by Bin Laden .
I therefore believe that the Middle East peace process needs an extra boost and I also wonder whether the time has come to do this now .
I would direct this question to the President-in-Office of the Council , if she happens to be listening .
I would especially ask you whether you , together with the Commission , could not ensure that a UN resolution on a Palestinian state could now be laid down at long last ?
Has the time not come for pushing for breakthroughs on this score , as we did years ago with Israel ?
I also wonder whether an evaluation is not needed of the role of Saudi-Arabia in the funding of all possible institutions in western Europe which one would be right to question ?
The position of Syria has already been mentioned .
As our President has already pointed out , I also believe it is useful and necessary to help the young Assad to play the far more positive role which we had all expected of him , but which , through all kinds of circumstances , he was unable to fulfil .
As , however , Syria plays a crucial role , a great deal more needs to be done there .
If we as the EU want to play a part , also in the peace process as a whole , we must be careful what action we undertake , for example , in connection with the arms sales or the supply of goods for dual use to Iran .
Israel is monitoring the proceedings with great concern , and I believe that these kinds of signals are of the utmost importance .
Finally , nearly everyone has already said it , and I am not about to repeat it , but it is unacceptable for the European Union to continue to send out a disintegrated picture .
We must show a united front and act at Community level in terms of external , peace and security policy .
If we still fail to get the message , how can we then expect to play a role on the world stage ?
I therefore make a dramatic appeal , also to the presidency , to make huge strides forward on this score .
Madam President , I am very glad we are holding this debate today , at a moment when the situation in Afghan is changing by the hour and , I hope , for the better .
I know that Europe has two obligations towards Afghanistan .
Together with the UN , we must press for a political settlement of the conflict , aimed , as Guy Verhofstadt said , at the establishment of a stable , legitimate and democratic government that is very broadly representative of all the ethnic groups and abides by the principles of human rights .
Yet I believe we also have a second duty towards Afghanistan , an urgent duty .
We know that the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is a tragedy .
It is the result of the combined effect of a war that has been devastating this country for 23 years and the drought that has plagued it for the past three years .
We know that seven million people were dependent on humanitarian aid even before the military operations began .
We also know that up to 100 000 children may die this winter unless adequate supplies reach them in the coming weeks .
That is why we call on Europe to take urgent , large-scale measures in face of this humanitarian tragedy .
In the framework of what we hope will become a process of permanent consultation between the European Union , the United States , Afghanistan 's neighbouring states , the specialist UN agencies and the NGOs working in Afghanistan , we call , as you , Madam President , have also done on several occasions , for the creation of safe humanitarian corridors through which emergency food aid and shelter for the displaced Afghans can be brought in .
This is not only an urgent requirement ; it is quite simply the duty of the peoples of the European Union , whom we represent here .
Madam President , I will reply or , at least , try to give some kind of reply to the comments made during this debate , which is all the more interesting because it is being held at a moment when we have very high hopes while at the same time having little idea of what the outcome will be .
Let me first take you back to the famous meeting in London that several of you mentioned and remind you that this meeting was certainly not arranged at the presidency 's initiative .
The presidency is responsible for inviting and chairing the meetings of the Fifteen .
The Ghent meeting , by contrast , was convened for military reasons or , in other words , those who wished to meet in Ghent cited military reasons .
In regard to the London meeting , let me also point out that the presidency was invited to that meeting but as I said , the meeting was not held at its initiative .
Once he had been invited , Mr Verhofstadt , the President of the European Council , naturally contacted his various colleagues immediately to ascertain their individual positions .
He was strongly encouraged to go to London and at the COREPER meeting the following day , he immediately undertook to report back on everything that would be said in London and chose to be accompanied by Mr Solana , since he felt that these issues were indeed most important and related to security .
So these are a few facts about the context of this meeting in London . Allow me to repeat that the European Union obviously plays a diplomatic and political role but also a humanitarian one - and I am saying this not just by the way but as a definite statement .
I declared in my introductory statement , as Mr Busquin also declared on behalf of the Commission , that we attach great importance to humanitarian questions , not only at the level of words or financial resources , but also and above all at the level of deeds .
We are making sure that we take action here .
You may be certain that the presidency of the Council and the Commission are determined to make very concrete , specific and urgent progress in terms of responding to the situation and endeavouring to do so very visibly .
It is indeed important , over and above the action to be taken , for people to know and see that the European Union wants to play and will play a role in this respect .
I agree with Mr Poettering that Europe must speak with one voice .
I can assure you that the Presidency of the Council has done its utmost to ensure this , in particular at the London meeting . It was a meeting we did not convene but prior to which the presidency was asked to consult the other Member States and to attend together with Mr Solana .

That is what I have to say on London , Ghent and these matters .

In reply to Mr Lagendijk 's question about , amongst other things , the United Nations force and the post-Taliban regime , the Council has not yet discussed the participation of the European Union as such in a United Nations force and has not , therefore , determined its position at this stage .
Therefore I cannot give it .
Conversely , regarding the stabilisation of the post-Taliban regime , I think that will necessarily require consultation with the countries of the region under the aegis of the United Nations and therefore of the Security Council .
Since we are discussing this post-Taliban regime , which we all hope will be stable , multi-ethnic and democratic , while also knowing that the road will be a difficult one , let me put particular emphasis on a question which I and the Presidency of the Council feel very strongly about , namely the gender question .
We must indeed aim at a representation and a government that are more democratic , stable , etc . But we must also take the gender question into consideration .
Neither I nor the Presidency of the Council would find it comprehensible if Afghan women , who were the first victims of the Taliban regime and who suffered a great many deprivations , especially of their rights , while taking on huge responsibilities , were excluded from the formation of this government and its future activities .
Lastly , I think nearly all the speakers pointed out that we very much need to adopt a more integrated European stance on common security .
We need to act as a community .
The Belgian Presidency is convinced of this and I really hope this question will be on the agenda of the Laeken Summit .
Recent events have made it abundantly clear that we have to move forward together , in a more harmonious manner and as a community .
These are the replies I wanted to make to this debate , which , I believe , has highlighted some extremely useful and important principles for the days , weeks and months ahead .
Madam President , I just wanted to make three clarifications .
As Mrs Durant pointed out , the question of humanitarian aid is of course paramount . As many speakers have also shown , it is a priority at a time when winter is approaching and the people are in danger .
I can only confirm our resolve to release the funds that have been allocated .
Let me repeat that the amount for 2001 is EUR 100 million , channelled via the World Food Organisation and the non-governmental organisations .
This being said , if we agree about the creation of safety corridors , I think it is then up to us to ensure , via the ECHO instrument , that the aid is delivered as effectively as possible .
That , at least , is the Commission 's resolve . I can only confirm it .
Similarly , the Commission , in consultation with the international community and the Afghan people , including , of course , Afghan women , is assessing the reconstruction needs , as indeed it also did in Serbia , where that process was regarded as a model of speed and efficiency .

Finally , at diplomatic level , Mr Prodi and Mr Patten , in particular , are quite ready to respond to the requests the Presidency of the European Union will no doubt be making to them in the next few days .
Thank you , Mr Busquin .
The debate is closed .
Negotiations within the framework of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention following the recent anthrax attacks
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the negotiations within the framework of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention following the recent anthrax attacks .
Mrs Durant has the floor on behalf of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to speak about the negotiations on the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention .
The attacks of 11 September have only strengthened our conviction that multilateral instruments for disarmament and non-proliferation are more crucial than ever .
Everything possible must be done to prevent terrorist organisations and their members having access to more powerful means with which to carry out their criminal activities .
The fight against biological weapons must , in this context , be pursued at a more sustained pace , particularly given the threat of potential bioterrorist attacks .
The Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention is a crucial instrument in this process . The European Union and its Member States have committed themselves to ensuring that this convention is universally observed .
The European Union will be launching , with regard to the Fifth Review Conference on the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention that will take place in Geneva from 19 November to 7 December 2001 , a new call to those States that have not yet signed up to the Convention banning biological and toxin weapons , to ratify this as soon as possible .
Strengthening this Convention is , furthermore , one of the Union ' s priorities in the field of disarmament .
The Council , therefore , attaches the greatest importance to concluding the negotiations that have taken place in Geneva , within the ad hoc group , on a legally binding protocol establishing an effective system that will ensure compliance with the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention .
In its conclusions of 11 June 2001 , the Council of the European Union once again confirmed its commitment to contribute to the drawing up of a protocol containing a raft of practical measures that it had defined in its common position of 17 May 1999 , as essential to the implementation of an effective instrument .
In this regard , the Union regrets the fact that the special group has not managed to fulfil its mandate , which is to conclude these negotiations on a legally binding protocol before the opening of the Fifth Review Conference .
The Union has , in fact , expressed its disappointment at the United States ' refusal to accept the synthesis text presented by the chairman of the special group .
The Council is , therefore , maintaining its position .
The threat biological weapons pose requires an appropriate multilateral response .
The Council will continue to emphasise the importance it attaches to the work that must lead to a legally binding instrument and , in particular , to maintaining the special group .
The Union has noted the statement by the United States , according to which that country supports all multilateral mechanisms currently in force for the control , non-proliferation and monitoring of arms exports and has also noted their alternative proposals , which the Union is still studying .
We have already discussed them with the United States and will continue to do so in the context of preparations for the Review Conference .
The Union reserves the right to also formulate its own proposals .
Lastly , the Union hopes that the gains made in the negotiations are preserved and that the Review Conference is able to take decisions that offer prospects for a rapid renewal of negotiations within the multilateral framework of the Convention , with the participation of all States involved .
Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I do not have a great deal to add to what Mrs Durant has just said .
I simply wish to confirm that the European Union has , for its part , always been strongly in favour of the compromise text , convinced that it is as important as the agreements on the non-proliferation of weapons , provided that these are accompanied by effective verification measures .
The Union is convinced that sending a negative signal on progress with international commitments on the non-proliferation of weapons would generally be damaging to world security .
As has been said , the compromise has not been accepted .
It is , therefore , unlikely that a resolution will be produced before 19 November , but regular contacts are being maintained between the United States and the European Union on this matter .
The United States take the view , furthermore , that the events of 11 September and those that have followed do not change their position on the verification protocol drawn up by the ad-hoc group .
On the other hand , for its part , the European Union maintains that this compromise text would have enabled a major breakthrough to be made at a particularly critical moment .
The Union also takes the view that the dynamic of discussions in the ad-hoc group must be preserved , even if the form and the procedure have to be adapted to circumstances .
The United States is in the process of drafting new proposals for protection measures against the risk of a biological attack , insisting on the need to defend itself against the risk of terrorism .
The European Union considers that some of the United States ' proposals are to be welcomed . Nevertheless , it also wishes to add others that are intended to improve the Convention and to encourage the development in the longer term of an instrument that is truly binding under law , but that is the very nub of the problem .
The Union will also be proposing a mechanism that will enable us to pursue regular dialogue on the Convention and will open this up to all parties concerned .
These measures will certainly be part of the discussions at the Fifth Review Conference .
In conclusion , and as has already been said , one thing is certain and that is that there will be no protocol verifying the biological weapons convention in the short term .
We are seeking to uphold the achievements of the ad-hoc working group .
Consultation is taking place on a regular basis with the United States and we are trying , on the basis of their proposals , to complement them with our own , so as to preserve the spirit of open and regular dialogue with all parties to the Convention . This , in our view , is the key to multilateralism .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is said that proverbs are the expression of the wisdom of nations and , according to a French proverb , every cloud has a silver lining .
The appalling disaster of the World Trade Center and the launch by a few madmen of a campaign of anthrax poisoning can at least be credited with waking up public opinion and , through public opinion , waking political leaders , making them more aware of the dangers of the development of an international form of terrorism that is bent on imposing its view of the world by all means possible .
In this regard , one only has to think of the recent sabre rattling by Osama Bin Laden .
I hope , by the way , that this will be his last , because he will surely soon have to account to international justice for his crimes .
I hope , however , that following his imminent fall , the international community will pursue its action to control and ban biological and chemical weapons in order to eliminate the terrible threat that they pose .
This is the reasoning behind Parliament ' s drafting of the motion for a resolution that will be submitted tomorrow for the approval of our fellow Members .
We are pleased to see the change in the attitude of the American government which , in July , withdrew from negotiations on concluding a protocol to implement the Convention , as you have just reminded us , Commissioner , and we hope that the new conference that is due to take place next week in Geneva , which you informed us about , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , will consequently take place under the best possible auspices .
We wish to thank you , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , as representative of the Council , for having assured us of the Council ' s desire to coordinate the actions of the Member State governments in this area .
To this end , we call on the Commission to set up , under its own control , a specialist agency , that could rapidly intervene whenever breaches of the Convention are suspected .
Could you , Commissioner , give us your personal opinion on this matter ?
Mr President , earlier this year we expressed our disappointment at the lack of support from the United States for the reinforcement of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention .
In the wake of the events of 11 September and the anthrax attacks on the United States , the issue of bio-terror has suddenly become very topical .
Biological weapons are threatening to become part of the asymmetrical warfare which typifies the fight against terrorism .
The Convention is , of course , directed at states , but the effective implementation also makes it more difficult for terrorists to obtain these weapons .
These weapons have been banned for a very long time , but are unfortunately still available . That is why we call for binding international rules in order to monitor compliance with the Convention better .
Fortunately , the Americans are back at the negotiating table .
They have a problem which they are unable to solve on their own .
However , the proposals they have tabled contain too many loopholes .
The tighter and more transparent the controls , the better , and that must also be the EU ' s focus of attention at the forthcoming review conference later this month .
The Convention must become an instrument in the search of manufacturers of biological weapons , but also for tracking down existing supplies .
Russia used to implement extensive programmes .
How were they wound up , and what happened with the expertise gathered ?
It is rumoured that scientists who worked on these programmes have offered their services elsewhere .
The anthrax attacks in the US compel us yet again to consider how we can stop the arms programmes in Iraq .
For this purpose , the UN must launch new initiatives .
Naturally , the Convention does not offer adequate protection against bio-terror , against the so-called non-governmental players .
This also requires more and better cooperation with the police and intelligence services , as well as better criminal investigation methods .
We need to offer our citizens better protection against possible attacks and the effects thereof .
Many countries take measures in order to protect themselves against anthrax or smallpox better . The costs involved in those initiatives are enormous .
Poor countries do not have those funds and could for that reason become the principal victim of a possible smallpox epidemic as a result of bio-terror .
I would call on the EU and the EU Member States not only to consider the possible protection of its own citizens , but also to examine whether developing countries can be helped by setting up programmes to protect the people in the event of possible terrorist attacks involving biological weapons .
Mr President , my group , the Liberal Group , wants to make three points , largely in the form of questions .
First of all - and this point will appear in the compromise resolution which is not yet in print but it is certainly in our own resolution - my colleague , Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , points out that the United Nations is extremely slow , or has been in the past , to respond when there are reports of breaches of use of these weapons .
For example , when Saddam Hussein , in the early 90s , used these weapons in the marshes of Iraq , it took the United Nations three and a half weeks to get inspectors there , giving Saddam Hussein plenty of time to cover up the evidence of his crimes .
Would the Council kindly point out to the United Nations that we need a much quicker response than three and a half weeks if such incidents happen in future , as we fear may happen .
Secondly - and this appears in the Liberal Group 's resolution and also in the compromise resolution - the anthrax problem in the United States has drawn all our attention to the need to react quickly and to analyse what is happening .
There is no European Union-wide agency looking at this although , in the USA , there is the Centre for Disease Control in Atlanta .
Would the Commission be willing to undertake to propose the creation of a European Union agency , under its control , which would coordinate the work of the relevant national agencies in our Member States in the field of communicable diseases ?
That would speed up our reaction and help us on a Union basis .
My third question is addressed to the Council .
I hope it is a hypothetical question .
If the investigations in the USA show that the anthrax outbreak came from Iraq and therefore American public opinion becomes overwhelmingly in favour of an attack on Iraq and - I imagine that George Bush would find it very hard to resist such overwhelming public opinion - what would be the Council 's position ?
Would we encourage the EU to attack Iraq as well , or would we try to hold George Bush back ?
Has the Council considered this ?
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , may heaven preserve us from the weapons which serve and are designed to protect us .
After the attack of 11 September on Manhattan , the American people remained in the grip of fear following the anthrax attacks which , although they resulted only in a limited number of victims , have a massive psychological effect which reaches far beyond the United States .
The deadly product that was used points , in terms of its concentration and purity , in the direction of laboratories in the United States itself which are reported to be the only ones in the world that could make the product .
This clearly shows that the risks which our population faces as a result of the manufacture of chemical and biological weapons are insufficiently removed by current legislation .
A conference on this subject matter is to take place in Geneva shortly , and we would remind you that in July , notably , the United States withdrew from the negotiations about the Protocol that is before us .
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on 14 June to back the approval of this Protocol .
However , we are convinced that an outright ban should apply to both the manufacture and the use of chemical and biological weapons by the international community , and that this ban should be legally binding .
Current supplies should be destroyed expertly , and I fear that the Protocol too could still be too weak to cope with this .
Mr President , we have had a treaty against biological weapons and weapons containing toxins for a very long time now .
It cannot be applied and its application cannot be monitored without a protocol setting out how this is to be done , something we have been trying to achieve for years .
We have not succeeded .
The United States sabotaged the protocol , do not ask me why .
I read papers by American analysts who say that they have not had time to complete various biological warfare programmes which are up and running .
Be that as it may , following the awful events in New York and the anthrax attacks in the United States , we need to get back to the concept of monitoring and applying this treaty as quickly as possible , come what may .
I was astounded to hear the Commissioner say that the position of the United States has not changed and that we are unlikely to have a protocol with provisions on monitoring and applying the treaty in the foreseeable future .
We obviously need to withdraw what we say in the joint motion before you , honourable Members , about welcoming the change in the position of the United States .
We have made a mistake .
We must change it tomorrow in an oral amendment .
Secondly , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , you have not told us how you intend to exert greater pressure on the United States , given that the whole business is down to them .
Will discussion alone suffice , I wonder ?
Thirdly , new factors have come into play , Mr President .
It has been proven that genetic engineering can be used for this sort of weapon of mass destruction by applying research into vaccines and other forms of treatment which are easily hijacked for military purposes .
I have tabled an amendment for tomorrow 's vote .
I think that we should adopt it and that the European Union should include this issue in the debate .
Finally , if it turns out , ladies and gentlemen , as the FBI is saying , that the anthrax was made and supplied in the United States , are there any Members here who propose that someone , do not ask me who , should bomb the United States ?
Mr President , since this is the first time I have spoken in this House , please allow me to greet the presidency , the Council and my fellow Members .
The possible use of military technology and biological and chemical weapons by subversive groups is no longer a remote risk but a real civil defence problem .
The loss of military secrets , experts and materials has now been verified and is the real basis that the strategy of terrorism can use to strike against the civil population , which is defenceless in the face of such new aggression .
To address this new scenario of warfare , in which the enemy is well concealed in the meshes of civil society , protected by the very rights of freedom he is fighting against and where the targets are no longer just the armed forces but the civil population , it is vital to know what threats may be hanging over the safety of the citizens .
In view of the fact that some nations have not signed up to the Geneva Convention on chemical and biological weapons , as we have heard , and have continued to develop these technologies of warfare , we appeal to the United States and the republics of the former Soviet Union , as well as all those states that have not taken part or signed up , to provide the international community with detailed information on the biological and chemical agents they know about which could , in some way , be traced or stolen by terrorist groups .
The aim of all this is to acquire useful data as soon as possible to prevent the creation , stockpiling and spread of such means of mass destruction , and , at the same time , to prepare the necessary information measures for the staff of civil and paramilitary institutions to equip them to deal effectively and rapidly with these new scenarios of disasters caused by people without any scruples at all .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it is an historic tragedy that the country which has refused to adopt truly effective controls on the use of biological and toxic weapons was the first to fall victim to these brutal attacks .
Of course , this does not prevent us from expressing our deep sympathy with the American people and especially the families affected .
However , I believe that this sign of isolationism and unilateralism , which is still very strong in America , must be viewed by the European Union , and in particular by the Council , as an opportunity to lobby the US very hard , not only on this issue but also on the International Criminal Court , for effective international agreements and monitoring arrangements in the wake of these dreadful attacks .
It is grotesque that in recent days , Congress has debated a bill which vehemently opposes the establishment of the International Criminal Court - a Court which would deal with crimes like these , especially if they were supported and perpetrated by states .
The second important point - and I would like to address the Commission in particular here - is how we , in Europe , are equipped , as far as is humanly possible , to defend ourselves against such attacks or to reduce their impact to a minimum .
As has already been mentioned , the USA has an agency in Atlanta , a disease control centre .
Does the Commission think this should be considered in Europe as well ?
Of course , I know that when there is a problem , there is a tendency to call for a new EU agency to be set up , which raises further problems of control and supervision .
However , in light of recent developments , I think that there are various arguments in favour of this type of agency .
In general terms , I think that the Commission must do more regarding security against this type of terrorist attack , whether it involves biological or nuclear weapons .
This is not a task which we can simply leave to the Member States .
Certain safety standards in these areas must be set out at European level in response to this type of terrorism .
I also believe that the Commission , together with the Council , must consider how we should deal with the installations , factories and laboratories which handle these hazardous products , especially genetically modified products , without encroaching unnecessarily on the privacy of employees while achieving a minimum of transparency , protection and prevention .
Those who work in this kind of installation must therefore be prepared to accept a certain measure of control .
Finally , I should like to ask the Commission once again what it intends to do to create this protection , not only in general terms but also as regards practical measures , in the coming years .
Mr President , Commissioner , Madam Minister , nothing has been said in this debate which I cannot support .
Nonetheless , I would like to raise three points which , in my view , should be emphasised to a far greater extent .
Firstly , in the long term , we cannot expect other states to adopt security policies which are different from those we practise ourselves .
If we do not want proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , in this area , for example , a clearer signal must be sent out by the European Union and its partners .
Secondly , there has obviously been a paradigm shift and a change in strategy in the USA on the verification issue compared with the 1980s .
In view of the urgency of these issues in the wake of 11 September , the European Union 's diplomatic restraint , which I have often understood , is inappropriate , and I hope that the USA 's unilateralism , which has just been mentioned , will be overcome on the basis of their own experience .
The third problem is the most crucial .
It is wrong to point to the USA alone .
This paradigm shift has obviously taken place here in Western Europe as well .
If I look at the model under discussion for the Biological Weapons Convention as well , namely the monitoring organisation for chemical weapons , there is currently a financial crisis in which EU Member States also play a role .
We have witnessed deterioration in the monitoring provisions since the Convention was first adopted .
Perhaps this is symptomatic , Madam Minister : in May this year , I asked the Council for its comments on these issues .
I have still not received a response , and I suspect that we , too , are approaching this issue with insufficient vigour .
Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I simply wish to answer the questions asked by Mr Morillon , Mr Swoboda and Mr Dunn on the issue of whether an Agency should or should not exist .

In the context of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention , there was clearly never any question of discussing an Agency .
The Union ' s position was to propose a mechanism for pursuing dialogue beyond the Review Conference in the form of either annual meetings of the signatories as is done for the Convention on Chemical Weapons , or of meetings of experts , in other words , continuing the former ad hoc group as was explained in the current state of discussions on this Convention .
Nevertheless , I should like to tell you that , at the Ghent Summit and , of course , at the request of the presidency of the European Union , the Commission has undertaken work on examining this issue in all its aspects and , therefore , on listing laboratories , in an attempt to see what type of response we can provide .
At the Commission meeting yesterday , a joint briefing sheet was issued by Mr Byrne , the Commissioner responsible for Health and Consumer protection , to Mr Liikanen and myself , to see how we can implement , at European Union level , in agreement , of course with the Member States , closer coordination in order to achieve our objectives , without necessarily creating an Agency .
This is , broadly speaking , the way things are heading .
In this regard , I would say that in the field of research itself , and , therefore , of the potential for knowledge in this area , we are planning a meeting dedicated to this issue , on 13 December , in Brussels , of all experts from the Member States .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I have received six motions for resolutions , tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Shipbuilding ( continuation )
The next item is the follow-up to the debate on the report ( A5-0373 / 2001 ) by Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning a temporary defensive mechanism for shipbuilding [ COM ( 2001 ) 401 - C5-0393 / 2001 - 2001 / 0153 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , after congratulating the rapporteur , I would like to begin by stressing that the ship-building industry throughout Europe is facing a serious crisis which could affect the very credibility of the European Union and perhaps endanger the continued existence of this sector in the Union , given the unfair competition on the part of South Korea .
Furthermore , it could represent an invitation or a stimulus to the Koreans to extend their unfair practices to other sectors of economic activity such as automobiles , electronics and steel .
Of course , this invitation may not only extend to Korea itself but also to other countries , principally in that region .
Transparency suggests a challenge : free competition in a free market .
But a free market means the same laws for all , and given that this does not exist at the moment , our transparency in a world and at a time when we do not have the other elements necessary for the existence of that free market , as well as naivety , may result in a clear risk of disaster and also a lack of solidarity from the European Union towards the Member States and the cities of those States .
This is the case with a city such as mine , Vigo , in the North East of Spain , where companies and families have made an enormous effort and a difficult sacrifice in order to be competitive .
Solidarity therefore demands measures in defence of a sector which is also strategic for Europe ; measures which impose the extension of the scope of the defensive support mechanism to all categories of ship built by the Korean shipyards and which also impose an extension of the period the defensive mechanism is in force until 31 December 2003 , which is also the period in force of Regulation ( EC ) 1540 / 98 or , alternatively , until the WTO procedure against Korea is concluded .

Mr President , our future , the future of our States and the citizens of Europe are at stake .
Twenty years on will be too late .
I believe that solidarity demands , and leads us to hope , that the Commission and the Council will act in the way I have mentioned .
These are the reasons given by the companies and workers in the sector in the parts of Europe where shipbuilding is important .
Mr President , those of you who know me will be aware that I do not usually speak in favour of public aid which distorts competition .
That does not mean that I do not recognise that some of this public aid makes sense and must continue if it contributes to the objectives laid down in the Treaty .
Despite this , and precisely because this is one of those cases , I would like to express my total support for the Commission ' s proposal and the amendments presented by the competent committees , which propose a defensive and temporary mechanism in the ship-building sector in order to confront the unfair practices of South Korea .
In this section , there is no room for solutions such as that proposed by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , which , by taking an extremely orthodox position in opposition to public aid , would have disastrous consequences for the European shipbuilding sector .
There is absolutely no doubt that the Republic of Korea is practising dumping in the sector , and for this reason the European industry cannot compete .
It is true that the Commission has begun proceedings before the World Trade Organisation to combat this unfair competition , but it is also the case that , while this procedure is under way , the European ship-building industry could disappear , with significant repercussions for employment .
We must bear in mind that there are two elements to this aid which make it worthy of support : firstly , it is transitional , it will only be granted until the WTO resolves the dispute in question , and secondly , it is defensive , it is a response to aggressive unfair competition by the Republic of Korea , and for these reasons it is perfectly acceptable .
Furthermore , the amendments approved by the competent committee are acceptable , since they include certain types of ship which are also affected by these unfair practices on the part of Korea .
The rapporteur has been informed of the existence of a possible legal report by the services of the Council which opposes these measures proposed by the Commission .
While we do not know what these legal arguments are , we must be content with the legal reports of both the European Parliament and the Commission , which speak of the suitability of the aid as proposed by the Commission , which is neither substantially distorted nor modified by the proposals which have been approved in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would protest about the fact that the Council is not represented here today in order to provide us with the legal evaluation we requested .
It is unacceptable that we , as a Parliament , do not have access to the same information as the Council .
It is unacceptable discrimination between the two institutions .
I should like to have seen us in Parliament postponing the debate on the proposal until we had received the Council ' s legal evaluation .
Unfortunately , that is not what the big two political groups wanted .
The usual demand for transparency is transparently not so important when money is at stake and national interests to be looked after .
I have , however , received an answer from the Commission regarding the regulation ' s compliance with the WTO rules .
The Commission sees no problems .
There , I disagree .
The Commission says that the regulation will not have any negative effect on third countries .
That is incorrect .
In future , a Japanese shipyard , for example , will compete with European shipyards that receive State aid .
In that way , the regulation will have a negative effect on third countries , for example Japan .
The Commission also says that the proposed regulation cannot be regarded as biased action by the EU against South Korea , something that would be contrary to the WTO regulations .
The regulation states quite specifically that European shipyards can only receive State aid if they are in direct competition with Korean shipyards .
Korea is mentioned specifically , then .
A more biased course of action cannot be imagined .
With this proposal , we , in the EU , are doing something that is downright illegal .
I urge that what was adopted in Parliament ' s committee be rejected , just as I should ideally like to see the Commission withdraw its proposal and instead concentrate on taking WTO proceedings against the Koreans .
What is the Commission trying to do with all these amendments to extend the period of the regulation and to increase the number of types of ship that are eligible for aid ?
Will the Commission confirm that it will on no account comply with Parliament ' s requests today ?
Will the Commission confirm or deny that it has plans to table an altered proposal that includes LNG tankers ?
I very much hope that the Commission will answer these questions .
Mr President , for years European shipyards have been condemning the dumping practised by South Korea in relation to the sales prices of the ships built there .
Finally , and after so many complaints about it , the Commission has presented an initiative , with the acquiescence of the Council , and has proposed certain provisional measures to us , which consist of a temporary defence mechanism , specifically designed to counteract Korea ' s unfair practices , putting a complaint procedure before the World Trade Organisation .
Nevertheless , the Commission , in its proposed aid to ship building , only includes container ships and oil tankers .
We believe that it should also include special ships for the transportation of gases derived from oil and liquefied natural gas , as well as ferries , bulk carriers and roll-on roll-off car ferries , all of which are included in the complaints presented to the WTO .
It is time that Korea realised that the Union is determined to defend its shipbuilding industry in the face of unfair practices by any other country .
Mr President , this Commission proposal has arisen following the problems resulting from the liberalisation agreements it agreed to negotiate within the OECD while at the same time it limited State aid to the shipbuilding industry , promoted the concentration of shipyards and later removed operating aid .
Now that there are serious problems in the industry , which is of strategic importance to the European Union , particularly to ensure the security of supply on appropriate terms and to prevent excessive dependence on external sources , it has become necessary to support the European shipbuilding industry against unfair practices by Korea .
Although the Commission proposal is important for the moment , it is only temporary and partial , and in the end , is on the same level as Korean unfair practices .
In any event , it is important that the proposals that the rapporteur has made should at least be taken into account , including the extension of the expiry date of this 6 % operating aid , in special cases up to a limit of 14 % , and also the enlargement of its scope to other vessels .
We therefore back this report in order to prevent the short-term aggravation of the economic and social problems that already exist in this area .
Mr President , tomorrow never comes now that the European Commission has proposed to subsidise shipbuilding again .
It was made clear in the past that the subsidies for the shipbuilding industry would be discontinued in mid-2001 .
The re-introduction of a temporary subsidy scheme goes against the agreements made and is unacceptable .
The granting of subsidies to the shipbuilding industry is both unnecessary and undesirable .
It is unnecessary because shipbuilding in Europe focuses on the construction of technologically advanced ships and not on the simple conveyer-belt production as is the case in low-wage countries .
It therefore offers not a single solution to the problems in the industry .
The granting of aid is undesirable because financially unhealthy companies remain in production thanks to subsidies , and efficient production is impossible as a result .
The industry does not benefit from non-generic support .
Structural solutions to the problems European shipbuilding is facing lie in healthy competition and structural reforms .
The Commission proposal , however , will undermine these prospects for a long time .
The internal market will be disrupted since the Member States will step in to implement the Regulation , and non-generic support will lead to unfair competition .
With this proposal , Europe places itself in an untenable position .
Lodging a complaint at the WTO is absurd if the Commission adheres to temporary support measures as suggested .
We therefore share the overwhelming concern expressed by the original rapporteur , Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , with regard to this proposal .
In fact , I cannot imagine that the duty Commissioner Bolkestein would think any differently about this .
Mr President , colleagues , honourable Member of the Commission , the European Union and South Korea have been conducting so far fruitless negotiations in order to bring about sound competition into the world shipbuilding market .
The Commission has now approved a strategy , according to which the matter will be taken to the WTO dispute settlement procedure .
I support this decision and would like to thank all those Members of the Commission who actively contributed to this decision .
At the same time , however , the Commission issued a proposal to the effect that operating aid could be allowed to individual shipyards temporarily during the WTO procedure .
According to the Commission proposal for a regulation , any arrangements for subsidies would be exceptional and temporary measures and would concern a limited number of ship types only .
At first glance the Commission proposal may seem justified , but in reality it distorts competition both in the world market and even within the EU and lacks any valid legitimate reason .
The link between the subsidy mechanism and the WTO procedure is totally artificial .
These matters have no natural connection and therefore these questions should be dealt with separately .
All of us who are involved in politics understand this : this is politics , not a legal process .
If we want to lean on the WTO , we ourselves must act according to the rules set by the WTO .
By allocating subsidies , the EU itself is guilty of distorting actions of which it is now accusing Korea .
This will bring discredit on us and will weaken our negotiation position within the WTO .
I said that the Commission proposal distorts competition also inside the EU .
Even if only certain ship types would receive subsidies , the subsidised shipyards would always benefit from subsidy monies and would therefore have an advantage over other shipyards .
In particular this will impede the position of the high technology shipbuilding industry , which for very good reasons has responded to fiercening competition by concentrating especially on products representing more demanding technology .
Among others my home country Finland has from the very beginning , as agreed , reduced shipyard subsidies , and we have invested strongly in the building of cruise ships and other high technology vessels .
Consequently , through these actions Finnish shipyards have achieved world-wide competitiveness , which the Commission is now trying to take away from us .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to express my satisfaction at the way in which Mrs Riis-Jørgensen ' s report has been very fruitfully amended in committee , which will enable us to establish a defensive mechanism for our shipbuilding industry .
We are all already aware of the difficulties that this sector has faced for years as a result of unfair competition from Korea .
We are also aware that Korea continues to set prices below cost , that the Korean authorities provide their shipyards with subsidies , both direct and indirect , that bankrupt shipyards are kept operational , that South Korea ' s production capacity increased by 170 % between 1988 and 1997 , whereas , during the same period , European production fell by 30 % .
And yet , during this time , European subsidies were ended .
All attempts to resolve the matter amicably have been in vain and a case therefore had to be lodged with the WTO .
I am pleased that this case has now been supplemented with a proposal for a defensive mechanism .
The WTO procedure will probably last three years .
It would be absurd to leave European shipbuilding unprotected for this time and the Commission has proposed a defence mechanism in the form of subsidies .
I support this measure but I would add that Korean competition also affects oil tankers .
One Korean company , with USD five billion ' s worth of losses that have been absorbed by state banks , nevertheless won half of all industrial tonnage in 2000 - by dropping prices .
At a time when the consequences of the 11 September attacks have led to a pause in orders for cruise ships , a sector which does not need subsidies , orders for oil tankers are much needed , which is why we must include this sector in the defensive mechanism .
This is my contribution , ladies and gentlemen , to this very important debate on shipbuilding .
I too wish to see Parliament give massive support to the Commission ' s proposal .
Mr President , I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , for her tenacious and courageous fight for a free market economy .
The rapporteur knows something of which other colleagues in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Commission ought to be aware : State subsidies of any kind damage the economy , impair the operation of the market and harm consumers .
Subsidies make for inefficiency and increase costs .
What is depressing is that fellow MEPs now want to make a bad proposal still worse .
I come from Sweden .
In the seventies , Sweden was the world ' s second largest shipbuilding nation after Japan .
I had my first job in what was at that time one of Sweden ' s largest shipyards .
We built the largest oil tanker in history .
When competition increased from countries such as Portugal , Japan and South Korea , the Swedish state invested a total of EUR 2 billion in an attempt to rescue the shipbuilding industry .
No industrial investment in Sweden has been so ill-starred , cost so much and resulted in so little .
The necessary restructuring of industry came to a halt , and no new jobs were created .
If we in the EU now want to show real solidarity with the shipyard workers and their families , the Commission ' s and the committees ' proposals must naturally be rejected .
That would be an investment for the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , I will get straight to the point .
Our group supports the Commission proposal with amendments .
Of course , we question the way in which we put up defensive mechanisms when there is talk of opaque , unclear and unfair competition .
The rapporteur has suggested that we should not take any generic measures , as is now the case , namely according to types of ships and possibly a broader concept thereof , but has favoured measures according to regions and shipbuilding yards instead .
Separate support must be granted within the agreements we have concluded in this connection .
The question then actually arises as to the way in which people who , let us say , want to uphold the liberal principles , need to act the moment damage is being done .
I will quote one example .
At present , the Commission has instituted proceedings against the Schelde-Damen construction , that is to say , Damen , has taken over the company Schelde for 1 Guilder .
Questions have been raised as to whether that is acceptable .
My question is whether , in the spirit of the directive which is now being proposed , it could be possible that the Commission , let us say in an oblique way , is now also turning a blind eye to constructions which are being used in this context and in the above example .
Mr President , the ban on State aid for what are mostly publicly-owned shipyards , the refusal to write off the debts run up by their previous private owners and the practice of handing them back to the private sector more or less free of charge are the mainstays of the policy exercised by the European Union which , in collusion with our national governments , has caused this strategically important sector to waste away .
This sorry state of affairs has been exacerbated by a dumping policy , especially in South Korea .
The blow which started with the seventh directive has been fatal for Greece 's highly-developed shipbuilding industry .
Thousands of jobs have been lost , working and health and safety conditions in the sector have deteriorated and we recently mourned the death of another five workers , sacrificed to capitalist speculation in the shipbuilding sector .
Now we have a hypocritical proposal to give aid , the aid which was previously banned , to what are now privately-owned shipyards as their only means of salvation .
Yet again we see the European Union 's devotion to the interests of big business .
The Communist Party of Greece takes the view that the only viable solution is to create a single publicly-owned agency which can withstand international competition and benefit employment and the economy .
Mr President , during this debate , certain things have become clear and have enjoyed general consensus . There is a general consensus that the crisis is affecting the European Union ' s shipbuilding industry .
There is a general consensus that this crisis is due , amongst other things , to unfair competition on the part of the Republic of South Korea , which , according to Mr Caudron , consists of three elements : prices which are lower than costs , aid to shipyards and the maintenance of bankrupt shipyards .
I have also stressed that the crisis is serious .
Over the last 10 years , Korea has increased its capacity by 180 % , while we have reduced ours by 30 % .
What have we done so far ?
So far , we have signed an agreement with South Korea which that country has not respected .
We have lodged a complaint which is yet to be dealt with .
And recently , a twin course of action has been decided upon : firstly , to take the case to the WTO and , secondly , to establish the defensive , selective and temporary mechanism which we are discussing .
It is as if Commissioner Bolkestein , faced with the non-compliances of Korea , had used the words of Cicero to Catiline : " Quousque tandem abutere Catilina patientia nostra [ How long now , Catiline , will you abuse our patience ] " .
I would remind those Members , almost all from the North , who have spoken against this decision , of a military aphorism which says that ' the mission of the artillery is to bomb the infantry , preferably that of the enemy ' .
In this case , the weapons of the North are aiming at European positions , bringing to mind in many cases the situation of Japan or that of other industries .
What does the European Parliament want to do ?
Support Mr Bolkestein whole-heartedly and ask him to be more generous .
To be more generous in relation to the field of protection : that is to say , as Mr Ortuondo has stressed , that it also be extended to those vessels which suffer from unfair competition , those which transport gases , car ferries , etc. and that he be less stingy in terms of the date of application .
That he extend this temporary and defensive measure until 2003 .
May God bless you if you do this , Mr Bolkestein .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commission for proposing a regulation for the shipbuilding industry which may be temporary and segmented but which somehow , once again , helps minimise the effects of protectionism , which exists in various trading blocs around the world and not just in Korea .
In Korea it is not even a question of protectionism : it is a massive violation of WTO rules .
We should like to believe that the complaint that has been made will have some effect and bring some discipline to this sector .
The Commission has revealed , however , that it knows the proposed mechanism is not enough , and that it is only one step , and a step with all the negative baggage that stopgap measures entail , once we get beyond the deficit and crises of the shipbuilding industry , some of which have already been mentioned here , so I shall not repeat them .
But while it is true that the Nordic countries support investment and alternative technology , and thus achieve added value and still manage to keep active in the market without great social upheaval , this is not equally true for other European Union regions , such as southern Europe , regions where this sector is the largest employer and supports employment in a number of services and subsidiary industries .
It is often the only activity that generates development in these regions , and so the disappearance of this activity would be a social tragedy for certain regions , particularly in my country , in Spain and in Greece .
But while we hope that the Commission will implement this regulation at least by 2003 , we hope for a lot more for the future and a different attitude towards the sector .
Mr President , on 5 December 2000 , the Council decided that the granting of State aid of up to 9 per cent to the shipbuilding industry should cease for all Member States at the end of the year 2000 .
This was for two reasons : State aid had not proved to have had any major effect on the industry ' s ability to survive , and there was a conviction on grounds of principle that State aid should be reduced as much as possible and preferably cease .
Parliament shared this view as recently as last year .
State aid to shipyards is , moreover , contrary to international trade agreements , a fact crystallised by the Commission ' s attempt in the autumn of 1999 and the spring of 2000 to reach a negotiated solution with South Korea to the problem of their having violated current trade agreements by providing extensive State aid .
Now that that attempt has failed , the Commission is instead tabling a proposal for a so-called temporary defensive mechanism for the shipbuilding industry , involving aid of between 6 and 14 per cent .
According to the committee ' s proposal , this is to continue right up until the end of 2003 , at the same time as dispute settlement proceedings have been instituted before the WTO against South Korea as a result of the latter ' s having violated current trade agreements .
The reintroduction of extensive State aid within the EU would scarcely increase the prospects of solving the dispute with South Korea .
It would make more sense to reject the Commission ' s proposal and put every effort into the WTO proceedings against South Korea .
In conclusion , I should like to put the following question to Commissioner Bolkestein : how does he think this proposal stands in relation to the EU ' s competition policy through which we are trying to minimise , and preferably remove , State aid to industries in order to create fair and healthy competition between companies ?
Mr President , my colleague , Mr Monti , has asked me to pass on his regrets to Parliament for his absence and to respond on his behalf .
I should like , on Mr Monti 's behalf , to thank Mrs Riis-Jørgensen for her hard work and considerable input into this report .
We are extremely grateful for the rapid handling of this file by Parliament .
I also wish to take this opportunity to explain to Parliament the Commission 's position on this report .
Ideally , there would be no need for the Commission to present this proposal .
I stress that operating aid is a particularly distorting form of aid , because it provides no incentive to improve efficiency and delivers no benefit in terms of competitiveness of the yards by , for example , encouraging training or research development .
Nor , indeed , does it help the environment .
For those reasons and after many years of operating aid being granted to the shipbuilding industry , the Commission finally decided to prohibit it as from the end of last year .
However , to quote a well-known philosopher , we do not live in the best of all possible worlds .
That being so , it is only right that the Community should take action against any unfair competitive practices , and it is within that context that the proposal for the temporary defensive mechanism should be seen .
This proposal is one part of a two-pronged strategy against Korean practices and is designed to support the Community 's action against Korea in the WTO .
It is an exceptional measure , and is only taken in the light of a situation which led one representative rightly to quote Cicero saying : ' Quo usque tandem abutere , Catilina , patientia nostra ? '
It is , as I say , an exceptional measure , whose purpose is to put pressure on Korea to bring it to the negotiating table with the Community and to force it to bring an end to its unfair commercial practices .
As far as the Commission is concerned , it is not in any way the beginning of a new , possibly open ended regime of operating aid .
That emphatically is not the Commission 's intention .
I note that the proposed amendments to the Commission 's proposal relate to three main issues .
Firstly , there is the scope of the mechanism .
Secondly , there is the information to be made available to the Member States and also to third parties through Member States .
Thirdly and finally , there is the matter of its duration .
I should like to respond to these points in that order .
So , firstly , on the extension of the scope : the amendments proposed in the report would considerably widen the scope of the mechanism , which covers only those market segments that the Commission has identified , in its report on the trade barriers regulation , as having already been considerably injured by unfair Korean practices .
The proposal strikes a balance between a high maximum aid ceiling of 14 % on the one hand and limited eligibility on the other hand .
It is therefore specifically designed to counter unfair Korean practices .
Any enlargement of the scope would risk changing the nature of the proposal .
I would like to draw Members ' attention to Article 2 ( 6 ) of the proposal , which provides that the Commission will keep under review the market segments eligible for aid in the light of evidence clearly proving that a specific market segment within the Community has been directly injured by unfair and opaque competitive conditions .
The Commission will , accordingly , monitor the situation and keep Parliament informed of any potential review under that provision .
The second point relates to information provided to Member States and third parties through Member States , that is , the removal of the name and address of the applicant shipyard and prospective purchaser .
That is the intention of the amendments put forward .
The information that has been specified in Article ( 2 ) ( a ) of the Commission 's proposal is the minimum necessary to allow third parties to submit useful comments to the Commission and to ensure the effectiveness of the transparency procedure .
The purpose of that provision is to speed up the procedure .
The alternative option would be to open the formal investigation procedure in all cases where the Commission has doubts about the compatibility of aid .
That would entail the full publication of detailed information relating to the notification .
Thirdly , there is the extension of the expiry date until 31 December 2003 .
It has been argued by some Members of Parliament that the expiry date of the mechanism is too early .
But by the end of 2002 we will have a good idea of how the WTO action is proceeding .
It would be a timely opportunity to take stock of the situation and to reassess whether special measures for shipbuilding are still considered necessary .
The Commission can , at that stage , propose an extension of the defensive mechanisms to the Council .
In addition to what I have just said on behalf of my colleague Mr Monti , I should like to reply more specifically to two or three questions that were put to the Commission just now .
Firstly , Mr Blokland claims that there is a need for structural changes and not for more aid to ailing industries .
I would agree with him that ideally subsidies should support structural change .
Let us hope that in this case that is true .
Various Members have raised the issue of compatibility with the WTO .
In the Commission 's view the proposal on a temporary defensive mechanism is fully compatible with WTO law subsidies , provided they are not prohibitive , are not drawn to cause so-called adverse effects and are legitimate national policy instruments as far as the WTO is concerned .
Therefore the European Community has the right to grant aid to its shipbuilders .
In fact the EC has been granting such aid to its shipbuilding industry for many years , up to 31 December 2000 .
Insofar as subsidies are not sanctions in the sense of the dispute settlement procedure , they are permitted policy measures .
Therefore the recourse to dispute settlement can in no way be seen as limiting the normal rights and obligations of Members under the WTO agreements .
Lastly , in reply to Mrs Riis-Jørgensen 's question , as to whether the Commission would submit a new proposal for the reasons explained , the Commission does not see any reason to modify the proposal .
Therefore the Commission has no plans to put forward a new proposal .
The Commission is grateful for the support Parliament has so far shown for this proposal .
For the reasons that I have outlined , the proposed amendments are not acceptable to the Commission .
Nevertheless I very much hope that we can count on Parliament 's continued support in this matter .

Mr President , I am glad Mr Bolkestein confirmed that he will not submit a new proposal .
But he also referred to the review clause in the proposal .
Can you assure me today , Mr Bolkestein , that you are not going to give in to France by permitting it to subsidise its shipyards in order to get agreement in the Council in December ?
Can you confirm that you will make no agreement with France before that meeting ?
In reply to Mrs Riis-Jørgensen 's question , I repeat that the Commission stands by the position I have outlined just now .
Any further negotiations are , as far as the Commission is concerned , not in order .
We will see what happens in the Industry Council at the beginning of December .
As far as the position of one Member State is concerned , the Commission has nothing further to add .
) Mr President , my speech concerns a matter of procedure .
My view is that from the point of view of the working of the Members of Parliament it is very unsatisfactory that reports are continuously moved to entirely different time slots on the agenda .
Mrs Peijs ' s report was originally due to be considered at the afternoon session , then we were informed that it has been moved to the session starting at 9 p.m. , after that a notification suddenly appeared here at 5.15 p.m. that in actual fact its processing is starting now .


This kind of tossing the ball back and forth is not acceptable with regard to getting the Members ' time schedules organised .
Another matter I would like to draw attention to is the absence of the Council .
The Council question time is starting now .
Surely they would have been able to arrive half an hour earlier to discuss , for example , this matter which is very important to the shipbuilding industry .
The Council , however , is again conspicuous by being absent .
I deeply regret that this is happening .
I do understand your concern , Mrs Kauppi , but I must tell you that Council Question Time is also set on our agenda for a very precise time , which is 5.30 p.m.
Members who have tabled questions will , therefore , be joining us in a few minutes . We must give them the floor .
Having said that , although our debates are programmed into the agenda , it is impossible to predict exactly how long they will last , give or take a few minutes or a quarter of an hour , not least because the Commissioners and the ministers sometimes take up much more speaking time than the sitting staff plan for .
This is why I would ask you to show some understanding and flexibility .
We have two or three minutes left before 5.30 p.m. and I therefore suspend the sitting until Council Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.27 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Questions to the Council ( B5-0338 / 2001 ) .
On behalf of the Council , Mrs Durant is with us as President-in-Office of the Council and we thank her for being here .
She is Vice Prime Minister and Minister for Mobility and Transport .
As the author , Mr Staes , is not present , Question No 1 lapses .
The fact that we have started on time today has probably surprised some Members who always bank on a delay , but not today .
The second question has been withdrawn .
Question No 3 by ( H-0778 / 01 ) :
Subject : Guidelines for the Cardiff Integration Process How does the Council intend to develop a common set of guidelines for the proper evaluation , follow-up and monitoring of the nine Council strategies , as well as the overall Cardiff Process , for environmental integration ?
Will these guidelines include recommendations for a more transparent process and wider stakeholder participation in the development and implementation of the strategies ?
How will the Council ensure full involvement of the European Parliament in the Cardiff Process ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , the Council would like to reiterate that the Cardiff process has led six Council formations to present strategies to the European Council that seek to integrate the environment into their policies .
These strategies concerned the transport , energy , agriculture , industry , internal market and development cooperation sectors .
The General Affairs , ECOFIN and Fisheries Councils plan to present the three latest relevant strategies to the Barcelona European Council in the spring of 2002 .
The nine integration strategies must be implemented in the form of sectoral measures , adopted by the majority , through co-decision with the European Parliament .
In addition to the Cardiff process , we must highlight the Lisbon process , which integrates the 1997 Luxembourg social process on employment with the 1999 Cologne macro-economic process , which was given a third dimension in Gothenburg , an environmental dimension , made up of the strategy for sustainable development , which also seeks to achieve integration of the environment into sectoral policies .
The European Union will present all this to the Global Summit on Sustainable Development which , as you know , will be held in Johannesburg in September 2002 .
By creating this strategy on sustainable development , the European Council has given priority , in terms of the environment , to climate change , to ecologically viable methods of transport , to the responsible management of natural resources and , lastly , to the management of risks to public health .
Whilst continuing to function independently , the Cardiff process has been assessed and monitored since its launch in 1998 , with results which are now integrated into the enlarged framework of the Lisbon process .
The implementation of the strategy on sustainable development must , as decided at Gothenburg , be based on four points .
The first point is an annual synthesis report by the Commission , which will now concern the three dimensions of the Lisbon process , including the strategy on sustainable development .
A report of the same kind will also have to be presented to the Barcelona European Council .
The second point is an evaluation and a political direction at the spring European Councils .
The third point concerns structural indicators on sustainable development which will be , on the basis of a Commission communication , endorsed by the Council before being submitted to the Laeken European Council .
The fourth and final point is a Commission communication on better regulation , which will mean that all the major proposals from this institution will be assessed beforehand for their effects on the strategy on sustainable development , including integration of the environmental dimension .
The Council is currently working to implement the conclusions of the European Council on the structures of work .
These will be designed with particular consideration given to the principles of governance in terms of transparency , stakeholder participation , better methods for regulation and the re-focusing of Community policies .
Trying to put the principles of environmental sustainability into practice is no easy task .
The Council is actually inventing the wheel .
The impression that many of us have is that the discussions are taking place behind closed doors .
I wonder whether the presidency is trying to open the discussion up , increase the transparency of the process and perhaps involve other organisations such as NGOs in the development of strategies .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council in particular what is being done to press for the working groups to identify specific medium-term objectives , clear targets and programmes of action , so that we have something to get our teeth into and have a demonstrable means of measuring progress and achievement ?
I share your concern regarding transparency and openness , so that we can have specific indicators and results .
I also share your concern to take into account the views , advice or specific results from other organisations , particularly NGOs .
I have taken careful note of your suggestion , of your request to increase transparency and the involvement of all those who are helping to draw up strategies on sustainable development in the field .
I do hope that in showing transparency , the Council will also be able to integrate the results that you mention in order to ensure that these indicators on sustainable development , which are being prepared and are due to be submitted to the Laeken European Council , can , as part of the process and in the run-up to Barcelona , be improved from the point of view of both transparency and their repercussions or in terms of taking into account the views of all those who are working specifically in the field in the area of sustainable development .
Mr President , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Cardiff process is essential for sustainable development .
The European Parliament , and especially its Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , has already carried out very good preliminary work here , and I think that in this House , transparency and , of course , dialogue can really be taken for granted .
We very often hold hearings here and make every effort to maximise dialogue with non-government organisations .
My question relates to this issue .
We have just concluded the WTO negotiations .
What opportunities do you see to coordinate the Cardiff process in consultation with the WTO organisations ?
Mr President , your concern regarding both transparency and correspondence or coherence between , firstly , the outcome of the Doha Summit , the final details of which we are awaiting , and , secondly , the strategies on sustainable development , is extremely interesting .
Admittedly , as we saw at Doha , it is difficult , but interesting nonetheless , to integrate environmental policies into a much more multi-lateral context .
This is an important step forward , considering our starting point .
I think that this is a positive aspect and that , in the wake of the Doha Summit , we will now have to make the most of the achievements of Doha and use them within the framework of the measures that are to be implemented at European Union level , so as to ensure that sustainable development not only continues to be an honourable and bold ambition for everyone , but more importantly , translates itself , whilst observing the principle of transparency and following constructive dialogue , into specific measures in the field .
I therefore feel that the correspondence between the two parts , what was achieved within a wider forum and what was achieved or is in the process of being achieved at European Union level and , in particular , what must be achieved at the Laeken and Barcelona Councils , should be coherent and should be the milestones of a structural position , that is specific and conducive to the integration of sustainable development in all the policies implemented at Council and European Union level in general .
Question No 4 by ( H-0781 / 01 ) :
Subject : Landing of large numbers of illegal immigrants in the Canary Islands What measures does the Council intend to put forward to guarantee the integrity of Community waters around the Canary Islands , given the recent reports that motherships are being used to land large numbers of illegal immigrants from Africa on the Canaries ?
Mr President , the Council has already responded , on several occasions , to the questions from Members of the European Parliament on illegal immigration by sea from the African continent .
In particular , I refer to the answers to oral questions H-2701 , H-0330 / 01 and H-0699 / 01 on illegal immigration in the European Union , and to the answers to written questions E-0085 / 01 and E-1045 / 01 , which also tackled these problems .
The Council has already taken several measures to combat illegal immigration .
The action plans that have been drawn up for the countries and regions producing illegal immigrants and / or asylum seekers , within the framework of the High Level Asylum and Immigration Group , is a good example of one such measure .
Another example is that of the rapid alert system that was developed within the Centre for Information , Discussion and Exchange on the Crossing of Frontiers and Immigration ( Cirefi ) .
Measures to improve the effectiveness of checks by Member States at maritime borders were launched as part of cooperation under the Schengen Agreement .
Since the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force , these measures are now part of the Community acquis .
Of course , Member States are responsible for performing these checks , and the surveillance of and checks on territorial waters are therefore a matter of their competence .
The Council also stresses that the preparatory bodies are currently looking into introducing a good practice guide , the aim of which is to assist Member States in carrying out these checks .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , the Presidency of the Council will realise that I am not satisfied by references to mere written declarations .
The current situation in the Canary Islands amounts to a genuine invasion .
Approximately one hundred people are arriving every week and , furthermore , we are sending them to the rest of the Community .
A week ago , the Mayor of the city of Las Palmas in Gran Canaria sent two hundred immigrants to Madrid with one-way tickets .
If the European Union does not look after this border , I can assure you that we will have a real invasion , which is going to change all the parameters .
Perhaps my supplementary question should be , in relation to certain replies I received yesterday from Commissioner Vitorino on the Commission ' s new proposals , whether the Council is considering those Commission proposals on the control of external borders , on immigration agreements with neighbouring countries and on the return of illegal immigrants in the EU to the countries of origin .
Mr President , I can understand that you feel the answer that I have given on behalf of the Council may be insufficient in terms of a situation that gives you cause for concern and which you feel is extremely important .
As I have just said , I can only refer to the competence of Member States regarding decisions taken at Community level .
It is up to Member States , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , to implement the necessary measures that were drawn up within the context of the Community .
Question No 5 by , which has been taken over by Mr Ortuondo Larrea ( H-0783 / 01 ) :
Subject : Reference to nationalism in the conclusions of the European Council meeting of 21 September 2001 Following the horrific terrorist attacks which took place on 11 September and their tragic consequences , people in the United States reacted strongly , with clear expressions of nationalism or patriotism based on the democratic and moral values which underpin North American society .
It was out of a similar form of democratic nationalism that most of the current Member States of the European Union were born in the face of despotic power .
The fact that certain European states acted in a violent and imperialistic manner and were thus the cause of the tragic wars which have marked Europe 's history should in no way detract from the peaceful aspirations which characterise the democratic nationalism to be found in most European countries .
It is therefore surprising to note that , in the conclusions of the European Council meeting of 21 September 2001 , which was held in response to the terrorist attacks against US citizens , the term ' nationalism ' is once more used indiscriminately as being equivalent to racism and xenophobia .
This is quite clearly offensive to all those Europeans who see themselves as peaceful , democratic and caring members of a nation and part of a national culture , as well as members of the European and world community .
Does the Council not agree that it is manifestly unfair to link nationalism with racism and xenophobia in such an indiscriminate manner ?
The Council would reiterate that it is not up to the Council to comment on the conclusions of the European Council .
In this case , it is also beneficial to highlight that , in its conclusions of 21 September 2001 , the European Council emphasises the need to combat any nationalist , racist or xenophobic drift .
I shall stress this - any nationalist drift , which is not the same thing as nationalism .
The term ' nationalism ' does not actually appear in the text .
The only terms that appear are ' drifts , abuses , in nationalist , racist or xenophobic terms ' .
And in this respect , I do not believe that the position taken by the Council does contradict the position that you expressed in your question .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , the European Council has been able to differentiate between Arab and Muslim religion and society , on the one hand , and fanatical Islamic terrorist groups on the other .
However , in its conclusions of 21 September , the European Council expresses the need , as you have said , to combat any nationalist tendency , as if to be nationalist were a crime in itself or an attack on human rights .
Does the Council not agree that to stress the need to combat peaceful nationalism , which defends the universal right to free self-determination , something which the United Nations approved , by exclusively democratic means , could be seen as a display of intolerance and fascism on the part of the governments of the European Union ?
While it is true that there are radical nationalist groups , which support terrorism , there are also violent groups with unionist or environmentalist ideologies which also commit violent acts .
Does the Council therefore believe that we should combat British unionism or environmentalism , for example , in all its forms ?
Would it not be better to show prudence and democratic respect whenever we refer to nationalism , unionism , environmentalism or any other ideology ?
I confirm what I just said . There is no reference to nationalism being a non-democratic movement in itself .
There are references here to abuses and drifts , be they racist , xenophobic , exclusionist , but nationalism in itself is not referred to as something that generates these drifts .
On the other hand , nationalism can sometimes be used for much more extremist purposes which should be condemned outright .
This is also the case in the area of political action , where democratic political actions benefit democracy as a whole and the freedom of expression .
Each time there are drifts , however , they are dangerous and they must be stamped out .
I am grateful for the President-in-Office of the Council 's last remarks .
I belong to a national movement in my own country , Scotland , which over the last 100 years has produced great constitutional change without a single drop of human blood being shed or a single act of violence occurring .
There are other places , as she knows , where similar constitutional changes have taken place and are continuing .
The Council and the President-in-Office of the Council are perhaps wilfully missing the point in Mr Nogueira Román 's question .
It is a great mistake to say that there are some ends that tend to attract terrorism and therefore to attack those ends in themselves .
The truth is that a terrorist is someone who thinks that an end justifies any means .
It is absurd to believe that if the end is noble any means can be justified .
Those who believe that , make whatever end they seek ignoble .
I wish the Council would be less selective in its attitude to such questions .
I share your point of view and I would also like to reiterate that , given the debate we have just had on the international situation , in regard to nationalism , as I said , or in other areas , and I shall use the example of religion , which is particularly topical in terms of current events in Afghanistan , the Council clearly believes that religion forms part of one ' s private life , is a matter of individual choice .
I shall take Islam as an example .
Islam has nothing to do with the scandalous and abusive way that it has been treated by terrorists who use it in a way that borders on the disgraceful and to achieve vastly different goals .
I can only repeat , in answer to your question , the Council ' s belief is that , in Europe and throughout the world , we must also respect a democratic Islam , which , in fact , belongs to the sphere of one ' s private life , or which is expressed in a legitimate way , but also to combat any form of religious expression which pursues any other scandalously repressive goal .

Just to clarify the comments by my honourable colleague , Mr MacCormick , it was , in fact , the 1997 election of a Labour government which delivered the historic Scottish parliament that was democratically elected in 1999 .
If it had not been for that Labour government we would not have a Scottish parliament .
I would remind Members that this is exclusively a Question Time .
These clarifications can be made later outside the chamber .
Question No 6 by ( H-0784 / 01 ) :
Subject : Illegal immigration into Greece from Turkey - breach of accession partnership There has been an enormous upsurge in illegal immigration into Greece from Turkey , with thousands of clandestine immigrants reaching Greek shores aboard Turkish smugglers ' boats .
The Turkish authorities make no attempt to prevent such immigration , which is in breach of the accession partnership , while the measures taken by the Greek authorities are inadequate to stem the constant flood of illegal immigrants on to Greek territory and , by extension , into the EU .
Bearing in mind the climate of insecurity created by uncontrolled immigration into the EU , which was intensified by the terrorist attacks in the USA , what is the Council 's position on the flow of illegal immigrants from Turkey ?
What measures will the Council take in regard to Turkey as an applicant for EU accession , pursuant to the conditions laid down in the accession partnership concerning the prevention of illegal immigration and the strengthening of border management with a view to the adoption of the Schengen acquis , in order to prevent illegal immigrants entering Greece and to guarantee the security of the EU 's borders ?
In response to Mr Trakatellis ' question , the Council has often expressed its concern regarding illegal immigration and also refers in this connection to the conclusions of the Tampere , Santa Maria de Feira and Nice European Councils , for example .
Regarding the measures that it has taken and is continuing to take in this area , the Council kindly asks you to refer to the answers that have already been given to numerous questions submitted by Members of the European Parliament on illegal immigration .
The Council reiterates that the Helsinki European Council decided to consider Turkey as a candidate country which aims to join the European Union on the basis of the same criteria as those that are applied to the other candidate countries .
The Helsinki European Council stated that , and I quote , ' with a view to intensifying the harmonisation of Turkey ' s legislation and practice with the acquis , the Commission is invited to prepare a process of analytical examination of the acquis ' .
In accordance with the conclusions of the Feira European Council , the Commission will report back to the Council on the progress made in preparing the analytical examination of the acquis with Turkey .
The Council formally adopted the accession partnership with Turkey on 8 March 2000 .
Under this accession partnership , Turkey adopted a national programme for adopting the acquis , which sets out the framework for the policy to be pursued and the timetable of legislative work , as well as the budgetary and administrative requirements that are necessary in order for Turkey to adopt the Community acquis .
In line with the practice established for all candidate countries , the Commission will assess Turkey ' s national programme for adopting the acquis in the 2001 regular report on the basis of the accession partnership .
The European Union will closely monitor the implementation of the various measures announced as part of this framework .
The national programme on the acquis contains various measures in the area of justice and home affairs .
The main objectives on which progress was made during 2001 include the strengthening of border checks , the harmonisation of legislation and practices concerning visas with the European Union acquis , and , lastly , the adoption of the acquis in the area of immigration in order to prevent illegal immigration .
The Council again stated its concern given the enormous influx of illegal immigrants from Turkey into Greece or transiting through Greece .
The European Union asked Turkey to implement appropriate measures as laid out in the European Union report of November 2000 .
The EU is also keen to help Turkey financially in pursuing the implementation of the recommended approach , in line with the accession partnership .
In this respect , the Council noted with interest Turkey ' s intention to waive , in the medium term , the geographical proviso formulated with regard to the 1951 Geneva Convention on the status of refugees .
The Council also engaged in active dialogue with countries that produce asylum seekers and / or illegal immigrants within the framework of the High Level Asylum and Immigration group .
As I said earlier in my reply to the question by another Member regarding the Canary Islands , this group , set up by the Council in December 1998 , has the task of drawing up action plans for specific countries .
In order to draw up these action plans , the group adopted a global , trans-pillar approach , taking into account aspects relating to foreign policy , economic development and also the management of migratory flows .
One of the countries chosen for this action plan is Iraq , since it is a country that produces immigrants and which immigrants transit through .
Because of its geographical situation , Turkey is obviously an important country of transit .
As part of the action plan for Iraq , the Council has already launched a dialogue with Turkey in order to implement the European Union action plan concerning Iraq of 26 January 1998 .
One of the measures under the action plan is to negotiate a transit agreement with Turkey .
I welcome the Council 's lengthy reply but I still have two questions .
As the Prime Minister of Greece , Mr Simitis , has said , we are working on an assumption of 260 000 illegal immigrants this year .
Tell me , if you can , how two hundred and sixty thousand illegal immigrants can possibly pass through Turkey unnoticed ?
This being so , exactly what action has the Council taken with respect to Turkey , with its candidate status and partnership agreement , to make it improve its border patrols and prevent these huge numbers of illegal immigrants ?
Secondly , and more importantly , what exactly does the Council have in mind ?
Is it in a position to design a joined-up policy to ensure that this matter is resolved satisfactorily and that borders and illegal immigration are safely controlled ?
Of course , political asylum seekers are seeking political asylum , but there still has to be some form of control .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to confirm what I just said regarding the Council ' s action to effectively implement the things that were decided on as part of the Turkish action plan .
Furthermore , with regard to the more general question of migration , I acknowledge and the Council also freely acknowledges that , due to its geographical situation , Turkey is a country in a peculiar situation .
And now , we are all acquainted with the consequences of this situation that you have highlighted .
I would like to point out that , under the Belgian Presidency , we have in fact organised , for the first time , a conference , held in Brussels some weeks ago , on the issue of migration .
This was a European Conference which was held as part of a necessary investigation into the issue of migratory movements .
I think that this debate must run its course , and the Belgian Presidency wanted to launch this , independently of any decisions taken with regard to Turkey or Iraq , as part of the discussions that Europe is holding with both Turkey under the statute that was conferred upon it , and with non-European and non-candidate countries , to attempt to better manage the problems related to these migratory fluctuations .
The point I should like to make to the Minister is that there is a huge contradiction where Turkey is concerned .
On the one hand , it allows huge numbers of migrants to pass through it and , on the other , a stream of political refugees from Turkey itself or from other countries but who are open to prosecution in Turkey , such as Iraqi Kurds who might be prosecuted for their activities in Turkey , is turning up in Greece .
How can these two things be reconciled ?
By which I mean making Turkey stop , with the possible refoulement of immigrants entering the Community illegally via Greece , while at the same time protecting all those seeking political asylum , given that Turkey is a country which practises the death penalty and , as we saw in the Commission 's progress report yesterday , a country in which democracy is sorely lacking ?
The President-in-Office of the Council does not consider it appropriate to reply to the following question .
She probably considers it not to be a question but rather a declaration by the Member .
It is up to the President-in-Office of the Council .
Question No 7 by ( H-0788 / 01 ) :
Subject : Statements by Mr Berlusconi Recently , the Prime Minister of Italy , Mr Berlusconi , made statements which essentially put the mass demonstrations calling for a different kind of globalisation on a par with terrorism .
He also proceeded to make a number of comparisons and judgments about Western and Islamic civilisation which betrayed an ignorance of history and which the President-in-Office of the Council , the Belgian Foreign Minister , Mr Michel , described as barbaric , absurd and untrue .
In view of the fact that Mr Berlusconi 's statements are totally contrary to the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights , as signed and proclaimed by the Presidents of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission at the European Council meeting in Nice on 7 December 2000 , can the Council state its official and collective position on this matter ?
Mr President , it is , of course , not up to the Council to comment on the statements made by Mr Berlusconi .
The Council would like to reiterate the terms used by the European Council in its conclusions , at the outcome of the extraordinary meeting held in Brussels on 21 September .
The European Council , issuing an appeal to the international community to pursue , in all multilateral fora , dialogue and negotiation with a view to building , in Europe and elsewhere , a world of peace , law and tolerance , also emphasised the need to combat any racist and xenophobic drift and to reject any equation of terrorism with the Arab or Muslim world .
From this perspective , there is no doubt that the official and concerted position , which you have been hoping and praying for , was already taken by the Council at its sitting of 21 September .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , my question touched on two issues .
First , Mr Berlusconi 's views , if I may call them such , on Arabs and Islam .
It seems to me from what you have read out that the Council begs to differ from , not to say condemns these views .
And that is good news .
But I asked you a second question , Madam President-in-Office of the Council .
In his statements , Mr Berlusconi equated the huge demonstrations being held all over the world , in both Europe and America , by people who believe that globalisation could take a different form and a different direction , with terrorism .
In other words , he equated these demonstrations with terrorism .
What is the Council 's view on this issue , which is an extremely important issue and one which will no doubt crop up again in the future ?
Mr President , I would like to reiterate that it is not for the Council to comment on the statements made by Mr Berlusconi and others , not only on the aspects related to Islam or any other equation of terrorism with the Arab world , but also on issues related to globalisation .
I stand by the actions and the positions of the Council , which were adopted on 21 September and which I believe give a clear indication of the European Council ' s point of view , regarding its determination to reject any equation of this sort .
It is not for the Council to comment or issue an opinion on the statements made by Mr Berlusconi either .
Question No 8 by ( H-0791 / 01 ) :
Subject : Inclusion of additional data on new EU identity cards The recent terrorist attacks in the USA have given rise to intense debate over whether more detailed information about an individual 's characteristics and origin should be included on identity cards in the Member States of the Union .
The Greek press reports that this issue will be discussed early next December in Brussels at the meeting of the Ministers of Justice , Internal Affairs and Public Order of the 15 Member States of the EU .
Will the Council therefore say whether the deliberations which take place between those Ministers will also cover the following additional data to define more clearly the identity of European citizens and , in more general terms , EU residents : fingerprints , colour of eyes and hair , height , weight , blood group and subgroup , visible scars and other physical distinguishing features , hair growth , disabilities , nationality , place of birth , religion , family status , occupation , and academic qualifications .
I would request a specific answer for each of the above mentioned points .
Will the deliberations also cover the possibility of adding further characteristics to existing passports in all the UN Member States and , if so , which characteristics ?
I would like to thank you for asking this question , as it gives the Council the opportunity to clear up what is obviously a huge misunderstanding on the part of the Greek press .
At an extraordinary session on 20 September 2001 , organised in response to the events of 11 September , the Justice , Home Affairs and Civil Protection Council held a wide debate on measures to be taken as part of the fight against international terrorism .
It is true that the Council discussed including bio data , but only on visas to be issued to third country nationals .
As a follow-up to this debate , the Commission recently asked the Council to submit a proposal for a regulation to enhance the security of this category of visas , by including a digital photograph on these , so that we can ensure that the passport holder really is the person to whom the document was issued .
The Council would very much appreciate Parliament ' s issuing an opinion on this new proposal as soon as possible .
Lastly , you are almost certainly aware that identity cards of Member States ' nationals are an area that falls within the exclusive remit of each of the Member States .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her extremely clear reply to my question .
She has confirmed that the Council is discussing the inclusion of other information on passports or visas , such as a digital photograph , an extremely important element , and additional biometric data .
Could you perhaps be more specific , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , as regards what additional information you are discussing . Will it include biometric information other than a fingerprint and will it also include the person 's religion ?
This issue is of particular interest to Greece .
I should also like to ask why you only plan to request information on the identity of third country nationals and not European Union nationals . As far as I know , the European Union has its share of terrorists , for example in Spain and Greece .
Should we not be making it easier for European police forces to locate European terrorists ?
I obviously wanted to be sure that the answer I gave was accurate .
In fact , this does not only concern visas and , with respect to the data provided , this only regards digital fingerprinting .
I can today reassure you on the issue of religion , for example .
I think that it is important for Parliament , as I suggested , to issue an opinion on this proposal as soon as possible so that we can then forge ahead .
But I can reassure you that we do not mean digital fingerprinting .
Question No 9 by ( H-0795 / 01 ) :
Subject : Age discrimination Does the Council propose to change its current policy of discriminating against job applicants aged 45 and over in the light of the European Ombudsman 's current investigation into whether such age discrimination amounts to maladministration ?
The Council does not consider that setting an age limit of 45 years for the recruitment of civil servants at the starting grade constitutes discrimination in itself , because the difference in treatment established by this limit , on the one hand , is in line with the Treaty on establishing the European Community as well as the civil servants ' statute and , on the other , is based on objective reasons , particularly relating to the concept of a career , which is at the heart of Community work .
This consideration was twice brought to the attention of the European Ombudsman .
We must also emphasise that the age limit is raised systematically , and up to a maximum of six years , in order to take into account family commitments , such as bringing up children , military service or physical handicap .
The age limit is also raised in some other cases , in order to meet specific recruitment requirements due to the staff needs or the new requirements of an institution .
This was the case , for example , for the recruitment of Nordic language translators and this also happened more recently for posts advertised for political and military staff .
The Council ' s General Secretariat would not deprive itself of the experience of an older candidate if this experience was indispensable , but it must also ensure that younger staff are recruited to fulfil the permanent tasks of the institution , such as translation or administration .
Lastly , you drew attention to the fact that the process to undertake administrative reform and strengthen inter-institutional cooperation that is underway intends to establish an inter-institutional recruitment office .
The question regarding age limit has not been touched upon during the preparatory work carried out to establish this office .
The issue is also likely to be raised when reviewing the proposals on the reform of the statute , on which the Council , in its role of legislator , will be asked to comment .
Whilst we await the results of this work , which should enable common rules for all the institutions to be drawn up , it does not seem appropriate to change the current practice used by the Council ' s General Secretariat in the recruitment of civil servants at the starting grade of a career .
The practice appears to be in line with the rules of law and is also in the interests of the institution .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply .
I was alerted to this issue of age discrimination in the Council at our previous part-session when I was asked what I thought .
My immediate reaction was that , while on the one hand we are trying to encourage fairer treatment of older workers , yet , on the other hand , in one of our own EU institutions - and from what the minister said in more than one - we are discriminating against those aged 45 and over .
It is a sad state of affairs when those aged 45 are not considered for employment .
What talent , knowledge and experience is lost because of this !
I should like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council what measures are being taken to treat all job applications equally ?
It was interesting to hear about the inter-institutional recruitment office .
What is the time-scale for its creation and what common rules will all institutions have ?
I just wish to clarify something you said .
The base age has been raised by six years .
Does that mean it has been raised to 51 or has 39 been raised to 45 ?
Mr President , I just wanted to answer one of the specific supplementary questions that were asked .
The limit is effectively set at 45 years , and it is not possible to recruit anyone over 51 years of age .
Therefore this is a specific answer to one of the specific questions that I was asked as a result .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions No 10 and 11 will be taken together .
Question No 10 by ( H-0796 / 01 ) :
Subject : Specific measures to provide refuge and support for the Afghan population Given the current situation and the risk of a full blown humanitarian catastrophe in Afghanistan , what effective action and measures is the Council going to take to prevent hundreds of thousands of women and innocent people being made the victims of indiscriminate violence or of cold and hunger ?
Will the Council be opening humanitarian corridors and seeking political solutions ?
Question No 11 by ( H-0825 / 01 ) :
Subject : Wave of Afghan refugees at the gates of Europe For a number of years , Turkey has been one of the main points of entry into Europe for economic migrants and political refugees .
Following the terrorist attack in the USA , Afghans seeking shelter from the brutal Taliban regime and , above all , from the war , now make up the bulk of refugees on the move .
Reliable sources report that tens of thousands of Afghan refugees are preparing to make the crossing from Turkey to Greece and Italy .
In the Council 's view , what is the status of the Afghan refugees ?
Are they entitled to political asylum ? Is a quota system being considered to accommodate them in European countries ?
Is there any form of cooperation with the Turkish authorities ?
What view does the Council take of the conditions in which they are ' housed ' in Italy and Greece ( immigrant reception centres , etc . ) ? What measures can the Council take in cooperation with the Greek and Italian authorities ?
Mr President , as it has indicated in previous answers on the same subject , the Council fully shares your concerns regarding the humanitarian catastrophe in Afghanistan .
At its session on 8 and 9 October 2001 , the Council reaffirmed that the European Union and its Member States are doing everything possible in order to avoid a humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and in the neighbouring countries , which must be organised in close collaboration with the HCR and other specialised agencies , the International Red Cross Committee , the United States , neighbouring countries and other partners from multinational organisations .
On this occasion , the Council reiterated that , faced with the humanitarian crisis , the Community and its Member States have already released EUR 316 million .
The Council warmly welcomed the first steps taken by the Commission to assist refugees and has invited the Commission to present further measures as soon as possible .
In this respect , I would like to stress that the reserve for urgent aid , which amounts to EUR 25 million , to be used for humanitarian aid to help the Afghan people , was already approved at a budgetary tripartite meeting on 15 October .
Furthermore , the Council restated the European Union ' s determination to support , when required , a political process launched in Afghanistan , with the support of the United Nations , and to contribute to the reconstruction , modernisation , development and opening up of the country .
Current events confirm the need for us to work towards this .
The Council is in favour of opening humanitarian corridors but it stresses that this requires the cooperation of the forces in control of the situation on the ground .
In this context , the Council deeply regrets that the Taliban regime has , on several occasions , obstructed the delivery of humanitarian aid , harassed NGOs , destroyed humanitarian buildings , refused to cooperate with international institutions and , very recently , demanded that convoys , trying to deliver humanitarian aid to the needy Afghan people , pay road tolls .
Given the current situation in Afghanistan , it is obviously difficult to ensure that any measure can be totally efficient .
However , you will no doubt be aware that the European Union , whilst fully supportive of the efforts undertaken to eradicate terrorism in the wake of the attacks of 11 September , is taking an active part in the humanitarian operation designed to assist the displaced people in the region .
The position of the Council , when faced with such situations , has always been to work to keep displaced populations within the neighbouring regions , in order to facilitate their return , as soon as circumstances allow .
I would reiterate that , on 20 July 2001 , the Council adopted a directive on the temporary protection , on the territory of Member States , of displaced persons in the event of a massive influx .
Since this directive will not be applied until December 2002 , the Commission stated , at the Council meeting of 27 and 28 September , that it was willing to investigate how the rules specified under this directive could be applied , if necessary , before this date .
From this perspective , the Commission has recently requested Member States to provide , on a fortnightly basis to Eurostat , statistical data on asylum requests and illegal entries of Afghan citizens .
The Council does not have any information on the conditions in reception centres .
And , in relation to this , I would like to say that the Council bodies are currently examining a proposal for a directive to set minimum standards for conditions in reception centres for asylum seekers in the Member States .
Lastly , with regard to relations with Turkey , I reiterate that regular meetings take place between the Council bodies and Turkey , as part of the implementation of the action plan for Iraq drawn up by the High Level Asylum and Immigration Group , as I also explained in answer to a previous question .
The next meeting is most likely to take place towards the end of November .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , thank you very much for your reply .
The serious problem we have is that all that European Union aid , those many millions of euros , is being channelled by means of Pakistan .
Pakistan is the only country - together with Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates - which has been supporting the Taliban regime .
It is a mistake to give the key to , and the administration of , the humanitarian aid to Pakistan .
However , that is what is happening , and this political error is the reason why the aid is not reaching all the Afghan beneficiaries who should be receiving it .
Madam President , now that Kabul has been taken , could you please change this so that European Union humanitarian aid is not channelled via Pakistan , as has been the case up to now . Let us not give the key and the administration to Pakistan , but let us do it directly so that it reaches the people of Afghanistan .
I shall start by thanking the President-in-Office of the Council and the Belgian Presidency 's entire team which , perhaps because it includes so many women , has given us some excellent replies .
What you said about the provisions of the directive on a mass influx of displaced persons being applied before it is applied in the Member States was most interesting .
Having said which , I should like to ask if , in cases such as that in Greece , where 700 people , mostly from Afghanistan and Iraqi Kurdistan , turned up in Zakynthos , Greece could apply the provisions of the directive , including making use of funds from the European Refugee Fund ?
I would like to reiterate what I said in my first answer to the joint question regarding the early application of the directive .
This obviously applies to all Member States .
It is also from this perspective that we requested the statistical data to be provided to Eurostat on a regular basis , in order to be able to consider the early application of the directive due to the situation , which , at the time , could not be predicted .
As for the other points , as far as the delivery of humanitarian aid is concerned , this is basically a matter for the Commission and , since this is the case , it is difficult for the Council to take a position on this subject .
I shall take careful note of the comments regarding the aid deliveries .
Question No 12 by ( H-0797 / 01 ) :
Subject : Death sentence for 16 Afghans for converting to another religion In Afghanistan , a prosecutor has brought 16 Afghans before a court in Kabul demanding that they be sentenced to death .
They are being charged with conversion from Islam to Christianity , and the prosecutor is demanding the death penalty for all of them in accordance with the Taliban regime 's Islamic laws .
In a trial taking place at the same time in Kabul , eight aid workers with Shelter Now International have been charged with carrying out Christian missionary work .
Here , too , the prosecution is calling for all of them to be sentenced to death in accordance with the country 's Islamic laws .
Germany , the USA and Australia are making diplomatic efforts to protect the eight aid workers ' interests and ensure legal certainty .
In a previous answer I received in the Chamber , the Commission stated that the three countries had said the European Union therefore does not need to become involved in the case .
However , there have been no international diplomatic efforts , on the part either of individual countries or of the European Union , to assist the 16 Afghans who have been charged .
Throughout the world , the European Union actively supports the abolition of the death penalty and religious freedom based on tolerance and respect for different beliefs .
How is this reflected in the Council 's actions in the case of the 16 Afghans who have changed religion ?
What is the European Union doing , via the Council , to follow and monitor the trial of the 16 Afghans facing the death penalty in Kabul , and to influence its outcome , and what concrete steps have been taken to ensure that they enjoy legal certainty and protection and that their lives are spared ?
The Council shares your concerns about the citizens of Afghanistan and foreign aid workers who are accused by the Taliban of religion conversion and preaching , and who are therefore facing the very serious threat of the death penalty .
The position of the Council with regard to the death penalty is well known .
The promotion and the respect of fundamental human rights , including the freedom of religion and belief , are an essential part of European Union policy on third countries and are , thus , included in the common position of the European Union on Afghanistan .
The main international legal instruments ensure that everyone has the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion .
This right covers the freedom to change religion or belief and the freedom to express , alone or collectively , in public or in private , one ' s religion or belief .
The European Union has expressed its concerns regarding the human rights situation in Afghanistan on an international stage , particularly to the Third Committee of the United Nations General Assembly , at which all EU Member States supported the draft resolution tabled by Italy on human rights violations in Afghanistan .
Given that the EU Member States do not recognise the Taliban government , it is extremely difficult to communicate with them and to gain access to territories under their control .
This was also the case before 11 September 2001 .
The bilateral diplomatic efforts to protect foreign aid workers , which have been made by diplomats from Germany , the United States and Australia from Islamabad , have not yet had any tangible results .
Since military action began in Afghanistan on 7 October , it has become even more difficult , of course , to closely monitor the fate of the 16 Afghan citizens mentioned in the honourable Member ' s question and to contribute to a political resolution of this matter .
Believe me , this is something I regret , but you will also understand that the situation is now even more difficult to assess than before .
I would thank the Belgian Presidency most sincerely for that answer .
It was characterised by commitment and a genuine desire to do its best for these people .
Kabul has fallen .
The Taliban regime is fleeing .
Afghanistan faces a new future .
In that scenario , I really want you in the Belgian Presidency to do everything you can to obtain information about these 16 Afghans who are threatened by the death penalty .
Are they still there in Kabul ?
Have they been taken to Kandahar ?
Can we rescue them ?
What has happened to the eight aid workers from Shelter Now International ?
I should be extremely glad if the Belgian Presidency were able to report here in Parliament that all 24 of these people had been found and were free and alive .
It is my wish that you in the Belgian Presidency should do everything you can .
There are new opportunities now that Kabul has been opened up .
I would ask you if you believe you can obtain some information before the end of the year .
As the author is not present , Question No 13 lapses .
Question No 14 by ( H-0806 / 01 ) :
Subject : Priorities in the fisheries sector during the second half of the Belgian Presidency Will the Council , under the Belgian Presidency , outline its priorities for the fisheries sector during the second half of its term of office , taking into account the particular and unique requirements of peripheral countries such as Ireland which has 11 % of Community waters in its jurisdiction but only 4 % of Community quotas ?
The Council refers you to the answer that it has already given to the same question asked at the September session of Question Time . The answer deals with the presidency ' s intentions regarding the timetable of the Council debate on the Commission ' s Green Paper , the extension of the multiannual guidance programmes and the rebuilding of those stocks at risk , as well as touching upon the issue of the redeployment of the fishing fleet and of fishermen who were dependent upon the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her response , even though it was very short and curt .
Would the President-in-Office of the Council agree that fisheries are important to peripheral maritime areas throughout the Union where there is no alternative source of employment ?
Would she also accept that in my country , Ireland , the fishing industry has not benefited to any great extent from its membership of the European Union , because the most prolific fishing grounds within a reasonable limit of our coast are being plundered by greedy maritime states within the Union .
Would she , during her term of office between now and the end of the year , investigate what could be done for areas right around the Irish coast , including my own area in the west of Ireland , which once had prolific fishing grounds that have certainly not been plundered by our small inshore fleet ?
Would she also accept that regional development policies and fisheries policies should not be looked at in isolation , but in tandem ?
The Council has given an answer to this question on several previous occasions .
Of course , I understand the importance and relevance of this issue from Mr Gallagher ' s point of view , but other than that , I stand by what I have said , and also reiterate that the Council had already stated its intentions regarding extensions , annual programmes , rebuilding stocks and the redeployment of fishing fleets and fishermen .
I can , therefore , only confirm the previous answers given by the Council to this question , whilst I clearly understand that this issue is a particular concern to Mr Gallagher .
Mr President , you did not give the Belgian Presidency the opportunity to reply to my follow-up question subsequent to my Question No 12 .
Normally a follow-up question is answered , and a follow-up question to Question No 14 has just now been answered .
I thought it was rather impolite not to give the Belgian Presidency the opportunity to answer .
Mr Sacrédeus , Mrs Durant , the President-in-Office of the Council , has declined to reply to the question in some cases because she considered that she had already answered it , but I will communicate your request to Mrs Durant in any case .
It is up to Mrs Durant to consider whether it is a question or whether it has already been answered .
In any event , Mrs Durant , if you have any message for the Member , or any reply , you have the floor .
I would simply like to confirm , Mr President , that , as I said in my detailed answer to your question regarding these 16 individuals , I obviously hope , as does everyone in the House , that these people can be spared .
That goes without saying .
And that , as far as possible , during our bilateral contacts , given the difficulty of the current situation , even if , perhaps , it gives rise to something positive , since , in the last 24 hours , we have witnessed the liberation of Kabul , and possibly of Kandahar , and the retreat by the Taliban , I sincerely hope that everything can be done to identify these people and to save their lives .
However , I cannot commit to taking specific and particular measures here and now .
In any case , bear in mind that everything that can be done will be done , but today , the situation on the ground in Afghanistan is extremely complicated .
In my question on a point of order , what specifically I pointed out was that , in my follow-up question , I had indicated that a whole new situation had arisen in Afghanistan and Kabul now that the Taliban regime had fled the capital .
The situation was different when this question was put to the Belgian Presidency a month ago and when the Belgian Presidency prepared its answer .
A new opening exists .
I would therefore thank the Belgian Presidency for the follow-up answer it has given me , to the effect that it will take action on the new situation in Afghanistan .
Question No 15 by ( H-0807 / 01 ) :
Subject : Revision of the common position on Cuba On 11 July 2001 I asked the Council whether it intended to revise the EU 's common position on its relations with Cuba .
On 5 September I received a detailed and satisfactory written answer .
I also welcome the Belgian Presidency 's initiative aimed at resuming the dialogue with Cuba , a country which has shown a strong interest in cooperating with Europe and counts the EU Member States as its main economic partners . Now that the President-in-Office of the Council has visited Havana and conveyed his impressions to the Council , I should like to raise the matter once again .
Does it not appear anachronistic and out-of-place that Cuba should be the only Latin American country with which the European Union has not signed any kind of cooperation agreement , largely owing to the EU 's current ' common position ' on Cuba ?
Does or does not the Council consider that the time has come to revise and update that common position , which does not reflect the stance taken by each of the Member States towards Cuba , and the text of which appears obsolete , in addition to the fact that it has not had any effect in the direction which its supporters claimed to have expected ?
Is it correct that , in the current debate within the Council on the revision of the EU 's common position on Cuba , there is one national government which is fundamentally opposed to any such revision , thus effectively blocking an updating which is in our view right , urgent and vital ?
Once again , this honourable Assembly is inviting the presidency of the Council to discuss relations between Cuba and the European Union .
I therefore hope to seize this opportunity to reiterate several points , and perhaps to clear up some misunderstandings regarding these relations .
The European Union ' s common position on Cuba remains the basis of the European Union ' s policy on this country .
As laid down in the Treaty on European Union , common positions are an instrument of the EU ' s common , foreign and security policy ( see Article 12 ) and the decisions concerning the common foreign and security policy are taken unanimously ( see Article 23 ) .
At the ninth revision of the common position on Cuba on 25 June , the Council noted that the common position was still valid .
The EU ' s objectives regarding Cuba are as before : to encourage a process of peaceful transition towards democratic pluralism and the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
In parallel with this , the Council has always shown its willingness to maintain an open and constructive dialogue on all the issues of common interest .
In June , the Council restated its intention to maintain this approach .
It also showed a favourable opinion on establishing an open , political dialogue and on finding a future framework agreement on cooperation based on the respect of democratic principles , the principles of human rights and the rule of law .
It is also in this spirit that an exploratory mission by the European Union ' s troika , led by the deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs , Louis Michel , visited Havana on 23 and 24 August 2001 .
Moreover , at the ninth revision of the common position , the Council urged the European Commission to step up its efforts to cooperate , particularly with civil and non-governmental organisations in Cuba , to enable greater numbers of EU players on the ground to contribute more effectively in achieving the objectives of the common position .
Furthermore , and as you yourself point out , the Member States of the European Union are Cuba ' s main economic partners .
However , we must remember that it was the Cuban authorities who broke off dialogue between the European Union and Cuba , when they cancelled the EU ' s troika mission at Director-General level , virtually the day before it was due to take place , on 27 and 28 April 2000 .
It was also the Cuban authorities that , in May 2000 , withdrew their request to sign up to the Cotonou agreement .
In addition , and as the Council already noted at the ninth revision of the common position , there has so far been no firm indication that the Cuban government has had a change of policy and is moving towards achieving the objectives of the common position .
The next meeting between the Cuban Minister for Foreign Affairs and the EU troika has been scheduled , at Cuba ' s request , to run in parallel with the 55th UN General Assembly which is currently underway , and , at this moment in time , I am as yet unable to give you any details of this second meeting .
Mr President , the Minister ' s reply leads me to ask her whether she is aware that , a few weeks ago , a delegation from the European Parliament visited Cuba .
During that visit , our colleagues spoke to the Cuban authorities , to the church , to NGOs and to the eleven resident Ambassadors of the countries of the Union .
All of them , apart from one Ambassador , agreed that the common position is useless , because it does not contribute to the progress of the Cubans nor to the progress of relations between the European Union and Cuba .
Therefore , the Minister , President-in-Office of the Council , must know that that common position has been surpassed , it is obsolete and an anachronism . It is unjust and scandalous that Cuba is the only country in Latin America with which the European Union does not have any cooperation agreement , which puts it in a difficult position - in the disastrous situation it is in at the moment - in terms of helping with the reconstruction of what was destroyed by Hurricane Michelle .
Mr President , as I said to you in my answer , I do believe that the recent visit by the European Union troika and the meeting , which is currently being held in parallel to the United Nations General Assembly , will certainly be of use to the Council ' s work in this area .
Nonetheless , I am committed to our will and our objectives which still aim to encourage a process of peaceful transition and above all to develop a dialogue , which is as frank , open and as constructive as it possibly can be , on all the issues of common interest .
I can only confirm therefore the benefits of these bilateral relations and hope that they are able to be of use to the future positions of the Council .
Thank you very much , Madam President-in-Office of the Council . Your reply was really very interesting .
I was a member of the delegation referred to by Miguel Ángel Martínez and I was able to witness the fact that NGOs , Ambassadors and even the so-called dissidents in Cuba consider the common position to be of little use .
I wanted to point out , Madam President , that if there are many Members here who feel the common position relating to Cuba is unjust , it is because , for example , we have a customs agreement with Turkey and we all know that Turkey does not comply with basic human rights .
In fact , the Kurdish Member of Parliament , Leyla Zana , who was awarded the Sakharov Prize , is in prison , and a European delegation has not been able to visit her over recent days .
We also have very special agreements with Morocco , another country which does not comply with human rights .
What we are saying is that the common position relating to Cuba demands that the latter make changes before we reach a cooperation agreement and that is what seems unfair to us , Madam President-in-Office of the Council .
We therefore always insist that this review - which is going to be at the last minute - should take account of the opinions of all these people in Cuba , and we also note that two different yardsticks are being used .
Although it is not a question , Mrs Durant can make a comment if she considers it appropriate .
Question No 16 by ( H-0810 / 01 ) :
Subject : Reversing depopulation in rural areas Has the Council , under the Belgian Presidency of the EU and in consultation with the forthcoming Spanish Presidency , considered the need for an active EU policy aimed at reversing depopulation in rural areas in the Member States , including Ireland , will it make a statement on the issues to be considered , including financial aspects , pilot projects , studies and involvement of relevant NGOs , and will it call on the Commission to publish a Communication on policies aimed at reversing depopulation in rural areas ?
First of all , I would like to reiterate that , as part of the European regional policy and particularly in the current 2000-2006 programming period , there is the possibility of supporting economic and social redevelopment in Objective 2 rural areas , which have a population of less than 100 inhabitants per kilometre .
The Council would also like to draw your attention to the fact that , following the Commission ' s presentation of the second report on economic and social cohesion , representatives from the Member States , the Commission and the European Parliament met last June , at the initiative of the Swedish Presidency of the Council , in Lycksele , in the north of Sweden , in order to share their experiences and discuss the future of depopulated zones , including rural areas , a matter on which the presidency that Belgium assumed this quarter , continues to work .
The Council believes that the first thing we must do , at this stage , is to seek to use the full potential of the current regulations in order to combat depopulation and impoverishment of specific rural areas .
This task is primarily down to the Member States , which should respect the criteria defined at Community level .
Given that the Commission ' s proposals for the future programming period are not expected until 2004 , the Council believes that it is still too early to launch a new debate on the implementation of European Union policy for rural areas that are depopulated or becoming depopulated , which would extend beyond what is currently in force .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her reply .
Does she agree that there is a need for greater coordination between national policies and those designed to achieve rural development objectives and that there should be more concentration on decentralisation and the creation of new employment opportunities in the regions ?
What new action can now be taken to encourage and achieve this objective ?
Will the President-in-Office of the Council ensure that this matter is placed on the agenda for further consideration by the Spanish Presidency ?
I can only confirm what I have just said , in other words , that I believe , and the Council also believes , that the full potential of the current regulations must be exploited .
Given that this concerns a Community framework in which specific actions must be taken by Member States , I am in favour of going further in using the current regulations , rather than prematurely engaging in another debate on the implementation of a policy for these areas .
I think that the existing framework can be better exploited , not only at Community level , but also , and more importantly , at a lower level , in other words at the level of Member States which must strive to implement policies within the context of criteria defined at Community level .
Question No 17 by ( H-0814 / 01 ) :
Subject : European citizenship , students and state benefits Has the Council considered the conclusions of the European Court of Justice handed down in its ruling of 20 September 2001 ( following a case brought by a French student studying in Belgium who had been refused a minimum living allowance ) which confirm that students living in a Member State other than their own are entitled to the same benefits as nationals of the host state and that the judgment was retroactive , and the immediate implications for all the Member States resulting from that judgment ?
Judgment EC 184 / 99 that you mention , Mr Crowley , was only handed down on 20 September 2001 .
The Council has not yet had an opportunity to study the full implications of the issue and , as is standard practice , the Council will respect the judgment of the Court and will , of course , draw conclusions from this .
In any case , it is up to the Member States to draw conclusions from the judgment .
This is a rather short answer , but this is simply because the judgment has only very recently been handed down .
I appreciate and understand the constraints which the President-in-Office of the Council has with this question .
However , on a number of occasions in this House I have raised the issue with regard to , in particular , Erasmus students who have been treated differently in different Member States .
One of the consequences of this judgment is that there will now be an obligation on all Member States to ensure that there is a common system available to give assistance to those students who are in Erasmus programmes or who are studying in full-time programmes in countries other than their own Member States .
Therefore I ask the President-in-Office of the Council to bring up this matter immediately at the next Council meeting , if possible so that there will be no more delays , so that opportunities will no longer be denied to many students who have not benefited up to now , or whose parents have had to pay for them to study abroad ; and so that these anomalies and inequalities will be removed in future .
I can only take note of your formal and urgent request to bring up this issue and repeat that the Council will respect the judgment passed by the Court as soon as it has studied all the consequences and implications of this judgment .
I shall , however , take note of the fact that you would like the Council to bring up this matter .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council whether she can confirm my belief that European citizens are entitled to benefit from this decision , whether or not the Member States have put provisions in place to interpret the decision ?
Am I correct in thinking that from the date the decision is made citizens are entitled to benefit from it ?
At this stage , and because the Court handed down this judgment so recently , I do wish to stand by what I said , but I certainly understand the way you would like to interpret this judgment .
I do hope that the Council will have time to study the implications of the judgment and to identify how far it is possible to confirm , invalidate or interpret the question you have asked .
I therefore hope that the Council will be given the time it needs to examine the implications , and therefore the consequences of the judgment that the Court handed down in September .
Mr President , on a point of order .
For information , I am referring to a previous Court decision which decided that , irrespective of whether a Member State had put implementing provisions in place arising from its decisions or the decisions of the Council or the Commission , citizens are entitled to benefit from those decisions .
I am simply asking the President-in-Office of the Council if she can confirm that the outcome of this particular court decision means that citizens will benefit , whatever those benefits may be , from the date of the decision and that no Member State is entitled to seek to restrict that .
As President for the sitting , I take note of your interpretation .
It has been communicated to the Council .
I shall take note of the points that you have put forward , but I stand by the answer that I have given .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions No 18 and 19 will be taken together .
Question No 18 by ( H-0816 / 01 ) :
Subject : Sellafield and the threat of terrorist attacks The European Council , meeting on 21 September 2001 in the wake of the terrible events in the United States , declared that terrorism is a real challenge to the world and to Europe .
It has moved to block the funding of terrorist organisations as a decisive aspect of meeting this challenge .
What contingency plans has the Council considered to respond to the threat of attack by terrorists on nuclear installations in the EU , and , in particular , on the Sellafield plant , taking into account the totally unacceptable decision of the British Environment Secretary to give the go-ahead on 3 October 2001 for the opening of the MOX ( mixed oxide ) plant at Sellafield , formal approval of which had been delayed because of the falsification of records by BNFL ?
Will it now use its good offices to urge the UK government to rescind its latest decision , will it call on the Commission to intervene in this matter , and does it accept that the only solution is the closure of the Sellafield plant ?
Question No 19 by ( H-0824 / 01 ) :
Subject : Sellafield MOX Fuel Plant In the light of the UK government ' s approval on 3 October 2001 of a new plutonium fuel facility at the Sellafield nuclear complex , will the Council state its position on this proposal , particularly with regard to the security aspects , given that there are worrying reports that such a facility will increase the global trade in plutonium , that such trade will increase the threat to global security , that transportation of ' weapons usable ' material makes it vulnerable to terrorists and that the atrocity of 11 September raises the risk that Sellafield could be targeted by terrorists , with catastrophic results for the populations of the UK , Ireland and globally .
The £ 470m MOX Plant , built five years ago by the state-owned British Nuclear Fuels plc but not yet operational , has yet to establish that the economic benefits of such a plant outweigh the health and environmental detriments , as it is required to do under EU law .
At the extraordinary session of 21 September , the Council decided that the fight against terrorism will , now more than ever , be a strategic priority of the European Union .
It is clear from the many meetings that the various Council formations and the European Council have held and will hold on this issue under the Belgian Presidency that the Council attaches a great deal of importance to this fight .
From this point of view , we should also reiterate the European Union , in the conclusions of the General Affairs Council meetings of 8 and 9 October 2001 , reaffirms its commitment to non-proliferation and disarmament .
More specifically , regarding the two questions that have been asked , the Council would like to draw attention to the fact that , overall , measures concerning the physical security of nuclear plants are an area of national competence .
Quite aside from the specific circumstances that you mention , the Euratom Treaty specified safeguards of nuclear materials used for civil use in the European Union , in other words , all the measures that enable us to verify that nuclear materials and equipment are not used for anything other than the peaceful purposes for which they are intended .
It is up to the Commission to ensure that these provisions and the ensuing Community regulations are implemented , particularly Regulation No 3227 / 76 concerning the application of the provisions on Euratom safeguards .
The Euratom Safeguards Office has the specific task of verifying , by deploying inspectors if necessary , that the operators of nuclear power plants respect the security control obligations enshrined in the treaty , as well as those stipulated in Regulation No 3227 / 76 .
There are several legally binding instruments at international level , which the United Kingdom and the other Member States are party , such as the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material of 3 March 1980 , several provisions of which cover , for example , the theft or other illicit means of obtaining nuclear materials , and which require other Member States that are contracting parties to cooperate and assist the party that is the victim of the crime .
More generally , the Treaty on European Union contains provisions on police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters among Member States , notably in Article 29 .
It is on this basis that the Council is currently examining a proposal for a Council framework decision on the fight against terrorism .
This proposal includes provisions drawing up - a list of terrorist offences in Article 3 , a list of minimum sentences and penalties in Article 5 , as well as provisions on extradition and prosecution in Article 11 and cooperation between Member States in Article 12 .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her lengthy reply , much of which I have heard before .
Is the President-in-Office of the Council aware that British Nuclear Fuels is technically insolvent ?
Is she aware that its liabilities for cleaning up after the closure of nuclear plants and the disposal of nuclear waste run to GBP 34 billion , while it has GBP 235 million worth of shareholders ' funds on its balance sheets ?
Would she also agree , under those circumstances , that there is not the slightest economic justification for the continuation of the Sellafield nuclear plant , let alone for seeking to expand its nuclear operations into the future , and that , indeed , the plant should be closed ?
If the Commission would - as we have requested for years - have an independent nuclear inspectorate look into the Sellafield operation , they would have found this out some years ago .
Perhaps they can find it out now .
I would like to draw the President-in-Office of the Council 's attention to the fact that she has not addressed the second part of my question relating to the fact that British Nuclear Fuels has not yet established the economic benefits of the MOX fuel plant , which it is obliged to do before it can commission it under existing EU regulations .
I would also draw her attention to the report of Parliament 's STOA Committee .
This is a research committee which has commissioned an extensive report on both the Sellafield plant and Cap La Hague plants , and it has raised fairly serious concerns about the emissions to air and water from both the Cap La Hague and the Sellafield plants .
It draws attention to the inadequacy of the Commission 's capacity to carry out its functions under the Euratom Treaty , and it has also drawn attention to a German study which has indicated that both the Cap La Hague and Sellafield plants have something like ten times the permitted dispersal-to-air of radioactive pollution .
I would say in response that the work , the responsibilities that you expect in terms of control or arbitration are responsibilities that have been passed on to the Commission and I am not currently in a position to give you , on behalf of the Council , any details on these .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I have asked the President-in-Office of the Council if she would address the second part of my question , and she has not done so either in her first or second replies .
The President-in-Office of the Council may judge whether she has sufficiently replied to the question .
Mr President , the second point was in fact more of an observation that you made as part of your question .
However , with regard to this comment , I can only repeat that these details are more of a matter for the Commission than the Council , as far as , for example , conformity to Community legislation is concerned .
As the author is not present , Question No 20 lapses .
Question No 21 by ( H-0820 / 01 ) :
Subject : Dioxin rules threaten fish in the Baltic A Commission proposal on the limit values for dioxin in fish could be a death blow to the Swedish fishing industry .
According to the Swedish Fisheries Board , the proposal would probably result in a total ban on the sale of salmon and eels from the Baltic .
The sale of Baltic-caught herring and small Baltic herring for human consumption would also be at risk .
In the worst case two or three thousand fishermen could lose their jobs .
Sweden will be hardest hit as Finland and Denmark also have fishing grounds in the Atlantic .
It is important not to act in too much haste in this matter .
The Swedish view is that for the time being it would be better to provide dietary advice on how often fish may be eaten , combined with a vigorous campaign against the release of dioxins , than to set limit values .
That was regarded as satisfactory in public health terms as the quantities of toxin are extraordinarily low and fish is an important source of nutrition .
Could the Council adjust the Commission proposal to avoid the destruction of much of Sweden ' s fishing industry ?
The presidency of the Council is currently focusing all its efforts with a view to reaching a solution that gives a balanced compromise , which will enable us to guarantee the protection of public health , whilst avoiding creating the sort of economic disruption that you described .
The presidency is thus in close contact with the Commission and members of the Council , so that this solution can be approved by the Council by the end of November 2001 , during which time the Council is due to issue an opinion given that the Commission ' s proposals were submitted at the end of August 2001 .
I would thank the Council of Ministers for its answer .
I think it is extremely positive that an attempt is being made to reach a compromise .
I intended to ask the Council of Ministers whether the compromise is based not upon absolute limit values but upon applying dietary recommendations in connection with the consumption of fish from the Baltic .
Is it a compromise along those lines that is being considered ?
I also want to emphasise that the opportunity to eat herring from the Baltic , including the variety indigenous to the Baltic , is not only an economic issue but also an important cultural issue .
Prohibiting fish from the Baltic would be rather like prohibiting mussels and pommes frites in Belgium , something I imagine would be unthinkable .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I would say that this is a question of an almost cultural nature .
You may reply to it as you see fit , subject to the relevant consultations with the Council ' s team .
At this stage , it is difficult for me to clarify the subject of these recommendations .
I can tell you , however , that if there were no chips in Belgium , this would , in my view , be a considerable national problem .
It would , however , be of secondary importance in relation to the question that is of concern to you , but it is difficult for me to respond to this question at the moment , as it will relate to both the nature of the recommendations which will be made and also to finding the best possible compromise from an economic or any other point of view .
As the author is not present , Question No 22 lapses .
Question No 23 by ( H-0838 / 01 ) :
Subject : Belgian Presidency and the Regulation on models and designs Has the Belgian Presidency succeeded in convincing the Member State whose attitude was preventing the Regulation on models and designs from being adopted ?
In response to your question , the Council would like to inform you that it noted , at the 27 September meeting of the Internal Market , Consumer and Tourism Council that there are no longer any barriers in the way of adopting the proposal for a regulation on the Community designs or models .
The proposal is currently being finalised by the legal linguists and is scheduled to be formally adopted by the Council at the end of November , or at the beginning of December .
I would first of all like to congratulate the Belgian Presidency on having managed to convince the Belgian government to withdraw the linguistic objections which , according to what was said earlier , were hindering the approval of the Regulation on models and designs .
Furthermore , we are pleased that , again under the Belgian Presidency , this Regulation , which is so essential to the operation of the internal market , and also to the operation of the Office for the Harmonisation of the Internal Market in Alicante , can be approved immediately .
It is not a question and therefore , unless the President-in-Office of the Council wishes to make any comment , we can end this Question Time by stating , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , that since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 24 to 27 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was adjourned at 7.02 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Cross-border payments in euro
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0357 / 2001 ) by Mrs Peijs , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on cross-border payments in euros [ COM ( 2001 ) 439 - C5-0379 / 2001 - 2001 / 0174 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , in 1990 , the Commission issued a Green Paper on payments , and that marked the beginning of talks with banks about cross-border payments , among other things .
Initially , the banks expressed objections , with good reason , and we have worked for years to accommodate those objections .
We now have an international bank account number , the IBAN , we have a bank identifier code , the BIC , the reporting requirements to the Central Bank have been lifted when amounts up to EUR 12 500 are involved , and that coincides with the permitted maximum of the money-laundering directive .
There is a format to transfer payments fully automatically .
To my disappointment , this resulted only in ever more expensive transfers .
At the end of 2000 , Mr Bolkestein and myself were in this plenary when the Commissioner promised on that occasion that he would take measures if nothing had changed in the first six months of this year .
In July , the Commission and Parliament established , each following their own extensive inquiries , that nothing had changed .
Quite the reverse , in fact : the situation had deteriorated .
The Commissioner kept his promise and presented his Regulation , and I realise that the banks have simply missed two opportunities .
In November 2000 and even in July of this year , there would have been enough time to set up a substantial self-regulation scheme , something which all parties would have preferred to this wrap over the knuckles .
The European Banking Association has made a manful attempt to set up a cheap payment structure , step one followed by step two , for which they also received praise by the European Central Bank in its 2000 annual report .
I would endorse this , but would at the same time express my astonishment about the fact that only a very small number of banks have joined the initiative .
Much to the delight of Parliament , the Council in Ghent expressed its approval of the Regulation , and we hope that this will impact positively on the Internal Market Council .
I will now turn my attention to the amendments .
I am unable to support Amendment No 9 on self-regulation .
As I have already stated , although we welcome the idea of self-regulation , the proposal should have been backed by all banks .
It should be accompanied by monitoring , guarantees , sanctions , etc .
However , the liberal amendment creates confusion about the date of entry into force and in strict legal terms , something like that cannot be provided for in this Regulation .
The other new amendments are the result of the sound cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for this sound cooperation .
I now have high hopes for the Internal Market Council reaching agreement on 26 November , something which the Ghent Summit called for .
The changes I would propose with regard to the Commission position are as follows .
First of all , I have suggested changing the date of entry into effect from 1 January to 1 March , by which date all countries will have completed their transitional periods .
Moreover , at this rate , we will not make 1 January with the notification in the Official Journal practically speaking .
I would propose a few amendments , namely 10 , 13 and 16 with regard to cheques .
I do not want cheques to fall within the principle of equal costs as referred to in Article 3 , because an increasing number of banks would actually like to do away with the cross-border cheque .
Guarantees concerning cheques are very different in all countries .
The cheque does remain within the scope of the transparency section of the Regulation , which is stipulated in Article 4 .
Another proposal for change concerns the obligation to communicate with the banking country by using the IBAN and BIC codes .
Some banks , such as the Postbank and Internet banks , have their own codes and should not , therefore , be forced to use the IBAN and BIC codes .
Finally , I should like to turn to Mrs Torres Marques ' earlier amendment .
Some Member States had difficulty coming to terms with yet another institution , and that was never our intention .
We have solved the matter with a consideration for redress procedures and an article about sanctions , something which we happen to attach great importance to .
I should like to thank Commissioner Bolkestein for his courage and for the fact that he kept his promise .
His offices were always available for consultation , and all this could well result in this Regulation ending its march through the institutions on a positive note .
Parliament is expected to provide broad support .
Mr President , we have certainly had a packed agenda today .
We have had research from Mr Caudron , we have voted on Mr Jarzembowski 's report on port services and we have had shipbuilding courtesy of Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , but looking up at the people in the galleries I have to say that these may all have been important issues for the economy or for society , but in many cases it will have been nothing but gobbledegook to our listeners .
This issue is different .
Last summer in Austria I , myself , unintentionally parked illegally and felt dreadfully guilty .
However , my bad conscience about this parking offence was very quickly eclipsed by concern about how much it would cost me to transfer the 200 Austrian schillings for this parking ticket from Germany to Austria .
I therefore went straight to the Austrian authorities and paid in cash because I was afraid that the bank charges might be more than the actual fine .
This is an experience familiar to many people .
What is decisive , and this is something which we should also always bear in mind in this House , is how Europe measures up when people encounter it in their everyday lives , and in many of the areas on which we are working it proves to be far from perfect .
On 1 January we will get the euro .
There is a German word , ' begreifen ' , which means to understand , but which incorporates a notion of grasping or touching .
The public will be able to touch the euro and that is why confidence in the euro will grow from that moment on .
However , we must also make sure that all of the appropriate arrangements are in place so that the public are able to treat payments within Europe in the same way as payments within their own countries .
That is why this regulation is incredibly important , and I very much regret the fact that the idea of it has only just occurred to the Commission .
I drafted an opinion once before , nine months ago .
At that time I was still being told by the Commission that there were steep mountain tracks between the banks , and I said that if money could be made with mountain tracks it would be .
If money can be made with motorways then it will be .
We need motorways in the banking sector too .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should first like to thank Mrs Peijs for her persistence and consistency , which have certainly paid off here .
In 47 days the euro coins and notes will be available to everyone in the euro zone as a common currency , in my opinion , the greatest European Union project ever in terms of creating identity and fostering integration .
The euro zone will be a domestic market within the internal market .
We are all called upon to do all we can , not only in connection with cross-border payments , to bring down the barriers to the creation of this domestic financial market .
The difference in cost between national and cross-border transfers in the domestic market stands in contradiction to our objectives .
A Commission study has shown that although these charges have been steadily falling since 1993 , even today , at some banks , people are still having to fork out up to EUR 24 to transfer EUR 100 to another country in the EU .
That is why this Commission proposal and the report are needed .
Nevertheless , I wish to say on behalf of my group that we would welcome a genuine system of bank self-regulation , a system which is sustainable , comprehensive and credible .
It is true that the proposals currently on the table are moving in the direction of a system of self-regulation of this kind , but we do not think that they go far enough .
That is also why this report is being tabled here .
Should a credible and sustainable system of self-regulation be forthcoming then we would be prepared to vote against the regulation at the next reading , which would allow the Commission not to implement its proposal for a regulation .
However , we are waiting on the banks .
The ball is in their court .
We must adopt this approach because none of the measures taken so far have been sufficient .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of Mrs Torres Marques , who for pressing reasons cannot be here , but I shall keep to her ideas and the meaning of her speech .
The European Parliament and especially its Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has for years been insisting on the need for banks to set up payment systems in the euro zone that would allow citizens to use the euro as if it were a national currency .
Despite the existence of fixed exchange rates between the various currencies in the euro zone , cross-border payments are processed with the same charges as domestic payments .
The citizens do not understand this : why are payments within the euro zone processed as if they were international payments ?
Is there or is there not a euro payment zone ?
The banks have perfected their credit and debit card and electronic purse payment systems at a national level , they have perfected their international operations , and they have forgotten about the euro area .
Well , the euro zone is for us a region with a single currency which should have monetary rules in common that are easily understood by the citizens .
It is just as well that when a recent Commission study revealed that , far from having fallen , transfer charges in the euro zone had remained high , it showed the need for the draft regulation that we are now examining . The regulation seeks , from January 2002 , to equalise the charges for cross-border credit and debit card transfers that each bank performs in its own domestic market .
The Commission proposes that the same should occur with bank transfers and cheques from January 2003 onwards .
The Party of European Socialists agrees with the rapporteur ' s proposals , and therefore this draft regulation deserves our approval ; we also hope that an agreement can be reached with the Council at first reading .
Implementation of the regulation must not , in any event , cause domestic charges to rise .
In fact , cross-border transfers only represent 1 % of the total payments made by the banks , and they are electronic payments which entail an effective reduction in staff costs for the banking system .
Thus any use of this regulation to raise charges on domestic payments must be firmly rejected by the European institutions .
The citizens have , in fact , already condemned and rejected it .
Of the main amendments approved , we highlight the one concerning the penalties to be applied in the event of infringement of the regulation by any banking organisation , as well as an indication of the procedures to follow in other situations , so as to give some assurance to the citizens who use the euro .
I believe that , with the approval of this regulation , Parliament will be contributing to a smooth launch of the new currency for the citizens , giving the euro greater credibility and strength , and easing the indispensable cultural and economic transition .
We hope that , after the decision of the Ghent European Council , this legislation will be approved as quickly as possible .
This political decision will be good for the euro zone , but most of all it will be good for the European Union .
Mr President , sometimes in politics , we have to make a choice between something that is terrible and something that is unpleasant , and now is , in fact , one of those times .
A solution to the problem of cross-border payments is now really in sight , and that is surely something to be welcomed .
Partly thanks to the tenacity of this Parliament , an arrangement will be put in place , and I think that the name of our rapporteur will remain inextricably linked with this .
Her tenacity has largely resulted in the current proposal to do something about this problem .
Consumers and businesses must be able to rely on efficient , safe and cheap services in the field of cross-border payments in the internal market once the new currency has been introduced .
After all , this euro offers the opportunity of bringing Europe truly closer to the citizen , as was stated a moment ago , and of making Europe tangible .
That is why it must be possible to use this currency as European currency without obstructions or excessive costs .
Not one citizen will understand why the remittance of euros from one country to another involves such high costs .
The banks are responsible for this , for that is where the problem lies . But , needless to say , it is not those banks , but we as politicians , who ultimately get the blame .
After all , we have launched the euro , so we are saddled with the problem .
However , it is not just our problem , it is also the problem of the banks .
In the first place , that is why the conversion must be as smooth as possible and it is therefore a good idea to concentrate all our efforts on that event .
Banks must be able to give their full attention to the successful introduction of the euro notes and coins at the beginning of next year and after that , the euro zone can , in terms of payments , develop into one country with one market .
In my view , the new amendments tabled by our rapporteur are particularly fitting in this connection , and we will be supporting them .
What we do not like in the proposal is that it could , of course , lead to a situation in which even the internal payments , which are , or at least seem to be , now mostly free , will become more expensive for the consumer .
That too will do nothing to boost the euro ' s popularity . It is therefore important to avoid this situation .
Finally , why is it a choice between two evils ?
We are not bankers and therefore do not know how bank charges should be calculated , nor do we want to know , in all honesty , for that is why we have bankers .
Self-regulation is therefore the big favourite as far as our group is concerned . We have tabled an amendment in this connection .
Should this not be accepted , and the banks have so far not been sufficiently prepared to do something about this , then these measures will unfortunately be inevitable .
Mr President , the introduction of the euro has created great expectations with the citizens .
One of those expectations is that when they use the euro in the relevant Member States , they will pay the same price for using means of payment other than cash .
It is therefore unsatisfactory that shortly before the introduction of the euro , an adequate solution has still not been found to the problem of charges for cross-border payments .
In this matter , a large proportion of the blame must be apportioned to the banks and financial institutions .
Self-regulation in the sector appears not to be working .
That is why I have great admiration for the efforts by Commissioner Bolkestein and rapporteur Peijs , who tenaciously worked to find a solution .
There are sound arguments why banks should not charge anything at all for electronic cross-border payments .
Current technology enables these payment transactions to be carried out at low cost and the same technology can also be used for cross-border payments .
The use of different charges is not desirable and contravenes the concept of an internal payment market and a common currency .
For banks , electronic payment means a saving since less labour-intensive PIN payments are encouraged .
I therefore support the view of the European Commission and rapporteur Peijs , and hope that a prompt introduction of this measure will strengthen consumer confidence .
Mr President , on 26 October 2000 , I explained to Parliament why the current level of bank charges on cross-border payments in Europe are due to technical obstacles which will disappear in time , or so we hope , but which are currently unavoidable .
Under these circumstances , the reason why some Members are portraying them as evil is because they are inexorably seeking to achieve a uniform internal market and because there has been a backlash from the pro-euro propaganda , which promised the impossible .
Having made these points , I shall leave it there .
The proposal for a regulation that is before us today belongs to the next stage .
Since the market is putting up some resistance , it is proposed that we use force to make it submit , by decreeing compulsory equality of bank charges on internal transactions , as on cross-border transactions .
We believe this text is untimely , not only because it denies the realities of the market , which will exact their revenge in one way or another in the future , but for four other reasons .
The first is that it undermines subsidiarity , because this issue should be a matter for Member States .
The second is that it undermines the freedom of pricing , which we actually believed was carefully safeguarded by the Commission . For the euro , however , which of our grand principles would we not allow to be sacrificed ?
The third is that it undermines the commitments repeatedly made to use regulation as sparingly as possible because , in being directly applied to the Member States , such regulation undermines the national parliaments ' power of transposition , which is , in fact , perfectly legitimate .
The fourth and final reason is that this will lead to many rather veiled forms of unequal treatment of citizens , since the actual , but banned , costs of cross-border payments will have to be passed on to other banking products .
There , then , are many more reasons than are needed for rejecting this regulation .
Mr President , Parliament has for years demanded that the Commission take action so that consumers ' bank charges in the euro area can be reduced .
The current situation , in which for a payment of EUR 100 you may have to pay as much as EUR 23 bank handling charges , cannot be tolerated .
Other colleagues , too , have referred to this matter .
Besides , at the beginning of next year the problem will only get bigger , when twelve euro area Member States move over to euro cash .
Developing the payment system and reducing the costs incurred both by banks and subsequently by consumers is therefore one of the top-priority items on the ' urgent ' list of our Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I am sure that the Commission will agree with this target we have , but the means to achieve it differ in part from Parliament ' s original wishes .
Structural problems must not be solved by force .
Cross-border bank charges can permanently be reduced only , and indeed only , if we are able to create technical standards for automated handling of payments in the euro area .
The current high costs are caused by the fact that payments have to be processed manually .
This paper chase , as old as Adam , is costing both time and money .
However , since there is not sufficient consensus in the banking sector so that this kind of technical standard could have been produced , Parliament has in several reports on the matter emphasised the role of the European Central Bank in the development of a payment system .
In fact , Parliament did , towards the end of last year , demand that the ECP should assemble a working group of qualified experts in the field , who would be given the task to create a suitable standard .
The idea of Parliament was that the group would have carried out the work during this year and a proposal would have been made public before Christmas .
In this way , a new standard , binding upon all banks , would factually have existed before the euro zero hour at the turn of the year , after which the commercial banks could have implemented it at their required time schedules .
This kind of arrangement would naturally have also given a competitive edge to those financial institutions , which are able to make a transfer to the new system faster than others .
It is regrettable that this was not achieved .
Therefore , this time it is unavoidable that we have to read the Commission report , which in all respects truly is not in accordance with Parliament ' s original wishes .
Mr President , I think that the Commission proposal has , in fact , come just at the right time , better late than never , and makes it clear that the currency union is not only being completed in the interests of the markets and business , but also in the interests of consumers .
I should like to recall that we have been working on this issue for over 10 years , as the rapporteur rightly said , and that we have always supported self-regulation and voluntary agreements , but that in this sector it has , in the end , always been necessary to adopt legislation , in order for example to bring about quicker , more reliable and above all cheaper transfers .
Here I am , of course , also thinking of the double charges which both those who made transfers and those who received them had to pay .
Happily , this is now in the past , but this experience in the European Parliament taught us precisely that it is necessary to enact legislation .
That is why I welcome both the tone and form of the regulation .
It does not dictate prices , but it does state quite clearly that domestic and cross-border credit transfers must be treated on the same footing because we are in an internal market .
This internal market requires a European payment system , and not just for large payments , like TARGET , but also for retail payments , for the transfer of small amounts .
Everyone is affected by this : mothers or fathers who have children studying or undergoing training abroad ; those of us who order books or wish to pay for a journey or a hotel in another European country .
Those who have a holiday flat or even a holiday home are affected by this .
All of them suffer as a result of this situation , including migrant workers who receive their wages in one country and want to send them home to their families .
We need to think of them .
An average of EUR 24 to transfer EUR 100 is quite simply too much and unacceptable .
I strongly reject Mr Maaten 's proposal .
We have tried everything ; now we need to make decisions .
I must also say that I do not understand Mr Karas 's plea .
Why should a proposal be forthcoming now , in the next two or three weeks , when it has been overdue for over 15 years ?
I have to say also that the proposals to postpone all of this to 2005 are really unacceptable in my view .
The rapporteur 's argument is as far as I am prepared to go , and I therefore think that we need to secure a broad majority in favour of this long-awaited project here in Parliament , because a European payment system would have been a reality long ago if the banks and building societies had wanted it .
Mr President , it is clear that the banks have been toying with this issue for years and have , at long last , thrown away this opportunity , making it necessary to introduce binding rules in a regulation .
It is not on for EUR 18 of bank charges to be debited for transfers of , say , EUR 100 , and often this is done twice , once from the sender 's account and once from the recipient 's .
It is not on quite simply because the financial institutions have , for some considerable time , had the technical means to carry out transfers , honour cheques and make card payments quickly and at a reasonable cost .
We must be careful to ensure , however , and this has already been mentioned several times - that , as cross-border charges go down , domestic charges are not increased correspondingly .
Should this be the case then , in the future , domestic charges will also have to be laid down in a regulation .
We should clarify this too .
One snag is the fact that there are moves to postpone the deadline by two months .
On this point , I am afraid that I cannot go along with the rapporteur .
The banks have always been able to raise interest rates and bank charges overnight .
In the space of a month and a half it will now also be possible for them to lower their charges to a standard level .
I hope that there is not a majority in favour of the amendments concerned .
Mr President , I thank the Commission for the brave proposal for a Regulation and congratulate Mrs Peijs for her long-term commitment to this matter , without which we probably would have been unable to convince the Commission and the Council of the need for this legislative initiative .
In fact , I also support all amendments which Mrs Peijs has tabled on behalf of our group .
Despite this , it is regrettable that some three years following the launch of the electronic euro and on the eve of 1 January 2002 , we are still having to work on a piece of legislation of this kind .
It is beyond me why the banks , which otherwise find each other so promptly and efficiently in a cross-border context and are united in effective professional organisations , should be forced by law to organise themselves properly and to automate in order to be able to work more cost-effectively in the internal market , and no longer to discriminate .
The binding nature of the non-discrimination rule will raise a few eyebrows , but there is no alternative : leaving things as they are would be worse , for we would then accept what some small businesses and consumers fear , namely that the benefits of the euro will pass them by and that cross-border payments will continue to cost some EUR 20 each .
As we cannot afford to lose the confidence of the consumers or of small businesses , we have no choice .
There is one concern I have , and I should like to ask the Commissioner a question in that connection .
How can we prevent this Regulation from being seized by the banks as an excuse to increase the charges for domestic payments , and how does the Commission itself view this proposal ?
Is it being regarded as a big stick in order to get a last-minute gentlemen ' s agreement out of the banks or , Commissioner , do you intend to continue to move towards a Regulation ?
I hope that you as Commissioner remain resolute .
Mr President , as Mrs Peijs stated a moment ago , I was standing on the same spot in this House in October last year , talking about the same issue , namely the establishment of a common payment area .
The Commission had just published its fourth or fifth communication on that subject and in it , it was stipulated that the internal market and the single currency had to be accompanied by a common payment area .
This Parliament then levelled criticism at the Commission for being too passive .
I remember this well .
Mrs Peijs wondered when the Commission would spring into action .
Well , the Commission has listened carefully to Mrs Peijs and has acted accordingly , no one will be able to deny this now .
The Commission has submitted a draft Regulation which is based on a simple principle , namely that each payment in euro is to cost the same , irrespective of whether the payment is national or cross-border .
This is of the utmost importance to the citizens , as has been noted by many Members of this Parliament .
Today , the euro is a virtual currency , especially for the citizens , but on 1 January 2002 , the currency will become tangible , for from that date onwards , 300 million Europeans will be using the same bank notes and coins .
Today , European citizens still accept that a cross-border payment costs more than a national one .
The reason is that different currencies are involved , but after 1 January , that will no longer be the case .
The citizens will then question the usefulness of the euro if cross-border payments are still as expensive as they are now .
In this connection , I should like to remind you that our latest study into the cost of cross-border payments has yielded baffling results .
It transpired that in the year 2001 , a cross-border payment of EUR 100 costs no less than EUR 24 on average .
We carried out a similar study in 1993 and unfortunately , we had to establish that no progress at all had been made in eight years .
That is why the Commission has decided to introduce a Regulation as a tool .
The market itself has failed to come up with solutions to the posed problem , and with this interventionist measure , the legislator wants to force the economic operators to set up the infrastructure which the market requires .
As Mrs Peijs knows , I am a staunch Liberal , and I regret the fact that I had no choice but to propose such a binding document for the banks .
However , it is the only way to persuade the economic operators to take great pains over the new systems which are vital for the smooth running of the internal market .
It is therefore with satisfaction that I have noted that the first results are rolling in .
In one section of the bank sector , the plan is now being put forward to set up a new system for cross-border payments .
And that proves that the present proposal for a Regulation is also realistic .
After all , the saying ' where there is a will , there is a way ' also applies to the bank sector .
What took me rather by surprise is the idea of the bank sector that since they , as banks , have committed to implementing the plan , we , as Commission , can withdraw our proposal for a Regulation .
Firstly , we should not overlook the fact that this plan can only count on a proportion of the bank sector .
Indeed , there are three European pressure groups for banking and only one of those has written to me to propose this plan .
That is an important fact .
After all , a payment system is a network , and a network develops at the rate of the slowest members that belong to it .
All it takes is for a few members of a network to refuse to develop any further , and that will throw a spanner in the works for the other members .
That is , in fact , one of the reasons why in the past ten years , no progress has been made whatsoever .
Secondly , the proposed plan is too late .
It was only announced in a press release two weeks prior to the discussion of the proposal in Parliament .
However , the Commission has been asking for this matter to be looked into for the past eleven years , but in all that time , too little progress has been made , and for those reasons , the Commission is unable to give a positive response to those MEPs who proposed to grant the bank sector a certain level of self-regulating authority .
The bank sector has had sufficient time , and it , at least a section of it , is now coming up with a proposal .
It is too little , too late , and that is why the Commission must resort to the proposals of a Regulation .
It is therefore illogical to demand withdrawal of the proposal just before the first benefits are becoming visible .
Accordingly , the idea to suspend the Regulation , as proposed in Amendment No 9 by Mr Maaten , seems unacceptable to me .
I repeat what I have said a moment ago : the proposals for self-regulation are too late .
Any call from the Commission to the banking world is being , or has been , backed by this Parliament , which is encouraging .
In this connection , I would praise many MEPs and particularly the rapporteur , Mrs Peijs , who has worked tenaciously to achieve the goal , namely to reduce the cost of transfers .
In this respect , Mrs Peijs is the mouthpiece of the citizens and illustrates the great significance for industry , not least the small- and medium-size enterprises .
The Commission proposal specifically embodies what is referred to as the Europe of the citizens .
I should like to turn to yet another bone of contention , namely the date on which the present draft Regulation should enter into force .
Some MEPs have in this connection referred to the opinion of the European Central Bank which states that the ECB is in complete agreement with the objectives which we aim to achieve with our proposal , but that we , the Commission , are said to go too fast and are too demanding .
The bottom line in the ECB ' s argument is that the banks need more time to set up the necessary infrastructure and logistical provisions .
That is why the European Central Bank proposes 1 January 2005 for the Regulation to come into force .
On the one hand , I do not dispute the fact that time will be needed to set up this infrastructure , but on the other hand , we should not make a mountain out of a molehill .
After all , for years , banks have claimed that cross-border payments only account for 1 % of the total transfers .
Consequently , the entry into force of the Regulation in 2003 will not involve insurmountable additional costs , and if our expectations are fulfilled and if it transpires that the price reduction results in a greater use of this means of payment , then there will be even more reason to go full steam ahead with the activities .
The report by Mrs Peijs contains sixteen amendments , seven pertaining to the recitals and nine to the articles .
One single amendment is not acceptable , namely Amendment No 9 on the suspension of the Regulation which I mentioned a moment ago .
One amendment constitutes a legal problem , namely Amendment No 4 on the rise in costs for domestic payments .
It concerns a political statement which although I fully endorse it , does not fit in a legal document .
Moreover , in this connection , I should like to refer to the last speaker , Mrs Thijssen , who asked me whether it is possible for banks to compensate for the losses incurred with regard to international payments by national payments .
As has been rightly noted , this proposed Regulation is not a price measure : indeed , the charges for transfers are not specified , and that means that , in theory , the charges for national payments could increase .
However , an essential component of this Regulation is transparency .
Banks must notify their customers of the price structure for the different types of transfers and they must also inform their customers when those prices change .
That means that total transparency will apply in terms of what this is all going to cost , and the Commission assumes that , based on the normal rules of competition , the different costs for domestic payments will be kept under control and will therefore not increase .
Amendment No 6 stipulates that the Member States must assume their responsibilities with regard to the application of this Regulation .
The Commission can identify with the first part of the amendment .
The second part , however , comes across as somewhat mysterious , and the Commission is finding it difficult to pass judgment on it at this stage .
With Amendment No 10 , the person who tabled this amendment hopes that the principle of non-discrimination will not apply to payment cheques .
As it happens , the Commission has never wanted to promote the use of cheques and therefore agrees with the amendment .
In addition , rapporteur Peijs would like the entry into force of the Regulation to be postponed until 1 March 2002 .
That does not pose any problems for the Commission .
We can thus accept that amendment .
The other seven amendments are acceptable in principle , although some will need to be edited .
This proposal will be discussed by the Internal Market Council in some ten days ' time , on 26 November .
I am convinced that we will reach an agreement , not least because the European Council in Ghent has requested the Council to reach its findings promptly and has endorsed this proposal .
I know that the rapporteur , Mrs Peijs , also has numerous contacts with the Council and I think she will share my feelings on this score .
I should like to thank Mrs Peijs for the excellent document she has drafted and for all her efforts since 1989 to reduce the costs of cross-border payments .
I hope that second reading will be nothing but a formality , in which case the text will be ready for publication in January .
Finally , I should like to ask Mrs Thyssen a second question .
She has also asked me whether the Commission is prepared to stand by its decision , and not to succumb to the pressure of the banks , and whether she considers this as a big stick .
No , Mr President , this is intended as a Regulation and the Commission is thus certainly planning to adhere to its original brief and to ensure that this Regulation enters into force in March next year and that cross-border payments will cost no more than national transfers .
Finally , allow me to thank Parliament as a whole for the sound cooperation .
It shows how progress can be made if both institutions , Parliament and the Commission , are on the same wavelength .
This proposal demonstrates the specific benefits of Europe to the citizen and enhances confidence in the European Union .
Mr President , I would not want Mr Bolkestein to return home thinking that there are extremely mysterious goings-on in this Parliament .
The first part of the amendment which the Commissioner mentioned remains unchanged , something which he , in fact , endorsed .
We , too , thought that the second part was set out in a rather peculiar way , all the more so since it was not Parliament ' s intention to set up a new institute .
We have converted this part into a recital , which contains more or less the same question for redress procedures as the 1997 directive .
With this , I believe that all mysterious elements have been removed , and we will thus all be able to concentrate on the second reading .
Mr President , the Commission has taken note of what Mrs Peijs said a moment ago and will specify its position in due course .
Many thanks , Mr President .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0352 / 2001 ) by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 92 / 79 / EEC , Directive 92 / 80 / EEC and Directive 95 / 59 / EC as regards the structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco [ COM ( 2001 ) 133 - C5-0139 / 2001 - 2001 / 0063 ( CNS ) ]
, rapporteur . ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am really sorry but , as far as this draft directive is concerned , I am unable to help reconcile the two institutional bodies .
I am sorry , but I must recommend that the Commission proposal be rejected .
As you know , cigarettes are not a tax-free commodity .
They are already subject to excise and value added tax and in Europe these taxes are extremely high , accounting for 70 % to 80 % of their price .
The Commission has proposed a fixed minimum tax of EUR 70 , in addition to the system of proportional taxation which already applies .
The argument is that , instead of converging , taxation diverges from one country to another in the Union .
That is the first mistake .
It is not true that there are tax divergences ; there is no particular convergence , but that is not the same as divergence .
There is greater convergence on cigarettes than there is with numerous other items , as confirmed in the independent study by the Directorate-General of Research of the European Parliament , which naturally was not written solely to back me up .
Why does the Commission feel that taxes should converge ?
Because they are one reason why prices differ , which is one reason why smuggling and tax fraud are on the rise .
Of course , these need to be stamped out and Parliament has repeatedly proposed measures which , unfortunately , have not been taken up , in order to stamp out cigarette smuggling .
But if price differences are to be wiped out , the difference in price itself needs to be wiped out .
The Commission has admitted that we do not know if tax convergence will bring about price convergence .
It is certain there will be no convergence because the industry is a monopoly industry and can therefore engage in strategic price setting .
These prices are not the result of market forces , they are competitive weapons used by the monopolies and we are living in cloud cuckoo land if we expect them to level out .
Similarly , the Commission proposal makes no provision whatsoever to harmonise value added tax , which fluctuates from one Member State to another by as much as 100 % .
How can taxation be harmonised unless value added tax on cigarettes is harmonised at the same time ?
Indeed smuggling - if it is smuggling to buy cheap cigarettes in one country of the Union in which the tax on them has been paid and sell them in another country in the Union in which they are more expensive , which in my view it is not , it is the normal working of the single market , but insofar as it is smuggling or if the tax is not paid , as in the case of England , where the situation will not change and which has a serious cigarette smuggling problem , with 50 % of cigarettes smoked in England smuggled in , precisely because the tax costs as much as the price of the cigarettes , the situation will not be affected in England because the Commission proposal will not affect prices in Belgium , Holland or France , which is where the smuggled cigarettes come from .
On the contrary , prices will rise in the Member States in the south , especially , of course , if we accept the candidate countries into the European Union ; or rather when we accept them , which I hope we shall , prices will rise there as a result of this directive by up to 200 % to 400 % .
Just imagine if there are derogations to cover this sort of price increase and just imagine what will happen with smuggling from the Ukraine or Russia or from China or India if we allow this sort of price increase .
The public health argument , that is , that higher prices reduce smoking , has also been wheeled out .
How do we know it will ?
Because we have statistics .
But the statistics are based on legal cigarettes .
The increase in the price of cigarettes does indeed reduce legal smoking , but it encourages illegal smoking and in England the mafia is having a field day and has put the cigarette market completely out of kilter for precisely this reason .
Furthermore , Commissioner , I must say that the Council has not demonstrated the necessary respect or tact vis-à-vis Parliament , because a week before we submitted our opinion , it presented us with a political agreement in which it attempts to force our opinion .
I hardly think that is the way to run democratic institutions but if , nonetheless , that is how Parliament is to be run , then one wonders why we won the Cold War .
And I heard you say in your previous speech that you are a dyed-in-the-wool liberal .
This makes we wonder how you can come along and support a measure from which , in the economic sector , only large monopolies stand to gain for reasons which , unfortunately , I cannot go into now , but you know full well that I am right , while , in the political sector , you come along with something which looks to me very much like totalitarianism .
I think that this sort of difference between the theory which we espouse and the practice which we follow should give you food for thought .
Mr President , the rapporteur is proposing rejection of the Commission 's proposal .
We , in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , are rather reluctant to do this without telling the Commission why , at least without giving the Commission a written explanation .
However , in conclusion it has to be said that the directive cannot remain as it is .
In its opinion , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market also made a number of comments .
It confined its comments to its particular field .
The issue of health protection undoubtedly has a role to play in this proposal for a directive .
However , this is not an issue for our committee .
The question of whether the minimum excise duty should be EUR 140 , 120 , 100 , 80 or 60 is also undoubtedly significant in connection with health protection , but not for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
For us , it was exclusively legal considerations that mattered .
In this respect , the directive would appear to have two essential weaknesses , which mean that it does not stand up to scrutiny against reasonable internal market considerations .
Firstly , the system of having a minimum incidence of excise duty comes under pressure from the fact that value added tax is imposed on top of this minimum rate .
If I take a country where the rate of excise duty is the bare minimum required and the rate of value added tax is also very low , then I have to conclude that there are distortions of competition if I compare it with a country where the rate of excise duty perhaps exceeds the minimum and there is a relatively high rate of value added tax .
That is why we think that in the future , instead of requiring a minimum incidence of excise duty exclusive of value added tax , it would be appropriate to work on the basis of a system which provides for a minimum rate of excise duty inclusive of the applicable value added tax .
The second point concerns Article 3 ( 1 ) .
We think that this proposal no longer draws a proper distinction between cigarettes and cigarillos or cigars .
The proposal tries to give the impression that cigarillos with filters are cigarettes with dark-coloured wrappers and that they should be taxed accordingly , like cigarettes .
We believe that this is wrong .
The health effects of filters can certainly be disputed , but it ought to be indisputable that a cigarillo with a filter is in any case slightly more healthy than a cigarillo without a filter .
If , however , I treat cigarillos with filters as equivalent to cigarettes for tax purposes - and I am not a cigarillo smoker ! - then I penalise the fundamentally healthier product by taxing it like a cigarette .
That is why I think that improvements also need to be made here .
We agree with the conclusion that the proposal should be rejected .
Even if it sounds harsh , technical improvements are necessary .
. ( NL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I would thank the Commission for the proposal on upward convergence of excise on tobacco .
Parliament requested this a few years ago and the Commission is now meeting this request .
In our view , the proposal is an improvement on the current situation and also solves a number of problems , including that of continuing to allow for exceptions , as is the case for Sweden now and the accession countries in future .
For that reason , we believe it is a considered proposal .
We did , however , table a number of amendments .
Firstly , there is the issue of VAT which Messrs Katiforis and Wieland also mentioned .
I share their point of view on this score , and that is why my group has re-tabled the amendment that was already adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , namely to include VAT in the equation .
Secondly , our committee was of the opinion that the issue should be clearly placed in the context of existing negotiations in the World Trade Organisation , for the latter plays a major role in this .
Thirdly , we believe that a great deal must be done against smuggling .
I do not subscribe to the rapporteur ' s point of view that an increase in excise will , in itself , promote smuggling or , vice versa , that a reduction in excise will lead to a drop in the incidence of smuggling .
I am of the opinion that completely different measures should be taken against smuggling , which are , in fact , the topic of debate in the World Trade Organisation .
Furthermore , we have tabled an amendment on tobacco subsidies , a much-debated topic which is also relevant in this context .
We have also tabled an amendment in which we state that , concerning products which are less unhealthy , we should be working towards a system , maybe not now , but in 2005 , whereby the excise on those products would also be lower .
We therefore support the gist of the Commission proposal , as well as the position which the Council has already adopted in this respect .
Mr President , this is one of the few occasions on which I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Katiforis , not because we talk the same language or are from the same country , but because we agree on what is called common sense .
I am sorry , but common sense is nowhere to be seen in this proposal for a directive , which we , too , propose should be rejected in its entirety .
If it is not rejected , we are all in danger of exposing ourselves because , if this sort of directive is adopted , it will have exactly the opposite of , what the Council says , are the desired results .
I should also like to point out that it would be most useful if the Council were present rather than absent , like their common sense .
The Council says that the aim is to combat tax evasion and cigarette smuggling .
If we increase tax , then we shall increase tax evasion .
We all know that , the higher the tax , the more attractive tax evasion becomes .
If we increase the price of cigarettes , as is proposed , then we shall , without question , increase cigarette smuggling because we shall be making legal cigarettes more expensive than smuggled cigarettes .
So we shall be working counter to our aims .
Again , the Council tells us that one of its aims is to protect public health and that this aim will be achieved by people giving up smoking because cigarettes are more expensive .
And who can say that people stop smoking when cigarettes go up in price ?
The best case scenario is that there will be no change in the consumption of cigarettes .
The worst case scenario is that smokers on low incomes will change to cheaper , that is , more harmful cigarettes .
Is that what we want to achieve ?
How clever of us !
Similarly , the proposals in the proposed directive are wrong because , first of all , they restrict application to five , mainly southern countries .
The other ten are not affected because they are already at the topmost point .
Secondly , the cost of living will rise in these five countries , four of which are southern countries , without any increase in wages , thereby exacerbating inflationary pressures .
I also think we should ask ourselves what the candidate countries have to say about this proposal for a directive ?
Do they think it shows the European Union 's concern for them ?
And it would be helpful to know how their governments are going to persuade them that integration into the European Union will benefit consumers , when they will have to pay 200 to 500 % more for cigarettes under this sort of directive .
Finally , I should like to express my disappointment with Ecofin for its rushed attempt to pre-empt tomorrow 's vote here by issuing details of its compromise agreement .
That was a mistake on their part .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission for this proposal .
The rapporteur gives me no option but to disagree with him .
Only yesterday in this House we passed a resolution giving the European Parliament 's opinion on the third round of negotiations for the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control .
This House should never forget that tobacco is the biggest cause of preventable illness and disease across the European Union .
It is like no other product .
Each year half a million EU citizens die needlessly due to tobacco .
In Scotland , which I represent , 13,000 people died last year due to smoking .
The Commission proposal will help people to stop smoking .
This proposal will introduce a cash minimum amount of cigarette duty .
Currently the rule is expressed as a percentage of tax , inclusive of the retail selling price , and therefore has little effect on Member States and applicant countries where retail prices are already low .
The more expensive a packet of cigarettes , the bigger the incentive to stop smoking .
Some say that the most effective way to help smokers cure their addiction is to make cost the issue .
Therefore any measures to reduce smoking are more than welcome and are more important to my mind than any arguments which support the tobacco industry .
As regards smuggling , unlike the rapporteur I believe this proposal will prevent smuggling within the EU .
Minimum EU rates of duty are sensible and effective in tackling the scourge of smuggling .
The Commission 's proposal is a good proposal and therefore should be wholeheartedly supported .
Mr President , it strikes me that the Katiforis report does not explain why the European Commission proposal to change excise duty rates for tobacco is being rejected .
It appears impossible to underpin this position .
As this new proposal introduces changes to existing directives , the legal base is not at issue .
One of the reasons for change is the fact that the Member States miss out on a huge amount of excise on account of fraud and smuggling .
The internal market , therefore , still leaves something to be desired , and there is also competitive distortion .
If the discrepancies between the Member States become less pronounced , fraud and smuggling will be discouraged and will , hopefully , even vanish altogether .
Furthermore , the necessary increase in tobacco excise for a number of Member States , following on from this proposal , will not cause any damage to health .
For the reasons already stated , I welcome a minimum excise duty of 57 % .
Where smuggling practices persist and even involve tobacco manufacturers , the European Commission will need to take additional measures .
I have already called for the dismantling of tobacco subsidies several times .
The amendments by Mr Maaten therefore receive my unqualified support .
The European Union is still very much lacking credibility on this score .
On the one hand , tobacco consumption is discouraged by warning labels , bans on tobacco advertising and higher excise , while on the other hand EUR 1 billion goes up in smoke in the form of tobacco subsidies .
Supporting tobacco growers in the switch to another crop which also entails subsidies , is a very generous solution and therefore deserves Parliament ' s support .
I call on the Council to support the European Commission proposals and to stand up to the pressure exerted by one or two Member States .
Moreover , I object to Mr Folias ' appropriation of common sense .
I could claim with just as much justification that everyone is entitled to their own stupidity .
Mr President , the position taken by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal under discussion has surprised me .
It diverges considerably from the position taken by this Parliament in 1996 .
At that time , Parliament urged the Commission to make proposals for upward harmonisation of tobacco prices , based upon higher duty rates across the Union for reasons including health protection , and to consider measures to reduce the scope for price manipulation by cigarette producers applying widely diverging pre-tax on the markets of each Member State .
The present Commission proposal is consistent with that opinion .
That is why I say that the advice of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee has greatly surprised me .
The Commission is doing what Parliament wanted in 1996 and therefore it is odd that the report should not accept the Commission 's proposal .
The changes proposed will bring about increased convergence in duty rates within the European Union and , as such , improve the functioning of the internal market , both now and as it will be after enlargement .
They will also reduce the incentive for excise fraud within the Union .
More surprisingly - and Mr Blokland has just drawn attention to this - the draft report does not set out the reasons for rejecting the Commission proposal .
That is the least that the Commission would have expected .
According to the working document presented by the rapporteur to EMAC in June , the main justification is that the introduction of a minimum amount of taxation of EUR 70 for cigarettes constitutes a shift towards specific taxation , and would disadvantage small- and medium-sized producers in southern Member States .
I would like to emphasise that this is emphatically not the view of the Commission .
The introduction of a fixed amount in euro does not alter the structure of excise duties on cigarettes .
Member States affected by the introduction of the fixed amount will retain the flexibility they enjoy at present to determine the proportions of the specific and ad valorem components of cigarette taxation , as other rules remain unchanged .
I would also like to point out that the Commission proposal has received broad support in the Council .
Last week in the Ecofin Council the Member States unanimously agreed a compromise text produced by the Belgian Presidency , which is clearly in line with the Commission 's proposal .
For cigarette taxation , the most significant element is the introduction of a minimum amount of duty of EUR 60 at the initial stage and EUR 64 at a later stage , rather than the EUR 70 proposed by the Commission .
The adoption of the proposal is also extremely important in view of the forthcoming enlargement of the Union eastwards .
Mr Folias has quite rightly drawn our attention to that aspect of the proposal .
The existing minimum taxation requirement - the so-called 57 % rule - allows for a higher degree of price manipulation and would not in itself be sufficient to reduce to a sustainable level the gap between the tax and price levels of the present Member States and the candidate countries .
Such a situation would result in substantial revenue loss for present Member States , especially those having borders with candidate countries .
The requirement for a minimum amount of duty will avoid this happening and ensure the proper functioning of the internal market after enlargement .
The Commission is aware that achieving the amounts in euro will require a significant effort from most candidate countries . Therefore , it has proposed that the Council grant limited transitional periods to candidate countries for reaching the minimum rate of taxation .
Next , I was pleased to see that the two Parliament committees that have issued opinions on the proposal - the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , with Mr Maaten as draftsman , and the Committee for Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , with Mr Wieland as draftsman - accepted the general thrust of the proposal , subject to a number of amendments .

Most of the amendments proposed in Mr Maaten 's report have been re-tabled in this plenary .
The Commission broadly shares the concerns of Mr Maaten on the need to pay more attention to health policy and to combat fraud and smuggling .
I do not see why Mr Katiforis cannot accept the arguments relating to health .
It is a well known fact - and I am sure he is aware of it - that 75 % of smokers started before the age of 18 .
Report after report and study after study confirm that for young people under the age of 18 , price clearly is a determining factor in terms of smoking .
I was pleased to hear both Mrs Stihler and Mr Blokland support the view of the Commission that there is a direct link between price and quantity consumed and that therefore the price very definitely has a bearing on health .
Mr Folias said that if the price goes up then cheaper cigarettes will be purchased and smoked .
According to that reasoning , if the price went down then more expensive cigarettes would also be purchased .
That is something that , in reality , is not noticeable .
Therefore , with all due respect to Mr Folias , his reasoning is not in line with reality .
While I am answering specific questions by Parliament , I have to say that I do not understand the argument by Mr Wieland - referring to the legal aspects of the case - when he says that the interplay of VAT and excise taxes would be illegal .
Of course they have a bearing on competition and smuggling , as we all know , but why should this be illegal , as he maintains ?
The point of view of his committee is based on the legal state of affairs .
He says that there is a problem in that cigarillos of a certain dimension and character should be treated as cigars and not as cigarettes .
Well , I have some here .
If you showed an average citizen of the European Union this packet of cigarillos , took one of them out - of the same dimensions and weight as an ordinary cigarette - and asked them if it was more like a cigarette or more like a cigar , I would wager Mr Wieland 144 packets of cigarettes or cigarillos - whichever he prefers - that the average citizen of the European Union would classify them as cigarettes .
Most of the amendments proposed in Mr Maaten 's opinion have been retabled for this plenary .
The Commission broadly shares these concerns on the need to pay more attention to health policy .
But the amendments require no change to the proposal .
According to the existing review requirements , the Commission already has the obligation to take into account the wider Treaty objectives , including health .
New developments , resulting for instance from the conclusion of a WHO framework convention on tobacco control , will thus automatically have to be taken into consideration in a subsequent review .
The Commission and the Member States have also taken a number of initiatives to combat fraud and smuggling following the conclusions of the high-level group on fraud in the field of excise duties .
To conclude , for the reasons I have given , the Commission is still convinced of the merits of its proposal and still considers the proposals by the Commission to be a direct reply to Parliament 's own opinion expressed in 1996 .
Therefore the Commission invites all Members of Parliament who have expressed an opinion contrary to that of the Commission to reconsider their position on this issue very carefully before tomorrow 's vote .
Mr President , Commissioner , you have just shown us an example .
May I ask you whether the Commission is of the view that tobacco products , like Commissioners , should be assessed not on their packaging but on their content ?
Mr President , the Commission always looks at content , rather than form .
But the form in this respect is important .
If you ask the ordinary citizen of the European Union , " What is this ?
Is this more like a cigarette or more like a cigar ? "
Because it is exactly the same size as a cigarette , has the same width and the same weight limits , he will say , without a shadow of a doubt , " This is like a cigarette " and not " This is like a cigar " .
That is the Commission 's opinion too .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
European Council in spring 2002
The next item is the debate on the oral question ( B5-0528 / 01 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission 's synthesis report in preparation for the Spring 2002 European Council .
Mr President , in March 2000 , the Lisbon European Council set out a new strategy for the coming decade .
At that time we were working on the basis of very optimistic economic data and really thought that we could bring about sustainable growth of at least 3 % , along with economic reform , full employment and also social inclusion .
Today our starting point is more difficult because the global economy has gone in the opposite direction and even the European Union , despite its readiness to reform and the reforms which it has already implemented , is experiencing an economic downturn .
That is why the following question is now much more urgent than it was during the preparations for the first spring summit in Stockholm : how does the Commission intend to continue this ambitious process of making the European Union , on the basis of innovation and knowledge , the most dynamic and competitive economic area in the world , and enabling it to overcome the problems which I have described ?
This question is all the more pertinent for the spring summit in Barcelona because , after evaluating a strategy of this kind for two years , it ought to be possible to identify the areas where national and European policy have actually been guided by the quantitative and qualitative objectives and see to what extent it has been possible to bundle measures together and make them visible .
The Member States ' budgets have actually shown uniform increases across the board in investment in research and development , innovation and further development of the information and communication society .
The few figures which are available to us in the European Parliament unfortunately do not yet speak the specific language which we would have liked , because we had hoped that the Lisbon strategy and its consistent implementation would also have yielded visible added value as a result of economic , financial , employment and social policy being coordinated at European level , so as to demonstrate to the public the benefits which European policy can have for them and quite specifically how it can improve their quality of life and work .
We should certainly also ask what approach has been adopted to achieve the ambitious aim of increasing investment in the European Union .
How has cross-border investment in infrastructure actually been made visible apart from through reports ?
The European Parliament needs to ask all of these questions because , in drafting its synthesis report , the Commission has the duty of actually producing a blueprint for the further consultations at the spring summit , which will then , of course , in the end , form the broad guidelines of the future economic policy of the European Union and its Member States .
In the current economic downturn and at a time when we are also facing particular challenges because of the adverse economic consequences of the terrible terrorist acts of 11 September - and in considering these issues we have to take into account a new aspect , the collapse of consumer confidence - we must also ask ourselves the following question : what can we do to stop a self-fulfilling prophecy , which states that we are sliding into recession , from becoming a reality ?
The Commission therefore bears great responsibility for taking more of a lead on setting targets and taking more practical action to reform the economy , not only with respect to the labour market , but also with respect to the other markets , full employment and also social inclusion , by issuing specific guidance on these areas .
Of course this also raises the question , and I should also like to address this particularly to you , Commissioner , of whether the tax situation , where unfortunately we still have countries pursuing independent national policies rather than coordinated ones , does not have an adverse impact on investment in the European Union and , in particular , on cross-border investment .
Commissioner , the European Parliament is still not clear about how it is actually , finally to be involved in this whole process , which is now approaching its second spring summit .
So far we have not been involved as partners in the macro-economic dialogue .
There are no plans to organise another forum with all of the stakeholders , as was done before the Lisbon meeting .
It really is legitimate to ask whether the European Parliament 's involvement is adequate and whether it is therefore able to represent the interests of the people in this process of setting priorities for the European Union 's economic and structural policy .
We really are in a situation where we need to mobilise our forces and rally optimism .
How do you envisage doing this in your synthesis report ?
What working methods do you intend to choose and which guidelines do you intend to issue in it ?
Mr President , in reply to the questions from Mrs Randzio-Plath , I should like to say first of all that the Commission 's synthesis report for the spring European Council in March 2002 is currently being prepared .
As requested by the European Council , that report will assess the progress made on the economic , social and environmental dimensions of the Lisbon strategy .
I mention the environmental dimension in particular since the Göteborg Summit .
Part of this assessment will consider the progress made by Council and Parliament on the Lisbon reform agenda .
The assessment will draw on the series of structural indicators which have been proposed by the Commission in its communication of 30 October 2001 .
As Mrs Randzio-Plath knows , those structural indicators are a very accurate reflection of the progress made and the Commission thinks it is a valuable instrument .
The objective of sustainable development will underpin the assessment of each strand of that strategy .
The focus of the synthesis report will also depend on further work by this Parliament and the Council up to the end of this year .
It is somewhat early , therefore , to be specific about the contents and structure of the reports at this stage .
I agree nevertheless with Mrs Randzio-Plath that the synthesis report will need to take account of the likely situation by the time the Barcelona European Council is held .
This means , on the one hand , the new international situation to which she has referred , and , on the other hand , the introduction of the euro on 1 January next year .
At the recent informal summit in Ghent , Heads of State and Government and the Commission renewed their commitment to pursuing the Lisbon strategy of structural and economic reform and social renewal with determination as a response to both those factors , the new environment and the introduction of the euro .
Continuity and the long-term focus of the reform agenda will need to be maintained , especially in view of the current economic downturn .
The economic situation in the euro area and worldwide has made it necessary to adjust economic policy .
But the confirmation by the Ghent European Council of its commitment to the stability and growth pact has brought confidence that the basic policy framework of economic and monetary union will be preserved and it has certainly facilitated the recent further adjustments in monetary policy .
This shows that economic policy coordination is working .
Nonetheless there is still further scope for strengthening economic policy coordination in line with the proposals put forward by the Commission , with a view to fostering a common assessment of the economic situation and appropriate economic policy responses .
To reinforce that message , Mr Prodi is writing to this Parliament , to the President of the Council and to the Heads of State and Government this week , urging them to continue their efforts to make progress before Barcelona on key elements of the Lisbon reforms , such as the Community patent and the telecoms review , in line with the existing timetable , as well as on a number of the financial services proposals .
The synthesis report by its nature covers a wide area of the Commission 's activity .
A number of Commission services are therefore contributing to its preparation and this work is being monitored at political level by a group of Commissioners dealing with growth , competitiveness , employment and sustainable development .
The report should be adopted by the Commission on 15 January 2002 and will be submitted to this Parliament on the same day .
By submitting the report at an early stage , it is intended to allow the other European institutions to give their views on the report in good time in order to contribute to the work of the European Council in Barcelona .
I believe that is precisely what Mrs Randzio-Plath wants .
Lastly , with regard to the open method of coordination , that is largely intended in the context of the Lisbon strategy to develop indicators at Member State level and to share best practice and experience .
It is used in line with the principles set out in the White Paper on governance in areas where legislative action under the methode communataire , the Community method , is not possible .
I hope I have answered the questions put by Mrs Randzio-Plath .
As I have said on earlier occasions , I shall be delighted to come and make a presentation to her committee and discuss what the Commission intends to do at the Barcelona Summit in further detail .
But it would be useful if my future discussion with the EMAC committee could take place after 15 January , because by then both Parliament and I will be in possession of the documents that will be the Commission 's input into the Barcelona Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Liberal Group I would like to support the position expressed by the Chairperson of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the issue we are debating .
I am pleased that Commissioner Bolkestein has said that he is willing to discuss the content of the proposed synthesis report in committee , since it must be the basis for a discussion at a meeting which we hope will be very important and which will take place in my city and the city of the President for this sitting .
We therefore have a special interest in Barcelona being a genuine success and that it be remembered as a truly significant advance in terms of the commitments we have been taking on since the meeting in Lisbon last year .
I would like to insist on one aspect which both the Commission and the Liberal Group have been highlighting .
This is the need to consolidate and clarify the mechanisms and objectives in the field of economic and monetary policy .
There is a degree of confusion , as you know , and this has been discussed both in the Commission and in this House , between the Europe of the euro ( which , as the Commissioner has said , is now close to completing its final stage with the introduction of notes and coins ) , the external representation of the euro and , on the other hand , the system for adopting decisions in the field of economic and monetary policy .
We know that this situation is unsatisfactory and the current crisis highlights this .
We hope that the present situation can be genuinely overcome , in the way that Commissioner Bolkestein ' s colleague , Commissioner Solbes , has often said optimistically .
However , at the same time he has been obliged to lower the growth forecasts .
I would therefore like to insist on this aspect and on another which the Commissioner has not mentioned and which I believe is very important within the various elements of Lisbon and their subsequent implementation : the training and technology element .
Lisbon set the objective of a fully competitive society by 2010 , in which we would be able to overcome our technological and scientific backwardness in comparison with the United States , which was the term of reference established in Lisbon .
I believe that this is an element which also has to be introduced into this synthesis report , and at subsequent meetings views have been expressed in agreement with this .
I thank Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and Mrs Randzio-Plath for the remarks they have made .
I stress the fact that progress made since Lisbon has been insufficient .
In the area of financial services , for example , the Commission intends to have a mid-term review meeting in February next year to stimulate more political interest in perfecting the internal market and achieving the difficult targets we were set by the Lisbon European Council .
But I stress that we have not done what we should have .
Considerable difficulties remain and we must use the meeting in Lisbon to make further progress .
It would be a good thing if Ecofin ministers were present in Barcelona so that they could do , on the spot , what members of the European Council want them to do .
So far members of the European Council have engaged in laudatory statements but when ministers have to deal with the subjects at hand the political will seems to evaporate .
If the Ecofin ministers were to be present at the Barcelona Council perhaps they could solve these problems there and then .
In the case of patents , the European Council has instructed the Council to come to a decision before Christmas this year .
I am not optimistic .
That underscores the need for the Barcelona European Council to be practical and emphasises the need to make more progress than have been made up until now .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Conversion of vessels and of fishermen dependent on the fishing agreement with Morocco
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0395 / 2001 ) by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation aiming to promote the conversion of vessels and of fishermen that were , up to 1999 , dependent on the fishing agreement with Morocco [ COM ( 2001 ) 384 - C5-0407 / 2001 - 2001 / 0163 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , the European Parliament is offering the Commission the opportunity to correct the proposed regulation it delivered to Parliament and the Council .
The intention of the report , approved by the Committee on Fisheries that we are discussing at the moment , is to correct the rigidity of this proposal , which is currently preventing progress being made in finding solutions to problems for the people affected by the non-renewal of the EC-Morocco fisheries agreement .
From the time the agreement expired , on 30 November 1999 , until the time it became clear that a new agreement would not be reached , owners of more than 400 vessels and some 4 300 fishermen were both hopeful and fearful at the time when negotiations between the Community and Morocco were being prolonged .
It was not until 26 March 2001 that Commissioner Fischler announced that it had been impossible to reach a mutually beneficial agreement .
From that moment , the Community set itself the objective of converting the affected fishing fleet .
By presenting this proposed regulation , the Commission is conforming to the guidelines set by the Nice European Council of 7 December 2000 .
At that Summit , the European Council ordered the Commission to propose a specific action plan for the restructuring of this Community fleet .
I must state clearly that this proposed regulation does not conform to the needs of the sector in question .
Once again the Commission seems to be presenting proposals , the objective of which we do not understand , that do not amount to decisive action in support of a fleet and certain regions which are suffering a serious crisis .
In fact , rather than helping to preserve most of the fleet and its economic activity , the Commission is presenting a rigid proposal which , if the Council approves it without the substantial amendments approved by the Committee on Fisheries , will have the effect of breaking up a fleet for which the ship owners and local authorities of those regions feel capable of finding alternatives .
This proposal must therefore be amended in the way approved by the Committee on Fisheries , so that the actions proposed may have a beneficial effect on the sector in question .
The Committee on Fisheries does not share the Commission ' s breaking-up approach .
The Commission could have focussed on the existing opportunities in alternative sectors , such as the processing industry , aquiculture and especially the promotion of fisheries products .
In the same way , the proposal excludes sectors directly affected by the non-renewal of the agreement , such as the non-extractive fisheries industries .
The land-based companies , during the long negotiation process , have suffered a series of economic setbacks that have led to employment rationalisations and redundancies , leading to considerable losses .
Today they are faced with a future just as uncertain as that of the fleet they depend on .
Faced with this breaking-up approach , the sector affected and the regional authorities have reached verbal agreements with companies and ship owners from various Maghreb countries to create mixed companies , and in this way , according to the estimates of the sector , in the small-scale sector , around a hundred vessels could be relocated with the help of this specific measure , if it were more flexible , thereby reducing to 26 those vessels destined for scrapping .
This would maintain an economic activity which is vital to certain regions and ensure that those who want to continue being ship owners and fishermen are able to do so .
The amendments contained in the Committee on Fisheries ' report , in summary , modify the proposed regulation in the following fashion :
In addition to ship owners and fishermen , the land-based fisheries industry which was directly linked to the existence of this agreement are included , provided that their losses exceed 70 % .
The requirement that the people affected must have been subsidised for a period of at least nine consecutive months as a result of inactivity in order to benefit now from this specific measure is removed .
This requirement leads to the exclusion of those people who , sometimes temporarily , found alternative work while waiting for a new fisheries agreement with Morocco to be reached .
This is all the more serious if we bear in mind that these ship owners and fishermen had not been warned that , if they found an activity , they would be penalised when it came to conversion .
The Committee on Fisheries has also rejected the requirement to return aid granted for modernisation .
It is not right to apply penalties of a backdated nature in the case of aid which was not subject to these conditions at the time of being granted .
The Commission ' s proposal intends to increase public aid per ship owner by 20 % in the case of scrapping or transfer to a third country .
The Committee on Fisheries believes that fishermen must also benefit from this increase of 20 % .
We have also redistributed the sum allocated to this specific measure in such a way that the amount intended for scrapping is 30 % , for the creation of mixed companies , 35 % , and for socio-economic measures , also 35 % .
This would lead to better implementation of the specific measure .
Lastly , I will mention the budgetary aspect .
In accordance with the conclusions of the Nice European Council , the Commission proposes granting up to EUR 197 million for this specific measure .
It proposes implementing the flexibility instrument in 2002 and allocating the appropriations corresponding to heading 2 of the financial perspectives .
The saving resulting from the non-renewal of the agreement has been EUR 500 million .
It is natural that the Community should also contribute to the cost of converting this fleet .
Mr President , this House may be listening for the last time to words relating to what , for fourteen years , we have known as the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
Tomorrow , on voting on the report we are debating today , our institution will write the last page of a story that has been told since August 1987 , when the European Union signed its first fisheries agreement with that country , but which for Spain goes back almost twenty-five years .
There are therefore Community fishermen and ship owners whose lives have been exclusively linked with the existence of the Moroccan fishing grounds .
Our obligation today is to close this chapter with the greatest possible dignity and responsibility towards this sector , which is going to suffer an unprecedented fisheries conversion .
We must thank the Commission for their efforts over the last two long years to try to make tomorrow ' s vote unnecessary .
But , given that the situation is irreversible , we must also recognise the solidarity contained in the Commission ' s proposal , its recognition that the end of an era cannot be marked by the spectacle of us being miserly towards those people who are waiting anxiously for this plan in order to carry on living and working , the financial cost of which is fully justified .
We hope that the other institutions have sufficient dignity to accept this need .
The amendments introduced by the Committee on Fisheries , above all , contribute to adding a greater degree of flexibility in order to allow Community solidarity to truly benefit a very heterogeneous fleet , which over the last two years has not ceased to seek its own solutions ; solutions which greater legislative rigidity may contribute to blocking .
Furthermore , our main obligation is to approve this report in order to provide the necessary legal basis so that on second reading of the budget the necessary appropriations can be provided to finance the restructuring plan .
This restructuring plan will no doubt put an end to part of an historic fleet , but it must not mean the end of fisheries relations with Morocco .
It is impossible to imagine that Morocco really wants to turn its back on the European Union , amongst other things because we share two seas and we are obliged to be neighbours , and Morocco can only benefit from this proximity .
I therefore ask the Commission to remain receptive and promote any mutually beneficial fishing cooperation initiative which may arise in the future .
It only remains for me to thank the rapporteur for the wonderful work she has done .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the draft Council regulation on the promotion of the conversion of vessels and of fishermen dependent on the fishing agreement with Morocco , which is the subject of the excellent report by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , deserves our unreserved approval .
The proposal shows that the European Union cares about the fate of such vulnerable and fragile activities , whose survival depended on the renewal or non-renewal of a fishing agreement with Morocco .
European solidarity works and continues to work .
That is for the sceptics .
The Commission proposal considers the problems of conversion from its economic and social angles .
It also has the merit of mobilising new money , EUR 197 million , which is compatible with the mobilisation of other resources already allocated under the Structural Funds .
In Portugal there are 570 fishermen who receive support under this programme , 400 of whom live in Sesimbra , a small , attractive fishing and tourist town very close to Lisbon .
Of these 400 who live in Sesimbra , 150 are already over 55 years old , which means they can be moved into early retirement , since at this age it is difficult to retrain them for a different job .
In simple terms , while the shipowners are liable to receive supplements of 20 % , the same is not true for the fishermen , which to me seems an injustice .
Now , the fishermen will be able to get EUR 10 000 euros over one year if they do not do any other work .
The possibility of a 20 % increase , although modest , would allow them to raise that sum to EUR 12 000 , which would make it rather more attractive .
Furthermore , the proposal has quite a rigid structure and should be made more flexible , allowing the Member States , in this case Portugal and Spain , to adapt better to situations that are truly complex and sometimes do not fit within the rigid stays of the regulation .
This flexibility should be accepted so that the aid already granted by the end of 2001 should not all be accounted for under the part of FIFG Article 4 intended for socio-economic measures , and all of it within the Lisbon and Tagus valley region , and it would be better if it could be diluted in other programmes .
Lastly , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I entirely agree with the content and proposals of the report by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , which I think are lucid and sensible , particularly those dealing with the possibility of supporting processing activities that were dependent on fishing .
Indeed , it does not make sense that certain fishery-dependent processing and marketing activities , which in this case have been hit very hard , should not also be funded .
For this reason , too , we are grateful for the report by Mrs Miguélez Ramos .
Mr President , I am pleased to inform the House that the UN Fish Stocks Agreement will enter into force on 11 December .
This follows the thirtieth ratification by Malta , shamefully with no ratifications by the EU .
Turning to Morocco , the Greens will be voting against this proposal , not because we oppose compensation for fishermen put out of work , but because we oppose this particular package .
Firstly it provides increased premiums for only certain people , those involved in Morocco .
This discriminates against other fishermen and ship owners .
Secondly , it will fund even more transfers of vessels to third countries , including flags of convenience , and there are still no controls in place to prevent this .
Thirdly , it sets a very bad precedent if every time an agreement collapses or problems entirely foreseeable arise , we decide to dish out huge sums of European taxpayers ' money .
Clearly , the problem with fisheries agreements has to be addressed .
Morocco is the first , but there are more to come .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Mrs Miguélez for the excellent work she has done .
Its quality is all the more notable insofar as it deals with an issue which is hugely traumatic for a large number of people who depend on fishing in Portugal and in Galicia , Andalucia and the Canary Islands in Spain .
It is a question of finding the best possible way to alleviate the effects of what I believe to be , if you pardon the expression , the chronicle of a death foretold .
For a long time my group has been warning the House of the risks of not linking the fisheries agreement with Morocco to the association agreement .
Today all I can say is that the Kingdom of Morocco has not shown the willingness to negotiate that we expect from a trading partner .
I would like to acknowledge the Commission ' s efforts to lessen the impact of the lack of an agreement with Morocco , but I am not going to repeat what has already been said .
It is sufficient to refer to the interventions of the rapporteur and Mrs Fraga , for example , to realise that the Committee on Fisheries has considerably improved on the Commission ' s proposal , by making it fairer .
In this respect , it only remains for me to ask , as my group will do , the House to approve the report of the Committee on Fisheries , written by Mrs Miguélez , tomorrow , and that , once approved by Parliament , the report may quickly be provided with the appropriate financial instruments so that it can be implemented .
And , in this respect , I would like to make it clear that the budgetary flexibility instrument is essential .
Ladies and gentlemen , it would be horrendous , to give an example , if an Objective 1 region , with the highest unemployment rate in the European Union , which also suffers the consequences of the competition created by the very favourable agreements which we , Europeans , have granted to Morocco in the fruit products sector , not only suffered the effects of a tough conversion as a result of the lack of an agreement with Morocco , but that , furthermore , as a result of the budgetary miserliness of certain people , it also ended up without Structural Funds .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since it is so late , I will try to be very brief and concise .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Miguélez , for the good work she has done despite the urgency of the issue .
I would also like to congratulate all the members of the Committee on Fisheries for the work they have done .
I believe that together we have all been able to meet the demands of the circumstances : the rapporteur , the authors of the amendments , those who have made it possible to reach compromises and the Members who have supported us . I thank them all for their understanding and solidarity .
The urgency procedure , as I said , always obliges us to work more quickly than we would have liked , but , even so , the result has been very positive .
I now hope the Commission takes account of the significant improvements which the Committee on Fisheries has introduced into its proposal .
I will highlight the extension of aid , better coverage and , above all , the flexibility introduced into the application of the various measures under discussion .
Secondly , we must speak about the funding of this plan , although this is not strictly an issue for our committee .
In Nice , the Council made a political commitment at the highest level , at the level of Heads of State and Government , to the people affected by the dramatic situation created following the failure of the negotiations with Morocco .
I believe that the European Commission has also been able to meet the demands of the circumstances , and I would like to acknowledge that here : the use of the flexibility instrument and the EUR 197 million it proposes for funding demonstrate this .
I therefore congratulate them .
I now ask Parliament ' s Committee on Budgets and the Council to support the European Commission and the European Parliament ' s Committee on Fisheries and reach the necessary compromise so that this essential EUR 197 million can be used for the proposed purpose .
There is a political commitment and a favourable opinion from this Parliament ' s Committee on Fisheries and we strongly urge that they be complied with .
Mr President , it is vital that this report should be approved so that a decision can be taken at the next Fisheries Council on the restructuring programme for the fleet that operated in Morocco and that has been idle since the end of 1999 , affecting Portuguese and Spanish fishermen and shipowners and the populations of the areas where they live .
The fact is that compensation for the stoppage finishes at the end of this year .
The central question , then , is the allocation of EUR 197 million for the restructuring programme that is to commence in January 2002 , which should be improved along the lines proposed in the Miguélez Ramos report .
For our part , we consider the proposal the Commission has made of using a flexibility instrument in the budget to be acceptable , and we regret that the matter was not made clearer during the first reading of the budget by the European Parliament , inserting the amounts on the line and requesting the use of the flexibility instrument , as in fact the Committee on Fisheries had proposed , as our chairman has just reminded us .
It is , therefore , important that the next Budgetary Council should stop blocking and take these proposals into account , creating the solution that will allow the fleet restructuring programme to come into force early next year .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is late , but we are awake , wide-awake even .
The alarm bells are ringing , the Gordian knot has not yet been hacked in two , but Parliament , I hope , is not giving up .
What is at stake here ?
At stake are jobs and the way the people of Europe perceive the EU .
Thanks to the emergency motion tabled by our colleague , Daniel Varela , we have an opportunity this evening to discuss an issue which is as problematic as it is urgent .
It concerns how to deal openly and honestly with the consequences which the failure of the negotiations with Morocco have had for the Iberian peninsular .
The bare facts are quickly stated : since November 1990 , we have heard , the EU fleet - in practice deep-sea fishermen from Spain and Portugal - has no longer been able to fall back on the resources off the coast of Morocco .
The 4 300 fishermen and 400 vessels affected are hoping that the compensation payments will be continued when they expire in December 2001 , as Mrs Miguélez Ramos has explained to us so convincingly .
Behind these figures there are people , families and whole communities who are committed to a traditional industry and we now need to give that industry prospects for the future .
In so doing , our efforts should certainly not be confined solely to giving financial handouts .
It is much more important that we - and here I would bring the Commission and the Council on board too - succeed in producing a comprehensive plan which is convincing and whose aim is to provide reduced , but no less profitable , fishing activity , or alternative work .
I would take this report as a further direct indication of how extremely important and urgent it is to reform the European Union 's common fisheries policy , a task which is occupying all of us at the moment .
It is no coincidence that the individual key words - external relations , trade agreements , capacity reduction and extensive restructuring - are also a leitmotif in the working documents on the reform .
The current situation in Spain and Portugal also highlights the fact that it is now high time to conclude a package which is really worthy of the name reform .
It is unacceptable to reduce members of a proud industry to the level of being simply recipients of charity .
As a Community of values we must not allow this .
Falling yields have , I believe , helped us to recognise the huge challenges .
Let us now work together to identify the right action to take and let us show the flexibility which the rapporteur and also other colleagues have reminded us is so important .
Mr President , the proposal that the Commission is putting forward is to be welcomed but needs improving .
I shall highlight three aspects in this regard : the first is that there is no sense in the rigidity that the draft regulation imposes regarding the percentage of the funding to be allocated to each type of measure .
What would make sense would be to allow each Member State the flexibility , within the overall envelope , to allocate these funds according to its own needs , with clear rules . For instance , in the case of Portugal , funds for destroying vessels should be reduced and funds for restructuring some of these ships and for the social part should be increased .
Secondly , an envelope of this kind should also include funding for the economic conversion of the areas most affected by fishing , and include in this compensation framework collateral activities such as the processing industry .
This would mean , right from the outset , that the financial envelope would need reinforcing , which unfortunately has not happened in this proposal by the Commission , which even so is arguing about certain problems of budgetary procedure .
The third aspect I should like to highlight is that , in the Commission ' s view , the aim of this aid is essentially to close a chapter in the common fisheries policy , which was the agreement with Morocco , without making the effort which I believe was needed to expand the fishing possibilities for these countries in third countries ' waters , and without duly providing for measures , which again were needed , to help these companies become more international more easily .
The Committee on Fisheries has tabled some amendments , and I should like to pay tribute to the rapporteur , who has made such an effort in this process .
We , ourselves , have also tried to do our part with amendments that will clearly improve this proposal where it has gaps .
As Mrs Fraga Estévez said , since there was no political ability to negotiate at the right time , I hope that there will now be dignity in the answers we are going to give to the fishermen affected .
I also hope that this House will approve the proposal by the Committee on Fisheries and that the Council will do the job it has to do .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking and congratulating Mrs Miguélez Ramos , the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Fisheries , for her report on this extremely important regulation which aims at facilitating conversion for those thousands of fishermen and hundreds of vessels whose activity has been suddenly cancelled because it has not been possible to conclude a new fishery agreement with the Kingdom of Morocco .
Beyond the availability of existing instruments , the Community has decided to make a special effort with a twofold initiative .
Firstly , the Council regulation aiming at widening the scope of existing provisions and , secondly , additional credits for a specific action .
While the proposal for additional credits is currently being discussed by the budgetary authority , today 's debate focuses on the legislative proposal .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the emergency procedure should allow the adoption of the regulation by the end of November instead of the end of December .
The report includes 18 amendments , which may be grouped in a few categories , which I shall review now .
The first group consists of Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 5 , 10 , 11 and 13 .
The Commission does not believe that the land-based industries - that is to say , fish-processing factories , as well as services to vessels - ought to benefit from the new regulation , nor should the coastal regions themselves .
Indeed , regional development programmes already exist , and those industries in need of conversion or those coastal communities in need of diversification should benefit from the European Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund .
Aquaculture and the fish-processing industry should benefit from the financial instrument for fisheries guidance .
The second group of amendments consists of Amendments Nos 3 and 4 .
The Commission does not believe that all fishermen and vessel owners who have received indemnities in 2000-2001 , irrespective of the actual duration of the cessation of activity , should benefit from the new regulation .
Therefore a minimum duration of compensation , as a simple criterion , has been proposed and a nine-month duration has been considered a reasonable minimum .
Moreover , until now , no evidence has been given that such a duration would penalise those who have tried to find alternative activities and are still in a difficult situation .
The third group consists of Amendments Nos 6 , 7 and 8 .
With respect to the age of vessels to be withdrawn , the Commission has proposed to reduce the minimum age to five years in the case of the exporting of vessels .
All other rules should be maintained .
Moreover , the Commission has proposed that the accumulation of grants for construction should be prevented premiums for withdrawal .
Any alternative rule would be against the sound management of public money , and therefore the Commission could not support those amendments .
On Amendments Nos 9 and 12 , the Commission would stress that social premiums for fishermen are already available in the existing regulation .
Nonetheless , it may support increasing those premiums in the new regulation .
However , Spain and Portugal should guarantee that such increased premiums do not create distortion in relation to equivalent social premiums that may be available for workers of other industries in the same Member States .
I turn to Amendments Nos 14 and 15 .
The additional credits are not structural funds .
Providing them allows the Commission to set up some rules . Those rules should be in line with today ' s priorities , which amount to scrapping redundant vessels and also to social measures .
No ' adjustment ' or ' variation ' should be allowed .
Then there is Amendment No 16 .
From the Commission ' s perspective , granting a joint enterprise in the fisheries sector is quite a risky action .
Two legal provisions limit that risk : firstly a bank guarantee , and secondly , a partially delayed payment ( that is , after two years of satisfactory operation ) .
The budget rules for using additional credits imply the relaxation of the second provision , but the Commission is willing to maintain its financial risk at the same level .
Therefore it has proposed to balance that loss by increasing the bank guarantee to 40 % of the premium .
But that is a purely mechanical calculation .
Then there is Amendment No 17 .
If the budgetary authority decides to earmark all the commitment credits dedicated to the specific action in the budgetary year 2002 , the wording of that article should remain unchanged .
Otherwise it should be adjusted accordingly .
Lastly , Amendment No 18 , which has no practical consequence .
The wording of Article 7 should remain consistent with the wording of the equivalent articles of Regulation ( EC ) No 2792 / 1999 .
In conclusion , the Commission has a favourable opinion of Amendments Nos 9 and 12 , and my colleague , Mr Fischler , will propose to the Fisheries Council that it includes them in the new regulation .
Amendment No17 may be considered , depending upon the decision taken by the budgetary authority .
I was speaking on behalf of my colleague , Mr Fischler , who , I am sure , will deal with any questions that I was unable to answer .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.20 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I had not managed to reach my seat .
I wanted to make a very brief comment : my name does not appear on the attendance register and I wanted to say that I was present at both the sitting and the corresponding vote .
I know that this relates to Monday 's sitting , but I did want to have it included in the Minutes .
Many thanks .
Obviously I did not sign in , but I was here and I did take part .
Thank you !
Very well , Mr Ebner , it will be rectified .
Are there any other comments on the Minutes ?
Madam President , before the debate begins , I just want to pass on the feelings of the people in Ireland regarding the future of our national airline Aer Lingus .
Prior to the terrorism in New York , it was a star performer in the airline industry , carrying 1.1 million passengers .
It is a great provider to our national economy .
There is a great wish that it not be regarded as the government giving national aid to keep this flying .
That is not really a comment about the Minutes , and besides , there is going to be a debate on that subject .
Are there any other comments about the Minutes ?
( The Minutes were approved ) .
Madam President , I just wanted to bring to your attention the arrest in Greece a week ago of twelve British subjects and two Dutch subjects .
Among the British subjects were two of my constituents , Paul and Lesley Coppin from Mildenhall in Suffolk .
They have been arrested by the Greek authorities on charges of espionage .
These people are plane spotters , aviation enthusiasts , on holiday in Greece .
It does seem to me rather extraordinary that they are still being held in custody in a fellow Member State , and I wonder if there is something that you can do to bring this matter to the attention of the Greek authorities in order they be released as soon as possible .
Mr Van Orden , we have taken note of your comments and we shall take whatever action is appropriate .
Economic and employment situation in the air transport sector and in the industrial and related services sectors
The next item calls for statements by the Council and the Commission on the economic and employment situation in the air transport sector and in the industrial and related services sectors .
Mrs Durant will now speak on behalf of the Council .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the American Airlines plane crash in New York on Monday 12 November has , of course , reminded everyone of the difficult and dreadful plight of the air transport sector .
There is a risk that this latest accident will worsen still further the economic and social crisis that the sector has been facing since 11 September .
However , this should not make us forget the roots of this crisis , which is the result , not only of the combination of economic problems directly linked to the attacks on 11 September , but also of previous structural difficulties which were revealed and aggravated by the events of 11 September .
As President of the Council of Transport Ministers and a Belgian Federal Minister , I am particularly concerned about this situation .
It seems to me more than ever vital to implement structural , economic and social reforms so as to enable the sector to overcome the current crisis , to give it a boost in the form of social measures , and to lay the foundations of sustainable development in this sector in the long term .
In order to do this , we must understand the real roots of the problem and identify the obstacles that must be removed , and I should like to make a start on that here and now , with you and with Mrs Diamantopoulou .
The main cause of the fragility endemic in the European air transport sector is its over-fragmentation , along with a lack of both consolidation at Community level and strategic alliances .
Up to now , the Community structure has been based on the desire to create a single market in which optimum conditions for competition are guaranteed .
The extreme competition that results from this , in a sector where marginal costs are relatively low , gives rise to problems of over-capacity and at the same time prices that are too low in relation to the average costs borne by the airlines .
This particularly fierce competition has therefore helped to make the airlines more fragile , and so they are vulnerable to any economic upset because their margins are so small .
The American air transport industry has for a long time been much more concentrated than its European counterpart , which together with other factors has helped it to cope , for better or worse , with the crisis which is affecting the United States in particular .
Although the difficulties in the air transport sector were caused not by the attacks of 11 September but by structural considerations , the events of that day imposed new constraints on what was already a difficult situation , and it was those constraints which precipitated the current crisis , and which have been made worse by the present context of an economic recession .
I shall list the major constraints , in chronological order . Firstly , US airspace remained closed for four days , then passenger confidence was reduced and there was a considerable fall in the amount of air traffic operating - 20 % fewer holiday flights compared with the year 2000 , particularly on transatlantic routes where there was a drop of 30 % - and to top it all there was the tragic accident two days ago , which will no doubt make the situation even worse .
Then there is the fact that insurance companies have decided to raise insurance premiums for both passengers and aeroplanes in the case of accidents due to a state of war or to acts of terrorism .
They have also decided to limit the airlines ' coverage for third-party damages in the same circumstances to USD 50 million .
What is more , additional security measures of necessity mean additional costs for airports and airlines .
Last but not least , American aid , consisting of USD 15 billion in immediate aid and Federal credits to companies in addition to USD 120 million for suppliers of services , have now caused distortions in competition in relation to the European industry , in particular because they have made possible predatory practices on the part of certain companies on the transatlantic routes .
The economic and social consequences for Europe of this combination of structural and economic factors are well known : airlines are experiencing serious difficulties , some of them even going into liquidation , investment is at a standstill and the whole air transport sector is experiencing a terrible crisis .
What has been the Council ' s response to all this so far ?
At their meetings on 14 September and 16 October , the Transport Ministers had already discussed the consequences for this sector of the attacks on 11 September , as had the European Council of Economic Affairs and Finance Ministers at its meeting on 21 September , with a view to issuing a rapid and coordinated response from all Member States which would make it possible to support the restructuring of the sector while at the same time trying to retain the basis for healthy competition .
The meeting of the Council of Transport Ministers on 16 October in particular examined the proposals contained in the European Commission ' s Communication of 10 October on the economic situation of the air transport sector , with a view to implementing a certain number of its proposals .
First of all the Council very rapidly coordinated Member States ' measures to deal with the insurance situation .
It decided that state aid provided to airlines and suppliers of services in order to make up for insufficient or non-existent cover for risks resulting from war would be extended until 31 December .
Such schemes have to be declared to the Commission and examined by it on a monthly basis .
As regards the cost of additional security measures , Member States have agreed to take these on board initially , without this being regarded as state aid .
However , they have emphasised the need for users and operators to contribute towards this cost in the long term , when the situation has become more normal again .
As for the four-day closure of airspace , the Council requested and obtained from the Commission a certain amount of flexibility to enable limited aid to be granted beyond that period , on the basis of objective criteria of course , to airlines which were the victims of the closure of airspace and its consequences .
Both the Member States and the Commission believe that this support must respect the major elements of the Community acquis regarding the containment of state aid to the air transport sector , and must not under any circumstances cause distortions in competition .
We do not accept the idea that American companies should use state aid in order to smash prices .
Our companies are suffering from the unfair competition practised by the American airlines .
We must not allow such a situation to continue within the European Union .
This is why the Presidency supports the Commission ' s proposal to adopt a code of conduct together with the United States , precisely in order to prevent or remove such distortions in competition .
In addition , the Council has taken into account the request by certain airlines for more flexibility in applying the procedures for allocating time slots .
Moreover , one of the key factors in the rapid recovery of air transport is the winning back of passengers ' confidence .
With this in mind , the Presidency and the Commission have worked very hard , with the support of the other Member States , in order to define and implement , as rapidly as possible , measures intended to reinforce security at airports and on board aircraft .
This will be a two-stage operation : the first stage , which is a matter of priority , will be to apply , on a Community-wide basis , the recommendations of the European Civil Aviation Conference on passenger and baggage checks at airports , which are the result of many years ' experience .
The earlier these checks are carried out , the more effective they are .
As you know , the Council has invested a great deal of time and energy , particularly through the Council-Commission joint experts group , in order to achieve a policy agreement among Member States as of the forthcoming Council meeting on 7 December .
In a spirit of close coordination with the European Parliament , I believe that it is very important to achieve our aims as quickly as possible .
The Council of 16 October also expressed the hope that the European Parliament should be in a position to give its opinion on this subject as quickly as possible .
In other words , I believe that the public would find it hard to understand if the Council or Parliament were to drag its feet on such a crucial issue .
The Presidency is at the disposal of the European Parliament in order to facilitate a close dialogue between the two institutions , and to enable the Members of the European Parliament to benefit from the expertise of its specialists , with a view to the rapid adoption of measures .
At a second stage we shall be studying the advisability of additional security measures on the basis of the final report of the joint Presidency-Commission ad hoc group , which will be submitted on 7 December .
Some of these measures will perhaps require legislative initiatives supplementing the first stage , represented by the ' Security ' regulation currently being examined .
The Council on 16 October thus made it possible to react coherently to the crisis in the air transport sector , but we should now be seeking to reconstruct a solid and sound foundation in this sector , even though we know that the current crisis may continue for several months .
As my contribution to today ' s debate , I propose to share with you my personal analysis of the prospects that exist for this sector and the measures that should be taken .
This debate , which the Council has not yet embarked upon , is all the more necessary within this House , because there is no doubt that in the months to come Parliament will be involved in it .
In structural terms , therefore , we must ensure that the sector is allowed to restructure itself , by reorganising the skies over Europe around a number of major alliances .
One way of enabling the airline companies to restore their real viability is to improve the way in which the pressure of competition is channelled in this sector , in particular by having recourse to some form of consolidation .
Without going so far as to recommend mergers or shareholdings which would require a full-scale remodelling of the system regulating competition , the creation of alliances or commercial alignments would be enough to enable a start to be made on the relieving of some problems .
For example , it would make it possible to limit the over-capacity which is such a burden on the sector ' s performance , and to reduce the effects of excessive competition on certain routes .
It is a question of allowing economies of scale and of network , which are particularly highly developed in this sector , to operate properly .
Together with the Commission , we must also think about adopting a strategy which will enable us to cope with similar situations . In particular we must study the adjustments to the European competition rules that will be required , at the same time overcoming , if possible , the current legal obstacles .
This raises the sensitive issue of how the companies concerned can be controlled , and it means that we need to think more about the role of the European Community in relation to third countries , and in particular the United States .
In effect , we must allow the major European airlines , around which future air travel will be organised , to be better armed to face their major North American rivals .
With this in mind , I personally support the eventual granting of a clear mandate to the Commission , to negotiate with our international discussion partners , particularly in America .
It is important for the future of civil aviation that the European Union should speak with a single voice .
However , I believe that the preliminary and essential stage in this step forward is to establish a regulatory framework for the air transport sector which will be more coherent and complete .
This ' internal ' framework should lay a healthy foundation for the redeployment of the sector and enable us to avoid any distortions in competition .
Out of the wasteland we have at the moment , we need to create a clear and binding regulatory corpus .
This movement needs to cover all areas of aviation , whether safety , security , the fight against noise pollution or more general environmental protection .
With this in mind , the Commission ' s proposals for a ' single European sky ' should be examined without delay .
This project is the point of departure for a whole range of regulatory measures and should be as detailed as possible in order to build up a strong and united European market .
The European Union must in time become an equal partner in international negotiations , particularly with its American discussion partners .
I hope that I and my fellow members of the Council of Transport Ministers will have an opportunity to come back to the question of the Community ' s competency in international negotiations on matters concerning air transport .
We shall have to give some thought to the conditions governing such a mandate , and the guarantees that will be given to Member States regarding the transparency of negotiations conducted in the name of the Community .
In-depth action must also be taken to deal with the social aspects of the crisis .
The bankruptcy of Sabena and the redundancies announced draw attention to the importance of and the urgent need for this .
The collapse of an airline causes job losses not only within that company itself , but also among its subcontractors .
Sabena was the key client of many businesses , not only Brussels-National Airport itself , but also the various providers of airport services .
We cannot rethink the civil aviation sector without rethinking the whole of our social policy in the context of liberalisation .
The Belgian Presidency therefore believes that it is vital that it is able to intervene to support social plans and retrain employees , while at the same time respecting the principle that public money should not be used to subsidise companies .
It is also vital that there should be a more far-reaching analysis of the social and environmental impact of the liberalisation of air transport , with a view to creating the conditions for greater harmonisation in this area .
Finally , it will be necessary to develop more specifically targeted measures by the European Social Fund .
In effect this means that the programming documents drawn up by the Commission and the Member States will have to be adjustable so as to cater for crises in any sector .
This will allow prompt reaction to any increase in the number of people seeking jobs , so that they can be retrained as soon as possible and their knowledge and skills brought up to the necessary levels rapidly and appropriately .
The problem lies in encouraging people to be adaptable .
Among the other vital requirements I will also mention the need to implement an information monitoring system at Community level , with regard to redundancy decisions , the need to increase consultation with social partners , and finally the need to introduce crisis-forecasting management into the European Change Observatory set up on 23 October in Dublin .
In this respect , it is important that the ' Employment and Social Policy ' Council meeting on 3 December should study the Commission ' s communication on the restructuring of undertakings , which the Commission announced at the time of the Marks & Spencer crisis last summer .
It will be a question of having to consider the concept of the social responsibility of undertakings in the context of restructuring measures .
The December ' Employment ' Council will certainly enable an agreement to be reached on the directive on informing and consulting workers , which also represents a definite step in the right direction in the form of the consultation of representative bodies in times of crisis .
Finally , looking at the long-term prospects , the challenge we are facing also includes the task of ensuring that civil aviation becomes a sustainable activity .
Security and safety , economic stability and respect for the environment are the essential components of sustainable development in this sector , which leads me to my last point : the need to make progress in the environmental aspect of the sector .
The responses to economic and social difficulties that are needed in the short term , like the measures on security standards that are needed in the medium term , must in no way prejudice the task of continuing and expanding the efforts being made in this area .
Environmentally responsible growth in this sector will , in the long term , be the vital condition for the survival of this form of transport .
We made considerable progress at the ICAO General Assembly in Montreal in September .
We must take advantage of what the European Union obtained on that occasion - and believe me it was not a foregone conclusion - in other words that consideration should be given to local , national and regional differences when defining these public policies , in order to adopt European regulations which effectively guarantee a high level of environmental protection .
We must put into practice the progress that has been made in policy , in particular by rapidly adopting adequate anti-noise measures , but also by adopting measures to reduce greenhouse effect gases , in the context of the undertaking that we gave in Kyoto and confirmed in Bonn and Marrakesh .
Even though European airlines have been less badly affected than their American counterparts , we must ensure that we put in place , at Community level , a regulatory framework that will ensure that they really are viable , and this means in particular revising the competition rules .
Moreover , it must be possible , in a crisis , for the regulatory framework to guarantee a high degree of social protection .
Together we must build up a civil aviation industry which is sustainable at economic , social and environmental levels .
We must act , and we must act quickly , in order to guarantee that from now on civil aviation will once again become the bridge between peoples and the bringer of peace that it always has been .
( Applause )
Madam President , European air transport policy had and still has serious structural weaknesses .
The events of 11 September have exacerbated the current situation exponentially .
The number of passengers on the main carriers has fallen dramatically and has now bottomed out at 20 % lower than in 2000 .
The airlines recently announced 30,000 redundancies .
Two national carriers , Sabena and Swissair , have folded .
When Sabena folded , 7,500 people lost their jobs from one day to the next .
And we cannot exclude the possibility of further job losses in the industry at European level .
Last week I met European partners representing all sectors of the air transport industry .
Their description was most interesting .
The airlines operate in a global village .
A global village which has been hit by an earthquake and all its buildings , both large and small , strong and weak , are teetering .
So how are we to cope at European level with part of a problem of truly global dimensions ?
I think that it is important for us to send out a clear message , and I agree completely with Minister Durant here : we shall not be doing the industry any favours if we allow the economic crisis provoked by 11 September to delay decisions to restructure and unify the industry .
The main message must be that the proper response is to restructure the airline industry .
It is important that we agree that we cannot help the industry with a massive injection of public funds but , at the same time , we must understand that we cannot restructure in a time of crisis without additional economic and social tools .
The communication which the European Commission approved on 10 October entitled " The repercussions of the terrorist attacks in the United States on the air transport industry " is an initial reaction to this extraordinary situation and therefore focuses on restoring confidence by planning additional safety measures , coupled with economic measures to support the industry .
Of course , I fully agree with the Minister that , because of our institutional configuration and specific policies in the European Union , we are unable , unlike the United States of America , to react directly and support European airlines .
This communication contains a number of important points and measures .
The European Commission is examining measures , in the light of state aid rules , on compensating airlines for the damage which they sustained over the four days during which American airspace was closed .
This compensation must be granted without exception to all airlines licensed by the Member State .
The European Commission will examine various measures , again in the light of state aid rules , on compensation for the cost of additional insurance and continuing state intervention up to the end of this year .
The Commission is currently checking a number of medium-term monthly insurance plans on the basis of competition rules and internal market legislation relating to insurance .
And it is examining the possibility of a longer-term solution to the problem of insurance within the framework of the European Commission .
Finally , the Commission and the Council of Transport Ministers have called on the Member States to check that third world carriers can provide the same level of insurance cover as that which is going to be required of European airlines .
If we are to be able to restructure and stabilise the air transport industry as we must , the problem of ownership and control needs to be resolved now more than ever .
The restrictions imposed on airlines by traditional rules of ownership and control in bilateral air transport service agreements make mergers and acquisitions and external investment very difficult , even if the companies are in dire economic straits , which is why the Community desperately needs a dynamic common policy in the external relations sector .
The European Commission has been asking the Council for years now for negotiating guidelines on an EU / USA air traffic agreement in order to set the procedure in question in motion .
This sort of agreement would benefit our air transport industry .
Finally , given the rules on landing and take-off slots , the Commission takes the view that the situation is highly critical and agrees to propose that airport coordinators allow carriers to keep the slots which they did not use during the summer of 2001 and during the current 2001 / 2002 winter period for the same programming periods next year .
The President-in-Office of the Council has set out the specific problems and the need for a direct European policy and agreement at European level very clearly .
I will not go over them again ; instead I shall focus a little longer on the question of the social crisis .
As I mentioned earlier , there have already been 30,000 redundancies in the space of a few weeks across all sectors and we are currently conducting a study to see what the repercussions will be on sectors working with the airlines .
The analysis of the cause of the redundancies is throwing up many and varied factors .
Some are due to the crisis per se , which started last spring .
Others are due to a fall in demand .
Some to the delay in adjusting capacity in order to correct the ratio between supply and demand after years of strong growth .
It is difficult to analyse the causes for all the redundancies immediately , but we shall certainly have to see where we can intervene directly and what part the European Union and the European Commission should play .
First of all , there is a relatively complete legal framework which allows companies to negotiate with their employees in order to find new working models in a bid to keep redundancies to a minimum .
British Airways and Alitalia , which have made a great many employees redundant , are already working with and keeping the workers ' representatives abreast of developments .
But of course legislation cannot stop the current round of redundancies , which is why available Community resources need to be used to deal with the fallout from the crisis .
There is an economic tool at European level - I refer to the European Social Fund - which can be used in three ways : first through the European Employment Strategy , for training and retraining employees made redundant or , often , in order to help them maintain their skills , which they risk losing on such a specialised job market .
The second way is by subsidising salaried employees whose jobs are at risk .
The problem of small and medium-sized satellite enterprises surrounding the airlines has already been raised .
The third way is for local and regional authorities to mobilise action programmes through the Social Fund to deal , for example , with the closure of small airports or local problems caused by redundancies or crises in specific sectors , so that they can be dealt with at regional level .
As far as the financial regulations for the European Social Fund are concerned , it is regulated at European level , but we have the flexibility to redirect funds in times of crisis or in special circumstances .
Certain measures for Sabena will be jointly funded by the European Social Fund .
These are the legislative and social tools currently available .
Of course , one of the most important tools in times of crisis is social dialogue and discussion with the social partners .
The European Commission set the European sectoral dialogue on air transport issues in motion following the crisis on 11 September .
We have already held meetings with the social partners through the Social Dialogue Committee and it has been decided that a European workshop will be held on 3 December , attended by all the sectors at social partner level and by national delegates from the fifteen Member States , in order to discuss the specific question of the repercussions on employment and the nascent social problems , in a bid to reach a joint agreement on measures which we can take into direct consideration .
Madam President , at this time of crisis , when it is hard to find answers and a recipe for recovery , we need proper and direct collaboration both between the European institutions and between the European institutions and the social partners before taking further steps .
Mr President , the reason for this urgent resolution is self-evident .
I should like firstly to thank the representatives from the other groups involved in drawing together this compromise .
It is true to say that since the attacks on the USA in September the aviation industry has suffered catastrophic consequences , not least on passenger confidence , but in addition for the tens of thousands of jobs which have already been lost worldwide and in particular across Europe .
Unfortunately this situation is not confined to the airline industry .
The knock-on effects are now evident , both in the aerospace manufacturing sector and in tourism .
In my own country , the United Kingdom , the slow recovery following the foot-and-mouth epidemic has suffered a major setback which is truly hard to bear .
Whatever the failures of some of the companies in the European Union to face the challenges of the business world , the vast majority of businesses have , through no fault of their own , found themselves on the brink of bankruptcy , or even worse .
I recall my own government , along with other national leaders , insisting within three or four days of the incident that help would be given as quickly as possible .
Unfortunately , apart from the short-term assistance concerning insurance cover , which should have been 180 days as at the outset in the United States , no financial help has been forthcoming .
I am not aware of any compensation for financial losses due to the closure of US airspace and airports , or for the additional security measures that the aviation industry has been expected to put in place .
It is Member States which should assume responsibility for security costs .
In short , the situation is a disgrace , not least because job losses outlined two months ago by many businesses are already escalating due to the lack of help .
We in this Parliament want action - and we want it now .
We are not interested in waiting for some case-by-case consideration by the Commission which may be agreed some time in the future .
We demand that interim financial aid packages be made available now to those eligible .
In conclusion , I must inform the Commission and the Council that it is my intention to keep this issue at the top of the agenda and I expect at the very least a report back to this Parliament at the November II part-session on the progress that has been made .
I hope that fellow MEPs will support the comments I have made , because we must remember that thousands of livelihoods are at stake .
Inaction is not an option , nor is a lecture on environmental issues , because at the rate we are going we will not have an aviation industry to worry about .
Madam President , I came to the Chamber this morning with a prepared speech about the situation in the airline industry .
I have radically altered that , in view of what I have heard from the President-in-Office and the Commissioner this morning .
Frankly , what we have heard is totally unacceptable .
We are faced with a classic scenario of the Council of Ministers fiddling like some modern-day Nero while the aviation industry of the European Union burns .
Madam President-in-Office , we are in a deep crisis .
You , more than anybody else , should know that from your own Member State .
Airlines have gone bankrupt .
Others are on the brink of bankruptcy - and what response do we get ?
We get a suggestion that the Commission can go and sit down with the Americans and talk to them about the aid they are giving to try and level the playing field .
By the time that happens there will not be a European civil aviation industry left to put on that level playing field !
We need action now .
We do not want fiddling at the edges , we want direct action so that our civil aviation industry can survive and have a future of its own .
The response from the United States after the events of 11 September was direct and straight to the point .
They made USD 5 billion available to their airlines straight away and offered another USD 10 billion in indirect aid to help them over other crises should they arise .
And what did we do ?
We fiddled at the edges and said , " Well , we might do this " and , as Mrs Foster said , " Well , we said you could pay compensation for the lost days " .
That is not enough .
We need direct action now .
What appalled me today was the tone of the contribution from the Commission and the President-in-Office .
It is as if they are accepting that airlines will have to go bust and that thousands of jobs will have to go , without doing anything to stop it .
Before today I suspected that Member States wanted to use this crisis to consolidate the industry , to get rid of some of the airlines .
Well , today the President-in-Office all but admitted that this is the case .
If that is so , then I condemn it .
Members of the trade unions are with us today in the gallery .
I say to them : I give you the support of my group in the quest to keep a European civil aviation industry alive .
Sadly , from what I have heard today , a similar commitment from the Council of Ministers seems to be a good way off .
I just wonder , Madam President-in-Office , whether people in history will remember the Belgian presidency of the year 2001 as the presidency that oversaw the demise of Europe 's civil aviation industry .
Madam President , I feel that a situation such as this requires us to keep calm .
My group supported the motion and is prepared to take part in any way it can in any action addressing the current situation quickly and immediately - and , I hope , effectively .
Three lines of action must be pursued : defending European industry fully against any unfair competition from the United States in the future ; speeding up the restructuring of European industry itself ; and meeting the obligations , which we had , moreover , already established before the crisis , to ensure , in any event , improved conditions of safety and respect for the environment than those hitherto in operation .
Europe has many objectives , which it must pursue simultaneously if we are to pull ourselves out of this situation .
This certainly means that we need the Council to confer a negotiating mandate upon the Commission as soon as possible , we need to be able to speak with one voice before the United States and we need to be able to monitor what happens on that front .
In other words , we must either defend ourselves or ensure that we all play according to the same rules in this situation .
However , the need to defend ourselves against attack from an industry which has taken less time to complete restructuring , which has regained its competitiveness first , must not be used an excuse not to change the current situation .
Therefore , we need to honour our aid commitments , within the limits laid down for aid for the past financial year , for insurance costs and for the extra security costs , but no more than this .
We must consistently maintain state aid within this framework and , what is more , be very astute in our management of the restructuring phases .
There is no doubt that European industry will have to go through some rather painful stages as it re-establishes itself and , therefore , it is quite likely that there may be more bankruptcies .
However , there are different ways of handling them .
That is a fundamental point , one on which it might be appropriate for both the Council of Ministers and the Commission to do more , to produce a few more proposals on how the transitions are to be handled .
One tiny example : the bankruptcy of Sabena or the restructuring of the new Sabena has led to a debate now on the allocation of slots on European routes .
There are small , competitive companies able to take on , to employ people who would be willing to take part in co-sharing operations on European routes .
Well then , we must not restrict ourselves to defence but be open to these possibilities too , in short , to a faster developing market : we must have the courage and the ability to keep up with it with active as well as defensive measures .
In this way , I feel we will also be able to meet the needs of the trade unions and workers very well , aware that this is the right way to ensure that there genuinely will be jobs in the long term .
One last point : this issue affects the services related to the aviation industry as well as airlines ; it affects the whole tourist industry .
If we do not succeed in restoring the confidence of our fellow citizens and persuading them to start flying again , much of the work we are doing will be wasted .
I have not yet heard anyone address this matter , but I feel it is the final task before us all .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , my group supports the policies set out by the Council Presidency and the Commission .
I believe that we should be careful not to miss the point here .
The air transport sector is experiencing a cyclical and structural crisis , as has been pointed out , but the whole of the European economy - and of the world economy - is also in crisis .
The real response to the employment problem is therefore , of course , to relaunch growth and general policies of social solidarity and job creation .
As far as the air transport sector is concerned , and in connection with the meeting on the social dialogue referred to by Mrs Diamantopoulou , I believe that the deterioration in working conditions and wages that is starting to occur in this sector is obviously a point to which we must pay a great deal of attention .
Moreover , at the level of the European Union , we would like to see the Community ' s competition policy adopted and , far from preventing the restructuring of the sector , coming to the aid of that sector , and we should also like this medium-term restructuring policy to be compatible with the policies set out in the White Paper on transport policy , in other words the development of a multi-mode transport policy which reflects , in the medium term , the real situation regarding costs for all sectors as a whole .
Finally , and I believe that it is necessary to draw attention to this point , this Parliament has always voted , by a clear majority , against any spiralling in state aids .
I would find it hard to understand if the majority of this House were to unleash a spiralling growth in state aid to one particular sector .
Finally , on the subject of the United States , let us be clear among ourselves .
The United States of America have presented us with a policy which is a fait accompli .
Their position on aid to their air transport sector is unacceptable and contrary to fair competition at international level .
Since we cannot , apparently , take the issue to the WTO , it is essential that in the context of the overall partnership between the United States and Europe , the European Union should be able to protect those legitimate interests which will , in the long term , work to the benefit of both the American and the European airlines .
Madam President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , the economic and employment situation in the airline industry and in the related industrial and services sectors is critical .
Although this situation was not caused solely by the events of 11 September , it was made much more acute as a result .
Air passengers ' confidence has fallen leading to a reduction in passenger numbers , losses have been incurred because of the closure of American airspace and airports , insurance cover has been withdrawn and there has been a decline in the numbers of tourists from the USA and the Far East : these are the main causes , as is the cancellation or postponing of orders for new aircraft .
The fundamental causes of this crisis are , however , of a structural nature : crippling competition between the airlines , built-in overcapacity , a general economic recession and bad decisions by management .
This motion for a European Parliament resolution refers to a host of necessary measures , for example compensation for the closure of airspace and airports , financial support or guarantees from the Member States to compensate for insurance cover being withdrawn , proposals on providing financial support to the European air transport sector so as to establish a level playing field with the United States and strategies to safeguard or create jobs .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left supports this motion , although we are aware that it is intended as a very short-term measure and can only constitute a first step , but a step which should be taken immediately .
In the medium and long term , we need a harmonised European airspace , higher standards of quality and safety , highly trained staff , high social standards and no low wages .
The mass redundancies which were announced in the air transport sector even before 11 September are absolutely unacceptable to us .
We need a strategy to coordinate the different modes of transport ; we need an all-embracing European transport strategy .
This problem cannot be solved on a mode-by-mode basis .
Mr President , after the shock of 11 September , the tragic scale of the crisis in the aviation industry and its related services was already apparent , but the situation has become even more complex with the events of recent days .
We are now faced with a problem : the problem of the crisis in general and a problem of safety too , which , if the theory on the plane crash should prove to be true , would prompt us to focus more closely on the issue of servicing of aircraft for safety purposes .
Without a doubt , the state of war and the economics of war then precipitated events into a genuine crisis for the airlines which has already had extreme consequences for Sabena and Swissair .
As has already been pointed out , the crisis , due to many different causes , not least - there is no doubt - clear strategic mismanagement of the sector , with airlines ( which we might describe as too individualistic ) unwilling to form consortia , which would have allowed them to streamline human , structural and financial resources ; we have seen pricing policies which are misguided and often seeking to evade competition law ; there are airports - such as Malpensa , to quote an example from my country - which are unreliable in terms of safety as well .
It is clear today that , in the current situation , the issue has reached dramatic , critical proportions , with the loss of at least 30 thousand jobs in Europe and 180 thousand jobs worldwide .
In Italy , my country ' s national airline company has contemplated recapitalisation .
It is preparing itself to take draconian measures , with a further 1 000 job cuts on top of the 2 500 already announced .
Italiatour , Eurofly and the IT services company Sigma Travel will be drastically reduced in size , if not abolished .
The recapitalisation will have to be endorsed by Brussels .
The Commission had already authorised , on 17 October , payment of a public subsidy of EUR 387 million , but Alitalia needs EUR 1.5 billion and we do not know how useful the shares created by the Treasury by issuing bonds will be .
Strengthening commercial links with Air France or joining the Skyteam consortium are likely to be more effective in terms of structural reform .
In conclusion , we endorse the joint motion for a resolution and we feel that the situation calls for various different types of action from the European Union , extremely urgent action which , with the precious help of the European social partners , will succeed in firmly stopping the severely critical situation from further deteriorating now .
Subsequently , however , it will be necessary to plan action to modernise and streamline the sector and to take clear , incisive measures to boost tourism , which , as has already been pointed out , is a sector which , all too often , to be honest , is discussed at length but in which very little is as yet being done .
Lastly , we hope that the forthcoming reflections on the White Paper on transport will lead to resolute , incisive undertakings to support the transport and tourism sector ' s economy , helping the many workers and their families , in particular , who must not be allowed to suffer further misfortune .
Madam President , the terrorist massacres of 11 September and last Monday ' s aircraft disaster have jolted us into an awareness of the transience of life and to the way in which our society is interconnected .
An attack in the United States is also an attack on the rest of the civilised world , and vice versa .
Now the effects are making themselves increasingly felt , we must also look to solve the economic implications .
In our opinion , the solution should fit into the line that the European Union has adopted in the transport sector .
In principle , businesses must operate without direct government subsidies .
Whether or not we should make an exception in this case should , however , be placed in the correct context .
After all , aviation is a worldwide market .
It is not acceptable , therefore , for European companies to go under because governments refuse to grant emergency aid , while elsewhere , government participation keeps companies afloat .
In view of the measures which the United States has taken , the zero option has been ruled out for the European Union .
We will need to establish , therefore , how far we can , want , and are able to , go , and the sooner the better .
This question is not restricted to aviation . Indeed , in addition to aviation , there are all kinds of related industries , including tourism , that have been hit hard .
We must also distinguish between short-term and long-term measures .
In the first instance , aid must remain restricted to the industry affected and to the damage which is the direct result of 11 September .
The payment of insurance costs is logical and , in principle , a certain compensation for lost income is also necessary , because otherwise there would probably only be a few airline companies left in the European Union .
However , that does not mean that we will prevent already financially unstable businesses from folding under the veil of compensation .
I would now like to focus on the longer term .
Since aviation has acquired a global character and attractive services are on offer , businesses are increasingly forced to seek economies of scale .
As a result , fewer companies will remain in business , not only in the European Union , but also outside .
The sector will then become truly global .
National and bilateral legislation , as well as certain existing rights , must be tailored to this .
It is not national claims , but the market that plays a decisive role in respect of such rights .
In that light , I endorse the measures which the European Commission is proposing and I expect that they will also be able to benefit the European Union in other areas .
Madam President , the bankruptcy of the Belgian airline company Sabena a few days ago is not only the biggest bankruptcy in Belgian history , but it is first and foremost a human and social tragedy for between approximately 7 500 and 12 000 workers .
It has already been said , and it is obvious , that Sabena is not an isolated incident .
There are a huge number of airline companies that are going through very difficult times , and the events of 11 September have only made matters worse .
I am aware of this , but with regard to Sabena , it has to be said that the President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Durant , has kept two fundamental facts from this Parliament .
Firstly , Sabena has been continuously loss making for the last 40 years , except for one year , and that was probably thanks to an accountancy trick .
For the past 40 years , the taxpayers have had to inject no less than BEF 62 billion into that company .
Secondly , the cause .
Sabena was a Belgian public company with all the hallmarks of the Belgian State and of the Parti Socialiste .
That translated into political profiteering , political appointments of the manifestly incompetent and political interference by the Belgian Royal House to keep the company in French-speaking hands .
For that reason , the alliance with KLM was sabotaged . Everyone knows that in my country .
In fact , parliament is currently setting up a parliamentary inquiry committee in order to scrutinise years of mismanagement , and , in my country , this is saying something .
We are all agreed that the airline industry is having a bumpy ride , and we must find a solution in Europe on the basis of a policy of " Europe first " as long as the Americans are putting " America first " .
However , in the Sabena dossier , we must first of all identify those responsible , notably in the Belgian Royal House and in the successive Belgian Governments .
Mr President , needless to say , airline companies , the aviation industry and tourism are the primary and most visible victims of 11 September , but let us not forget that outside tourism , many small- and medium-sized enterprises and their workers in the supply industry and in the geographical vicinity of airports , will also be directly affected by the tragedy .
In Belgium , the small- and medium-sized enterprises expect one redundancy per job lost at Sabena .
In our view , it should be ensured that government aid , in whatever form , benefits all industries affected .
We are also relying on the fact that the measures which the Commission can take are carried out promptly and on a large scale .
The following measures spring to mind in the first instance : the creating of scope for government investments in the safety of air transport , the prompt handling of specific financial aid dossiers and extended flexibility , albeit limited in time , in slot management .
The extremely difficult situation should also prompt the Commission to clamp down on competition-distorting practices in transatlantic relations .
In this day and age , we are dependent on many factors .
If they all go wrong at the same time , we will end up with a right mess , and Sabena is a tragic case in point .
As a Belgian MP , I would urge that DAT be treated like any other airline company that is being affected by the effects of 11 September .
DAT should also be seen as a company that is being restructured , and must have access to the same facilities which other companies would have at their disposal in the same situation .
Finally , I wish the workers and independent businesses that are the victims of this situation a great deal of strength , and I hope that we can offer them better prospects in the short term .
Mr President , faced with the social catastrophe which the collapse of Sabena represents for Belgium , I should like to add a little humanity to this sitting , by dedicating my first words to all those who , from one day to the next , found themselves , to put it bluntly , deprived of their jobs .
I would ask those who would seek to use this specific issue in order to criticise public enterprises to measure well the responsibilities of all those concerned .
Yes , Europe is responsible when , along with the Commission , certain parties urge rapid , inhumane and brutal liberalisation , and yes , Europe now appears to everyone to be the real driving force behind this process .
People no longer want this kind of Europe .
They now want to construct with us a social Europe , the Europe that we defended at Lisbon , which develops convergence indicators in order to increase employment and combat unemployment , in other words a Europe which refuses to be dictated to by the market .
The 12 000 Sabena workers who were dismissed at the beginning of this month are the first victims of this wave of liberalisation in civil aviation .
The results of other European companies are giving cause for concern .
Thousands of people are afraid of being thrown out of work , and they cannot understand the intransigence of the European Commission over repayment times for bridging loans to the Belgian company , while the United States are spending billions of dollars on subsidising their national airlines so that they can keep their European slots .
They find it unacceptable that the Commission should give preference to sanctions and ukases , in the name of the virtues of liberalism and the market , while at the same time that out-of-control liberalism culminates in companies in Europe closing down one after the other .
By setting up the Lisbon process , the Community authorities and the Member States have proved that they are capable of taking into account the human and territorial consequences implied by every decision .
Such blind liberalisation will do nothing to advance the cause of the European idea or to increase confidence in Europe ' s institutions and in our plans for peace and social progress .
It will inevitably lead the public to reject this European and simplistic vision .
Commissioner , the European Parliament ' s vote on the Langen report two days ago , confirmed that there are certain sectors that should not be open to competition , and among those sectors are the sectors with which you are concerned .
Let us be clear about this , we do not reject the idea of modern and efficient public enterprises , and we do not want them to be sacrificed and ridiculed .
We are waiting for a forward-looking vision of economic development , a project which is humane and intelligent , and which will enable sustainable development to be achieved .
I hope that that is what we shall see on 3 December .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , what has happened with Sabena in my country is very tragic , and I am pleased that the Belgian Government is making a huge effort to try to cushion the direct and indirect social effects .
Needless to say , that is never entirely possible with a bankruptcy of this scale , but it is important nevertheless that an effort is also being made indirectly , in the area of training and in-service training .
I should also like to ask the Commissioner to advise soon whether something will also be done at European level , what the amounts will be that are involved and what kind of efforts will be made in respect of various airline companies .
Sabena is , of course , a spectacular case , but social tragedies are also unfolding in other airline companies .
That is where a European approach and European support are needed , so that people know that Europe is doing something , for my fellow MEP quite rightly pointed out that at the moment we have a one-sided image of Europe which , in my view , should be rectified .
One thing is clear to me .
In my opinion , the role of the Member States and of an individual approach to aviation per Member State is over .
We have been saying this for years , even if some people in this Parliament still believe that a national approach must be maintained .
That era should finally come to an end , in my view .
We must opt for a European approach .
National state aid to airline companies makes no sense whatsoever .
We must decide very quickly on whether - and I share your view in this , Mr Simpson - European aid to a European sector is possible and on the conditions under which that can be done .
However , I do not think the problem is solved by saying : OK , they put USD 5 billion on the table , we will put EUR 5 billion on the table .
In my view , the problem will not be solved in that way , for this financial solution must be accompanied by a simultaneous restructuring scheme .
There was no point in getting the Belgian Government , or possibly the European Government , to bail out Sabena once again and to keep it in the air .
Sabena had to restructure and do something , which happened in too painful a manner .
They have waited for too long to do this rationally .
Instead , it is now happening in a chaotic manner .
That is unfortunate , but I believe we should learn from this .
The fact that Sabena is the first national airline company to go bankrupt in the Union speaks volumes .
We tend to hold on to national airline companies , and those days are over , as various MEPs have stated today .
We must adopt a European approach .
That implies air traffic control , security measures and agreements with third countries .
Mrs Durant , I am pleased that you are offering a window in this respect , but I hope that you can convince all your colleagues , for that is exactly what the opposition in the Council was about .
Member States are reluctant to relinquish this authority , and refuse to join forces at European level , and we are now paying the price for this. the Americans are able to adopt a joint policy , but we are not .
You are not represented at international level when aviation is at issue .
It is the fifteen Member States that conclude agreements with open skies etc. and that compete with each other politically .
I hope , therefore , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , that you will be able to convince your colleagues .
And I hope that everyone here in this Parliament is convinced of the fact that we must at long last respond at European , rather than national , level .
Mr President , I actually believe that , faced with the recession in the aviation industry and in air transport , we need some strong decisions in order to restore confidence and open up real prospects .
I personally am not satisfied with the Commission ' s response , which favours the speeding up of restructuring in the air transport sector .
I am in favour of a European approach . We can discuss and comment on the content of that approach later .
As for restoring confidence , I believe that confidence is actually a product of safety , and the safety dimension in this sector , as in others , is dependent upon the expertise , competence and qualifications of the staff employed .
Commissioner , I am absolutely in agreement with you on the urgent need to develop the social dialogue , but we cannot just be content with a social dialogue at a time when people are facing the problem of redundancies .
Is anyone really listening to the employees concerned ?
They too have comments , and thoughts , and proposals , and in view of what we have just decided regarding the consultation of workers , perhaps that could be implemented much more rapidly .
I also believe that restoring confidence involves learning lessons from the present crisis and putting a stop to the process of liberalisation that is currently underway .
Frankly , I do not believe that the liberalisation that has developed in this sector has contributed towards its development . In fact I would rather say that it has contributed towards its difficulties .
Restoring confidence also means , at any given moment , taking responsibility for providing assistance .
I believe that the limited targeted measures are insufficient to cope with this crisis .
Since the American aid is considerable , I believe that there should be compensatory aid in the air transport sector , but that it should also be made conditional upon maintaining jobs .
Finally , I believe that we also need to open up prospects .
It seems to me that among our long-term prospects we should be looking at how the European Union can work , not towards concentrations , but towards the development of international cooperation , on safety and the management of air traffic , between the airlines and the public authorities .
Mr President , I believe that we should also increase cooperation between air and rail transport , and that airports should be integrated into the trans-European networks .
Mr President , the terrorist attacks in September have disrupted the operations of many airline companies in Europe , resulting in job losses in the aviation industry and a reduction in the number of overseas tourists coming to Europe .
We want to ensure that we retain competitive airline companies in Europe .
I agree with the key proposals included in the compromise resolutions that are before us today .
It is important that the Commission works out a set of proposals which make it possible for the European airline industry to withstand the competition resulting from the massive help which the American Government is giving American airlines at this time .
We must ensure that the European aviation industry receives equal treatment vis-à-vis our American airline counterparts , particularly when it comes to addressing transatlantic arrangements .
For example , from an Irish perspective , Aer Lingus is highly dependent on transatlantic travel .
Other EU airlines also make a substantial profit from their transatlantic routes .
It is important that these EU airlines can compete against the American airlines which have received state aid from the American Government in recent times .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I should like to comment on just two aspects , socially acceptable and economically reasonable restructuring in the aviation industry .
Madam President-in-Office , you were too generous in your comments just now when you said that the Council had in fact responded consistently .
I have my doubts about this , Madam President-in-Office , and I should like to urge you in the strongest possible terms to ensure that the same subsidies - whether it be for insurance cover , whether it be compensation , or whether it be possible restructuring aid - are granted or not granted in all of the Member States .
It is not acceptable for airlines to be supported in a particular way in one Member State and not in another when all are supposed to be competing fairly in an internal market .
This cannot work .
We want to establish fair terms of competition between the airlines .
As President-in-Office of the Council you must ensure that this is the case and you , Commissioner , must , if necessary , take the Member States to court if there are distortions of competition here which destroy the internal market .
Secondly , Madam President-in-Office , you rightly referred to the fact that restructuring is necessary .
Probably there will be a number of larger global players and some regional airlines .
They cannot be bound to Member State A or Member State B. We need a functioning European and global air transport market .
This can only happen , Madam President-in-Office , if the Member States cede their responsibilities for take-off and landing rights to the Community and if we administer the take-off and landing rights together .
Only then can we give our airlines a chance to compete on fair terms in the global market .
I would earnestly request that in the next few weeks you do all you can to bring your influence to bear on your Member States on these two points .
Mr President , in making our decisions on the aviation industry in Europe we have to take account of the interconnectedness of our economies and politics in Europe and globally as well .
The fact is that Aer Lingus in Ireland had already been hit by the downturn in the high-tech industries where much of the lucrative business travel for Aer Lingus had already been badly hit because businessmen and women were simply not travelling back and forth across the Atlantic .
Clearly , 11 September virtually wiped out that business .
Tourism is also a major linchpin in the economy of Ireland .
Our airline is an important asset in that area of the industry .
If we allow that to go down the drain , who is going to service the Irish tourist economy ?
The Council and the Commission are , I am afraid , confused .
They are minimalist and grudging in their response to this crisis for the Irish airline .
That is perceived to be so by the workers of Aer Lingus and the Irish people in general .
We will pay the price in Europe for that perception .
It is important that we recognise that the national carrier in every Member State in Europe is as important as the national anthem or the national flag .
You can shake your head , but that is the reality .
We have to take that into account .
We may regret it , but we must take it into account in dealing with this crisis .
Finally , there are four things I would ask the Commission and the Council to address .
There is an urgent need for a reply to the Irish Government 's request to the Commission for permission to assist the Irish airline with the compensation that is due as a result of 11 September .
There is an urgent need for the reform of the competition rules .
There is an urgent need for assistance to help companies create alliances at a European level , which will ensure that the national carriers are not annihilated .
Finally , we need firm proposals for the social fund package that has been talked about here today .
Parliament should be discussing those proposals when we next meet in Strasbourg in December , not next June .
Mr President , the fact of the matter is that , even in the air transport industry , the law of the jungle and the savage neo-liberal policy which applies are such that mergers have taken place and national airlines which enjoyed periods of strong growth in the past have gone bankrupt , a blatant example being the bankruptcy of Swissair and Sabena .
And no doubt others will follow . In the medium term at least , two or three large airlines will survive in Europe to share the pickings with the American behemoths which , with the connivance of our governments , have taken pains to penetrate and take over the European market .
The terrorist attacks on 11 September have intensified the crisis and been used as an excuse for cutbacks and mass redundancies .
And in what is already a dismal situation for many national carriers , along comes the Commission to administer the coup de grace by prohibiting state aid , at a time when the US government is injecting its behemoths with massive amounts in aid .
There can be no doubt that this situation is here to stay and , the more capital is concentrated , the more the workers and consumers will be expected to pick up the tab in the form of job losses and more and more expensive tickets .
That is why the only solution is to support the fight to get this policy reversed and get rid of those who apply it .
Mr President , we have to restore public confidence in aviation and we have to let the market decide what happens to the airlines themselves .
Restoring public confidence means getting security screening right and improving the quality of staff , training , job procedures , pay and conditions .
It means , perhaps , ensuring that there is a state-run security operation at airports and paying accordingly .
That may well create more jobs .
So far as the airlines and their financial viability are concerned , we do not want more intervention , more bureaucracy and more delay .
We need targeted assistance in areas like insurance and the cost of security .
We must let the market decide what the future of the airline industry shall be .
As was said earlier , Sabena made a profit in only one year out of the many years that it has been in existence .
Aer Lingus , Alitalia , Air France and KLM are not far behind .
Why the devil should we support Aer Lingus when Ryanair can make money without any difficulties at all - like Easyjet , like GO , like Buzz ?
All those airlines can make money at a difficult time .
Why should we therefore bail out the Sabenas and the Aer Linguses with their overcapacity , with too many routes , too few passengers and too much state pride ?
I have two specific questions that I wish to ask the President-in-Office of the Council .
Firstly , I am led to believe that there are problems with the Sabena slots that have been offered , in Britain , for example , to British Midland and British European Airways .
They may have them for a short time but there is some suggestion from the coordinator that they may be lost in six months time if DAT is reformed and wants those slots back .
That is unacceptable .
If Sabena cannot fill those slots then others should be allowed to use them .
Secondly , what is being done to ensure that the staff at Brussels airport does not restrict the movement of those new-slot airlines as a result of picketing and delays at the airport ?
We need guarantees of freedom of movement on the ground as well as in the air .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it would be a shame if , at this difficult time , the European institutions were to fall into the trap of being both overzealous and too market-oriented at the same time .
On the one hand , in the name of what is in this case totally blinkered liberalisation , they require full adherence to the State aid system , which prevents any action being taken to support airlines . On the other hand , there is a genuine danger that we will find ourselves - there have already been 30 000 job losses within the space of 30 days - with 100 000 jobs being lost in 100 days , in a sector which , moreover , enjoys little in the way of social protection .
For two months , we have been saying that 11 September changed the world and the balance of society .
It would be a shame if we were to miss the political significance of this and fail to review the order of our priorities .
In European integration based on social cohesion , in a Europe built on the fundamental principle of work , what priority should we today give to the risk of an uncontrolled wave of unemployment ?
Do we still think we can prevent the inevitable market crisis ?
We are all aware that this crisis has roots in the past , that it is more than just a consequence of the events of 11 September , that it is also the result of excessive market fragmentation .
However , we do not feel that going to the opposite extreme - bringing about a huge merger which would ultimately only save three national airlines : the French , British and German companies - would be a healthy solution .
We are actually not so very far off this situation , considering what happened to Sabena and the engineered drop in the nominal value of the shares of a large number of airlines which are in danger of selling at a loss .
A prime example is Alitalia .
Lastly , Mr President , I welcome the code of conduct for US airlines intended to avoid piracy in the market , provided that , as others have said , the European governments do genuinely intend to enforce it , for otherwise it will be just another list of unfulfilled good intentions .
Mr President , the International Transport Agency anticipates that a total of 200 000 people will lose their jobs in the airline industry worldwide in the wake of the attacks .
This organisation also expects that the total losses incurred in this industry will amount to 7 billion this year , and that it will take twelve months before the industry will recover .
That is what we are facing here : a worldwide crisis which has major ramifications for Europe .
That is point one .
Point two - and this has already been mentioned by a number of speakers - is that this industry had been in a very bad way for a long time .
I often have to take the floor when we deal with enormous job losses , and it is always a sad occasion . This time is no exception .
However , there is something peculiar about it this time round . Part of the guilty party is sitting directly opposite me , namely the Council itself .
We ask in our resolution for a European airline industry and a European airline policy .
What the Council has offered us is a policy of national carriers where everyone acts in their own self-interest and everyone wants to conclude their own agreements with the United States .
Mr De Rossa said that the national carrier is as sacred as the national anthem .
If that is the attitude , then we will never solve the problem , of course .
If we all act in our own self-interest , we will be unable to reach a European solution .
We will then end up in a frosty restructuring programme , which is exactly what is now threatening to happen .
I think we are all agreed that that should not happen , but we must get the idea out of our heads that we can still have national carriers in this internal market .
It is impossible to pursue sound social policy if the economic backdrop is in total disarray , and as far as that is concerned , the Council is innocent in all of this .
The Commission has made a very good effort .
There are many proposals before us , but these have all been rejected by the Council .
The first thing the Council should allow the Commission to do is to talk with the United States on its own .
If that is not done , other things should not be discussed either .
Mr President , the tragic events of 11 September have certainly changed the face of the aviation industry and will probably have more effects in the months to come .
Today I want to deal with the effect they are having on the regional areas of Europe , rather than the major cities like London , Birmingham and Paris , because they will survive and receive support .
We in Northern Ireland watched with interest as Sabena pulled out , and then Aer Lingus , which provided a service from Belfast to Shannon for transatlantic flights and was used by many people in Northern Ireland .
The Republic of Ireland 's Government said it wanted greater cooperation with Northern Ireland , but the first time there is a bit of trouble , it runs away !
That is the kind of cooperation we Unionists have to put up with !
No one can persuade me that some of these large companies have not used this situation to put some of their own problems right .
British Airways stayed in Northern Ireland and stood by its staff through bombs and bullets .
What has it done ?
It has pulled out of Northern Ireland as well !
I condemn it for that .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will ensure that it is not allowed to keep those slots in order to open up more lucrative routes and that if other companies are prepared to start up from the regions those slots will be given to them .
I certainly feel very strongly about this .
I am not in favour of giving large amounts of money to bail out inefficient companies .
To some extent Mr Atkins is right : there are other companies out there which are making money and they have to be supported .
I say to the Commission and the Council that they cannot come here and give us a lecture .
They will have to come back with firm and positive proposals .
It is time for action and time for a dose of realism .
If the Council and the Commission cannot do it now , we will harry them until they do !
Mr President , briefly , on the subject of the discussion that we have just heard , I do not believe that anyone here , either the Council , or the Commission , or any one of us , has exclusive rights to indignation in the face of the social problems that are occurring now for each of these airlines , and perhaps for some of them more than others .
I am particularly well-placed to know all about that .
I believe that this social crisis that is being experienced by a certain number of those who operate and work in the air transport sector is obviously a challenge to all of us .
However , I also believe that , despite this challenge and the need to react to this problem , to follow the road that we took in the past , via massive state aid , would be to avoid or conceal a situation which was already in existence before 11 September .
This is a fragile sector , in which the profit margins have been extremely low in recent years . Therefore , despite the indignation that we all feel in the face of the current social problem , I believe that to imagine that simply returning to massive structural aid will solve the problems in this sector would be to evade an obstacle which will confront us again later , in an even more dramatic form .
I really believe , on behalf of the Council , even though this debate has only just started in the Council , that it will not be easy , and what you have said today demonstrates that .
We well know how much Member States are attached to their national airlines and how important that attachment is , and here I am speaking more on my own account than on behalf of the Council , where we shall soon have to start these discussions .
We have made an immediate start by giving immediate and specific responses in this sector .
Yes , there is aid in various forms .
There are specific and targeted forms of aid with regard to the closure of airspace , and the possibility of providing even more , on the basis of objective criteria .
There has been aid in connection with insurance facilities .
There are other types of aid , not financial aid , regarding the problem of time slots , so as to enable the airlines to keep their heads above water , or at least not to sink any deeper .
There have been responses .
I also believe that what we have done regarding the matter of security is an immediate response concerning those elements which will restore passengers ' confidence in the safety and security aspects , which are obviously so essential if the public is to regain confidence .
I therefore believe that the responses which have been given by the Council and the Commission are immediate responses .
It is true that the social crises which we are experiencing in various European airlines , and particularly in Belgium , and which also call for social responses involving taking these problems into consideration , should not cover up the urgent need to begin a debate , within the Council , on a more structural consolidation of the sector . This is without a doubt the only way of giving to this sector , in structural terms , not only the social responses which it needs , but also economic responses , and responses which will guarantee its long-term survival , not forgetting - as some of you have mentioned - the need for multi-mode transport systems , the need to place air transport too in the context of short-distance journeys at European level , the development of the high-speed train and any other alternatives which will enable us , in that context too , to provide responses at the level of a common transport policy .
However , I really believe that a return to massive state aid would be a step in the wrong direction , a step backwards , and a step which would , above all , risk leading us , at a later date , into even more serious difficulties .
By contrast , we have provided specific responses , and there are other responses to come : the security regulation , which I hope we shall be able to agree on on 7 December .
I also hope that it will be possible for Parliament to contribute its views on this subject to the debate as well .
There is still an enormous amount of work to do , but I really think that the time has come to begin these discussions on structural consolidation , in addition to the specific responses which have already been provided and which were necessary in the very short term .
Mr President , this has been a highly political debate in which the problem now facing all the Member States has been aired , as have the widely differing views and approaches which are reflected in both the European Parliament and the Council .
Two major sets of issues have been debated .
The first relates to the restructuring of the airlines .
The second relates to the need for social intervention .
As far as the first is concerned , I think that all the speakers agreed on the need for restructuring and for a new airline model in Europe .
There are three points worth making here : first , the present traditional model of ownership and control obviously will not allow the degree of restructuring we would like , or rather the degree of restructuring required .
Meaning that we need a new approach , with a more European dimension .
The second point is that , in today 's global world , Europe is not negotiating with one voice .
This works to the detriment of the European airlines .
And the third point relates to state aid .
The point was made that we are debating whether or not to support the airlines and that , when we finally make our decision , it will be too late , because the European airlines will already have gone out of business .
The law on state aid is not the Koran .
Let us assume that a decision is taken on state aid .
What tool do we have at European level ?
Can we decide to give state aid to airlines ?
Of course not .
What we can decide at European level is a yes or a no and the facility to grant state aid then shifts to the national level .
Meaning that we have national governments with different capabilities , different frameworks and different airlines .
Meaning that we will probably end up with a direct distortion of competition and the internal market .
Consequently , the state aid path is a hard path to tread as things currently stand in Europe .
To focus on three of the points of the dialogue , I would simply highlight what was said repeatedly by the members and the Belgian minister .
That now more than ever we need a European transport policy , not national policies which at the moment are leading nowhere fast .
As far as the second line of approach - social policy - is concerned , I analysed the potential for intervention under the Social Fund in my first intervention .
Policy to deal with the social fallout and employment needs to be taken , of course , at local , national and European level .
As far as intervention under the Social Fund is concerned , as we have been asked directly to table proposals , I should like to say that , depending on their particular circumstances and the problems which redundancies cause them , the Member States will need to table proposals to change their current programme for the community support framework so that it can be approved by the Commission .
This has already been done in other sectors with large companies being restructured both in Great Britain and France .
Consequently , it is up to the Member States to act fast and adjust their Social Fund programmes along these lines .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I have received six motions for resolution pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Combating social exclusion
The next item is the report ( A5-0372 / 2001 ) , by Mrs Figueiredo , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a programme of Community action to encourage cooperation between the Member States to combat social exclusion [ C5-0439 / 2001 - 2000 / 0157 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , as is well-known , and as the recent Commission report on social inclusion confirms , poverty remains at excessively high levels .
Although the latest available data on incomes in the Member States does not capture the whole complexity and multi-faceted nature of the scale of poverty and social exclusion , it does show that in 1997 , around 18 % of the population of European Union , in other words , more than 60 million people , lived in homes in which the income was less than 60 % of the average national income and that around half of these 60 million people had lived below the relative poverty threshold for three consecutive years .
This situation shows how crucial it is that we implement a global strategy for combating poverty and social exclusion , defending human rights in all their aspects , and that this programme is an instrument that must be implemented urgently .
One year ago , in this House , we approved at first reading the report on this Community programme of providing incentives for cooperation between Member States in the fight against social exclusion as an important aspect of the strategy to combat poverty which the Council spoke of so much at the Lisbon summit in March of 2000 .
At the same time , however , the Member States have given new commitments , with the definition , in Nice , of the objectives of the fight against poverty , and in Stockholm , where they committed themselves to promoting sustainable development and quality jobs , confirming their desire to thereby contribute to reducing the risk of poverty and social exclusion .
National plans for social inclusion were also drawn up , identifying a set of factors that considerably increase the risk of poverty and social exclusion , such as unemployment , especially long-term unemployment , low income , low-quality employment , lack of proper housing , unstable health , immigration , early school-leaving , gender inequality , discrimination and racism , disability , old age , family breakdown , drug addiction and alcoholism , and living in a highly disadvantaged area .
Sometimes , these risk factors interact and combine over time , and it is therefore necessary to break the recurring cycle of poverty and to prevent intergenerational poverty and new forms of poverty , including info-exclusion .
It is in this context that the programme becomes especially significant , as yet another instrument with which to fight poverty and social exclusion , which as we see , is continuing to increase .
Lastly , after overcoming the Council ' s intransigence on aspects that Parliament has always considered to be essential , specifically with regard to the programme ' s budget , the participation of NGOs and financial support for them , the role of the European Parliament and the promotion of innovative approaches , we have reached the end of a long process that includes a second reading on 17 May this year , various working meetings with the Belgian presidency and conciliation , in which , finally , consensus was reached on 18 September .
With regard to the agreement that has been reached , it is important to mention the aspects dealing with the budget and its increase by EUR 5 million to EUR 75 million for the five years of the programme , which is still insufficient , but , given the Council ' s intransigence , not reaching an agreement would have meant the programme not coming into force at the beginning of next year .
A decision was also reached on promoting innovative approaches and financial support for actions undertaken by NGOs , which has increased from 80 % to 90 % in exceptional circumstances . It is also worth noting that agreement was reached on the participation of NGOs , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , in preparing and holding the annual Round table on the situation ' s development and the programme ' s implementation .
It is also important to point out that the role of the European Parliament has been acknowledged , specifically in the timely consideration of the synthesis report for the Spring Council , which the Commission will draw up annually and which will examine the overall coherence of policies with social cohesion , including the progress made under this programme .
Lastly , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank everyone who has taken part and contributed to this proposal ' s success and for the consensus reached in the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament .
Mr President , may I express my political group 's satisfaction with the fact that , for the first time at European level , we are now ready to apply a Community strategy to combat social exclusion .
We have urgent challenges to meet .
Not only is it unacceptable for so many million citizens in the European Union and candidate countries to be living below the poverty line , but the knowledge society which we are creating and the increasingly multicultural society in which we live in Europe harbour new risks of social exclusion .
What is important is that this social programme will give us the chance to process our policies on the basis of modern scientific data , on the basis of statistical studies and on the basis of exchanges of best practices , including with countries outside the European Union , such as those in the European Economic Area .
This is particularly important for Member States unused to applying strategies based on social research , the very countries which now face the most serious social problems .
The European Parliament , as the rapporteur , Mrs Figueiredo has just said , had high hopes of this Community programme .
Nevertheless , it supports the joint text brokered during conciliation with the Council and is satisfied with the constructive part played by the European Commission .
The rapporteur has already listed the main points of this conciliation .
We particularly wanted to highlight the innovative approach which the European Commission has promised to promote in order to ensure that citizens with special difficulties are integrated into society .
The ground which we need to cover between now and 2010 , the timeframe and political milestone set in Lisbon , will be a long , hard haul and it is crucial , in our view , that the European Council in Laeken set its stamp very firmly on this effort .
We have special need of such decisiveness at this time when , as the previous debate highlighted , we are feeling the economic and social fallout from the crisis provoked by 11 September more and more acutely in Europe ; at the same time , the Member States need to move into action by instigating public dialogue and integrating the fight against social exclusion into all their policies .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs had quite a struggle over this issue of combating social exclusion .
I should like to point out that it was more or less unanimous throughout the procedure , and was served by an excellent rapporteur .
However , conciliation , which we had thought would be easy , since we were so much in accord with the Council ' s motives when it adopted the Commission ' s proposal , proved surprisingly tough and difficult .
I should therefore like to remind the House , briefly , of the reasons for our insistence .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and , I am sure , Parliament as a whole , approves the choice of the open-cooperation method .
It has proved its worth in this area .
We also agree that social exclusion is a complex and multi-facetted process , and that it is necessary to study it in greater depth , particularly as regards its links with poverty .
There are people on the margins of society who are not poor , and not all poor people are excluded , but the area of overlapping is a very large one .
It is not possible to separate the two problems .
However , one of the major strengths of the open-cooperation method is the fact that it allows the exchange of good practice .
It is here that Europe has a responsibility , or I would prefer to say a duty , to experiment and to lead by example .
The information already collected enables us to launch innovative schemes and pilot projects with confidence .
In addition , Commissioner , you are a politician , as we are .
How could you imagine for a moment that we could sell to our voters the idea that , on a problem as serious and as evident as social exclusion , Europe is able only to finance studies , and is not able to take any practical action ?
This sort of thing is suicidal as far as Europe ' s image is concerned , hence the innovatory approaches that you have finally conceded to us .
Fortunately you have other mechanisms , we know , but given the importance of this preoccupation it was necessary to include it .
The controversy over the budget arises from this . You have granted us only five million .
Since we know that you had plans ready for carrying out these studies , we would like to have a guarantee that there will be money available for innovative experiments .
In the same way , the NGOs must be able to work without having to look for unlikely external sponsors .
Well , we have achieved this , and the text has been improved .
I wish the Commission all the best in carrying out the task that lies before it .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her serious and very committed work on this issue and also the work that our own committee has done , as Mr Rocard has just pointed out .
This action programme is a very serious and important step forward for the European Union .
It is part of the recognition of the huge problem of social exclusion which is not only the result of poverty , although it is of course linked to it .
Some of those links are picked up in the excellent report by Mrs Lynne which we will be debating later , concerning the European Year of Disabled People , and in Mr Nobilia 's report which recognises the problems faced by elderly or disabled people in exercising , for example , their freedom of movement because disability benefits are not included in the coordination of social security systems .
In our discussions on this action programme , Parliament has insisted on the need for civil society to be involved in the programme itself and its evaluation .
This involvement is critical .
It is clear that the top-down policies , and the hope that overall economic growth would somehow overcome the poverty and lift the poorest out of that state , have not worked .
It is the constructive involvement of the people themselves that is part of the solution .
We therefore expect that the research and programmes funded with this modestly increased amount of money , a limited range as Mr Rocard has just said , will not just concentrate on policy but also on the process of policy formulation and funding decisions , which in itself could be an innovative dimension .
I recently attended a local government conference looking at the national social inclusion plans .
Speakers representing organisations from groups which often experience social exclusion - poor people , those with disabilities , those from minority ethnic groups etc. were asked whether they would rather see the implementation of a few policies that have worked elsewhere or have a full programme of real consultation , even if they did not then get what they wanted .
The answer , without exception , was that they wanted to be consulted because that implied respect for their experience and their opinions .
It is also my hope that the activities funded under this programme will not just concentrate on work as the answer to exclusion .
It is not a solution if the work is poorly paid and exploitative .
I , like many others , look forward to reading and evaluating the results of this programme and hope that they will make real progress in tackling social exclusion .
Mr President , like Mrs Figueiredo , we also welcome this action plan against social exclusion .
We think that certain things have been achieved - as always , in conciliation processes not everything we want is achieved - and , although the budget is still low , the budget for NGOs has been raised and the role that the European Parliament plays is very important .
I think that there is some fine wording in this document : I would remind you of Article 2 - which asks for a high level of employment and a fight against poverty - and point out that the Council considers the current levels of poverty that still exist in the European Union to be unacceptable .
However , we are running the risk that applying this action plan - whose implementation next year is welcomed by all of us - will be like putting a small sticking plaster onto a large gaping wound .
In the previous debate we talked about the virtues of the market in terms of sustaining airlines , yet we talk less of the 12 000 jobs at Sabena .
We run the risk of losing much blood whilst we try to stem its flow with a small sticking plaster .
Nevertheless , Mr President , this plan against social exclusion is very welcome .
Mr President , I should like to warmly welcome the final outcome of the conciliation procedure and make a point of congratulating Mrs Figueiredo who , thanks to her meticulous work and by working with all sides , managed in the end to give us this tool much more quickly than we anticipated .
Mr President , the speakers referred - and this is important - to the shortcomings and limited potential of this tool as it stands .
However , we have to start from the fact that we are talking about a policy area which does not come under European jurisdiction .
We have no jurisdiction to exercise policy but , for the first time , the Member States have decided to work together .
So , within the framework of this joint decision to work together , three things have happened .
First , national action plans against exclusion and poverty are being submitted , for the first time .
Secondly , the Social Protection Committee and the European Commission are working together to find a joint policy framework , again for the first time .
May I remind you that we do not even have a common definition of the word " poverty " in the European Union .
Thirdly , we have the programme , which is a first tool , but an important tool nevertheless .
What is important is that , first , the budget has been increased as a result of significant pressure and intervention on the part of the European Parliament and , secondly , we have achieved a common position between the Commission and Parliament during conciliation on 90 % funding for organisations which really do not have any resources of their own .
So what does this tool do ?
I can sum up the basic elements of this tool in seven points . One , it supports and helps the structures in the Member States to collate data and analyse and research the situation in all the Member States .
Two , it helps us work together and develop joint social indicators , for the first time .
Three , it supports the procedures used to monitor and implement national action plan programmes on employment .
Four , it supports the exchange of best practices and programmes .
Five , it involves all the agencies , local authorities , non-governmental organisations , governments , foundations and universities .
Six - and I should like to highlight this point - it specifically involves associations of people who are the victims of poverty and exclusion and , seven , it allows us to raise public awareness of the huge problem of poverty , which cannot be dealt with simply by governments and European programmes but which needs to galvanise the whole of society into action .
Thank you , Mrs Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Announcement by the President
First of all , ladies and gentlemen , I have some information which I would advise you , if I may , to listen to .

In view of the fact that the World Trade Organization meeting in Qatar lasted longer than expected , Mr Lamy and Mr Fischler will not be able to attend our sitting this afternoon .
I therefore propose that we should continue our debates between 3 p.m. and 4 p.m. , while we should stick to the planned timetable for topical and urgent subjects of major importance , and of course for the vote .
Madam President , when will my report be debated - the Lynne report on the European Year of People with Disabilities , 2003 ?
Will that now be at around 3.30 p.m. ?
We have a sign language interpreter arriving now for the debate at 5.30 p.m. because everything has been changed around so much that we do not know when this report is being debated .
I have deaf members of the public attending and we have the sign language interpreter .
So can we please stick to some sort of timetable ?
Mrs Lynne , you were quite right to bring this information to my attention .
I think that we can at least leave your report at the time that was originally planned for it , in other words at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , we understand the reasons why Commissioners Lamy and Fischler cannot be with us this afternoon .
Could you confirm , however , that there will be an opportunity for those two commissioners to report to us on the important negotiations at Doha and whether the EU 's views were accepted or not .
Of course , Mrs McNally , we shall certainly be holding this debate with the Commission in December , but we cannot really blame the commissioners in question for not being able to come back any earlier .
Madam President , I wish to say a few brief words , just to clarify something .
I was not able to take part in yesterday ' s vote on the Caudron report , and consequently did not spot a mistake that I would like to point out to my fellow Members .
As a result of a mistake by Parliament staff , a proposal for an amendment - No 20 - that we had tabled to the Caudron report on the research programme was mistakenly included in the Euratom report .
I do not intend to dwell on this subject , because other amendments by other Members have addressed the same issue . I do wish to make this observation , however , because people were probably surprised that the insertion of the amendment made no sense at all in the context of Euratom .
Mr Ribeiro e Castro , we are happy to take note of what you have said , and we shall see that the necessary correction is made .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I was in the Members ' Bar before we started voting .
I saw a piece of baggage on a chair .
For approximately 15 minutes nobody came for it .
A man approached and I asked him whether it was his bag .
I told him that , in view of the security situation , it was advisable to stay with one 's baggage and that , in addition , to be in the Members ' Bar you had to be invited by a Member .
He was extremely arrogant and annoyed .
He took his bag and marched away .
He said that he knew Mrs Muscardini .
She then arrived in the bar ; I asked her that if she knew the gentlemen , and said that due to the security problems , I had informed him politely of the situation .
I should like to say to this House that we as Members of this Parliament also have a responsibility .
We have been asking for security measures to be stepped up and we all , therefore , must take responsibility for the people we bring here or allow here in our name .
I would just ask you , Madam President , to remind the House of our responsibilities for future security .
I congratulate you , Mrs Foster , on your vigilance . You acted very properly in the circumstances .
Vote
Madam President , I should like to make it clear to my fellow MEPs that , if Amendment No 9 , tabled by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , is adopted , the issue will be sent back to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
That will be the correct method of proceeding , for it will give us more time to investigate the legal consequences of this proposal .
I received an answer from the Council yesterday , stating that it did not want to express an opinion on the proposal ' s legal validity as long as the proposal was being debated in the Council .
I simply believe it would be wrong for us to proceed to a vote here in Parliament before such a legal evaluation has been made available to us .
I find the Council ' s answer totally unacceptable .
I would ask my fellow MEPs to support Amendment No 9 so that we can obtain a new reading in the committee .
Thank you , Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , for having so clearly explained the significance of this amendment , which I shall now put to a roll-call vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0352 / 2001 ) by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 92 / 79 / EEC , Directive 92 / 80 / EEC and Directive 95 / 59 / EC as regards the structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco products [ COM ( 2001 ) 133 - C5-0139 / 2001 - 2001 / 0063 ( CNS ) ]
Following the rejection of the proposal by the Commission
Madam President , may I say to both you and the Commission that I believe that Rule 68 of the Rules of Procedure applies here , meaning that you have to give the Commissioner the floor in order to ask if the Commission intends to withdraw its proposal .
That is the first step .
I agree , and this is why I was giving the floor to the Commission .
Thank you , Mr Katiforis . I believe Mr Bolkestein wishes to speak .
Madam President , I understand that the report by Mr Katiforis has been accepted .
That means that the Commission proposal is rejected .
I would like to say first of all that the Commission very much regrets this vote , in particular because the Commission 's proposal is precisely what Parliament asked for in 1996 .
This is an unusual situation .
Parliament asks something of the Commission .
The Commission does what is asked of it and Parliament rejects what the Commission has done .
However I shall apprise the Commission of this regrettable result next week when the Commission next meets , and I shall confer with my colleagues and with President Prodi on the course of action to be taken now in connection with the rules of the Treaty which are perfectly clear .
( Applause )
Madam President , I should only like to comment on this point very briefly .
Firstly , the Commission proposal was flawed , but what is even more important , Commissioner , is the fact that elections have been held in the meantime , and the Commission should also take note of this .
We really cannot spend any more time on this matter .
Madam President , of course it is also a pity that the Council tried to pre-empt Parliament 's opinion with a political agreement and did not have the courtesy to let Parliament express its views first .
That by way of a brief reply to what Mr Bolkestein just said .
But may I say that , pursuant to Rule 68 of the Rules of Procedure , Mr Bolkestein 's answer is incomplete .
The Rule is clear .
We ask the Commission if it intends to withdraw its proposal .
Mr Bolkestein has not said if it intends to do so .
He said that he would confer with his colleagues on the course of action to be taken now , from which I conclude that the Commission refuses to withdraw its proposal .
Consequently , we need to proceed to the third paragraph of the Rule , which states that the matter has to be referred back to the committee responsible , without voting on the draft legislative resolution and I propose that we do precisely that .
I quite agree , Mr Katiforis .
This is the view we should take of the matter .
Madam President , Mr Katiforis is quite correct , but if the precedent in this House , is anything to go by , now that Parliament has made a proposal , in five years ' time the Commission will come forward with an idea which we will reject again .
( Parliament decided to refer the matter back to the committee responsible )
Report ( A5-0395 / 2001 ) by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation aiming to promote the conversion of vessels and of fishermen that were , up to 1999 , dependent on the fishing agreement with Morocco [ COM ( 2001 ) 384 - C5-0407 / 2001 - 2001 / 0163 ( CNS ) ]
Before the vote
chairman of the Committee on Budgets .
Madam President , it would be an oral amendment , which would be a new Recital 12 .
It would also apply to the draft legislative resolution and would read : " The proposal was not foreseen in the financial perspective .
The financial envelope of the proposal should be covered by additional resources . "
Madam President , as rapporteur of this report I would like to make two points : firstly , that this very amendment tabled orally by my fellow Member Mr Wynn has been rejected at the vote by the Committee on Fisheries on the day my own report was voted upon .
The second is that I do not oppose this amendment being tabled and it should be this House that decides upon its content .
Madam President , is it clear that the vote is only on the legislative part of the proposal and not on the budgetary part ?
We shall discuss the oral amendment that Mr Wynn has just mentioned , which does , of course , have financial implications .
I am sure that everyone understands this .
Madam President , with regard to the amendment tabled by the Chairperson of the Committee on Budgets , I support the proposal made by our rapporteur and , also , in agreement with what the Commission said , I would like to say that we have always spoken about this proposal from the point of view of fisheries and we do not involve ourselves with the budgetary aspects .
However , although what Mr Wynn proposes is true - that , as is stated here , the proposal was not included in the financial perspectives - it is nonetheless certain , and for this reason the House must also be provided with this information , that the Commission has requested the use of the flexibility instrument , providing this proposal , in due time , with EUR 197 million .
Therefore , we are in favour of this proposal from the Committee on Budgets , but we would remind our fellow Members in this committee , and the Council , that they should come to an agreement with regard to the use of this instrument and provide the proposal with this EUR 197 million , which is necessary so that fishermen and the families affected can resolve this problem .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to considering the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0384 / 2001 ) by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the approximation of the civil and commercial law of the Member States [ COM ( 2001 ) 398 - C5-0471 / 2001 - 2001 / 2187 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0363 / 2001 ) by Mr Chichester , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission Green Paper Towards a European strategy for the security of energy supply ( COM ( 2000 ) 769 - C5-0145 / 2001 - 2001 / 2071 ( COS ) )
Before the vote
Madam President , I have noticed that there are not just a few minor linguistic errors .
Entire paragraphs of the text are different . It looks like the translator has translated a different text .
Please could this be checked . And I should like to take this opportunity to say that errors have crept into Greek translations on other occasions .
If you spoke Greek you would understand what I am about to say .
In one section , the words tuberculosis and malaria have simply been transliterated into Greek instead of using the Greek terms .
I am very sorry , Mr Alyssandrakis .
I can only attempt to ensure that the versions in the various languages are properly monitored and checked .
I am told that this will be done and not only for the Greek version , because other versions are also affected by these mistakes .
We shall , therefore , ensure that everything is put right .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0356 / 2001 ) by Mrs Schörling , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Commission White Paper on Strategy for a future Chemicals Policy [ COM ( 2001 ) 88 - C5-0258 / 2001 - 2001 / 2118 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I should like to ask you to look into what this vote has cost European taxpayers .
I should also like you to make money available for a course through which the committee can learn to work together .
It is quite outrageous that we should sit for an hour voting on what should have been resolved by the committee .
They really must get their bloody act together before long .
This endless piddling about cannot continue !
Mr Blak , I think that from now on , we should count the cost of all votes .
Report ( A5-0341 / 2001 ) by Mrs Flemming , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on pricing policies for enhancing the sustainability of water resources [ COM ( 2000 ) 477 - C5-0634 / 2000 - 2000 / 2298 ( COS ) ]
Before the vote on the entire motion for a resolution
. ( DE ) Madam President , I deeply regret the fact that I must now recommend to my group that it reject my own report in the final vote , because I , like my group , really do not think that it is fair for a national problem to be brought before the European Parliament .
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Madam President , I just wanted to follow up the previous point of order and ask when are we going to be able to debate the proposals in Mr Corbett 's report - which I understand are stuck in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs - so that this ludicrous procedure , with six pages of plenary amendments on one report , can be reformed .
We will be a laughing stock if we do not reform and get our House in order .
Report ( A5-0323 / 2001 ) by Mrs Corbey , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on implementation of Directive 94 / 62 / EC on packaging and packaging waste 2000 / 2319 ( INI )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0336 / 2001 ) by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on a global partnership and a common strategy for relations between the European Union and Latin America [ 2000 / 2249 ( INI ) ]
Before the vote
Madam President , I should like to say that it states on the agenda that voting will be from 12 noon until 1 p.m. and that it will resume at 6.30 p.m.

I really do think that we ought to keep to the agenda .
I must point out , ladies and gentlemen , that yesterday , we exceeded the time allocated and that consequently , Mr Posselt ' s comment would have applied yesterday too .
I shall , therefore , consult the House : who wishes to continue ?
( The House decided to continue voting )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0704 / 2001 ) , by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy , on arbitrary arrests and the political situation in Laos .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on negotiations within the framework of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention following the recent anthrax attacks
Before the vote on paragraph 2
Given the uncertainty about the precise position of the President of the United States , I propose correcting the second part of paragraph 2 to say " including the search for effective procedures " instead of " the establishment of existing procedures " .
Madam President , there is a short oral amendment which has been agreed by all signatories of this compromise resolution and reads as follows : in paragraph 2 , after the word ' terrorism ' , a new sentence saying : ' Demands that national governments assume responsibility for additional security costs . '
If there are no objections to this oral amendment , the motion for a resolution I am putting to the vote will include the oral amendment that Mrs Foster has just explained .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , you have presided over 358 separate votes just now .
I hope colleagues will agree that this underlines the need to reform our Rules of Procedure .
Madam President , I gather from the display that the next report is the Bouwman report .
Does that mean that there is not going to be a debate on the WTO ?


That debate will take place in December , Mr Rübig , because , as I said , Mr Lamy and Mr Fischler will not be able to join us in time .
) .
I am afraid I cannot agree with Mr Corbett 's point about the votes in this plenary .
There are many committees in this Parliament , which do not have representation from every Member State .
Therefore we will find those people will be disenfranchised and that is becoming a greater problem as the European Union enlarges .
We must have the opportunity for members from every Member State to be able to vote on these reports and on these important amendments .
Madam President , a number of colleagues have remarked that it is a very bad thing to have so many votes on these occasions , but I would like to congratulate you on having kept us going .
I do not know for what purpose my constituents elected me if it was not to exercise discretion and choice in deciding what things to vote about .
I do not think we do a more important thing than cast our votes for and against proposals in this House and objecting to that is a very foolish thing .
Moreover , if one looks at the votes cast today , there were very few foregone conclusions : there were close votes on all the roll-call votes and that seems to me to show the need to test these matters by voting .
The idea that we should have fewer votes seems absurd .
That said , I should like to make a remark about the Watson report .
Once we have got to the point of having Community law , if that law is defied it seems perfectly obvious that there have to be within our nation States - and nations which are not States - criminal rules which uphold it , otherwise the States pass laws which they are not able to enforce and the Community becomes a laughing stock .
Of course , that requires a proper safeguard and proper defence rights .
These days we are thinking about defending our civilisation .
Our civilisation is to do with giving people proper rights of defence and I am sad at recent developments in the United Kingdom that seem to be ending these rights .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Madam President , although I had requested the floor to speak about ten documents , I shall limit myself to the explanations of vote on the Figueiredo and Chichester reports .
Proposal for a recommendation by Mr Watson ( B5-0707 / 2001 )
The Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities has voted against this recommendation because implementing it would be synonymous with finally withdrawing vital and crucial policy areas - namely policing and criminal law as these relate to the ordering of our ordinary lives - from the jurisdiction of the Member States and transferring them to the EU .
The recommendation is an absurd rhetorical demonstration of the parliamentary majority ' s disconnection from reality , and in a double sense . Firstly , it is - even now - politically unthinkable for the governments of the Member States to endorse the adoption of a recommendation that would make it possible to introduce EU criminal law and to establish a federal police service .
Secondly , adoption of the recommendation would be out of step with actual social conditions which indicate that Parliament ' s dream of a European federal state will prove to be a nightmare .
There are not one , but fifteen , different juridico-political cultures and systems in the EU .
EU criminal law and an EU police service would , at best , severely damage the Member States ' legal traditions and , at worst , consolidate a centralised system without democratic control and , moreover , do so without solving the problems faced by the Member States .
The core of European cooperation should be diversity and respect for other countries ' legal systems .
Figueiredo report ( A5-0372 / 2001 )
Madam President , of course , I voted for the Figueiredo report on the conciliation committee text on combating social exclusion .
I have to say that , in Italy , first the centre government , allied with the European socialist parties , increased the minimum Italian pensions greatly , from EUR 382 to EUR 490 per month ; now , Mr Berlusconi ' s centre-right government has increased them from EUR 382 to EUR 490 for people over 70 years old and has extended the categories of people entitled to receive them .
I call upon the other 14 States of the European Union and the 12 candidate countries to help pensioners and elderly people in the same way , and not just pensioners and elderly people but non-pensioners as well , for the right to life belongs to all people , whatever their age .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this report and I wanted to take this opportunity to say what a pity it is that the European Parliament and the European institutions are not as popular as they might be with the electorate and the people of the European Union because we are not in a position to respond appropriately and quickly to problems which arise and which we are aware of .
We have already seen this once this week with the transport of animals and now we are seeing it again with cross-border payments .
Over the years the public have become angry and have been forced to suffer losses , and now we are in the situation that we are lagging behind ; hopefully this initiative of Mrs Peijs will now at least be implemented quickly .
As early as the time of the introduction of the euro I brought this issue to the attention of the Commissioner responsible , Mr Monti , and I asked the Commission to take action on it as quickly as possible .
As we can see it has taken years , and that is a shame because so much damage has been done .
I believe - to stress this once more - that we need to listen more closely to what members of the public have to say , pay more attention to their problems and then take appropriate action .
I should also like to add that I had indicated that I wished to make an explanation of vote on the Flemming report .
Obviously this will no longer be necessary .
We have voted against the proposal for a regulation on cross-border payments in euro , which is designed to prevent banks from imposing charges , falsely giving the impression that such payments are free .
This absurdity , which is motivated only by the desire to make people think that the euro itself removes all commissions on cross-border payments runs the risk of proving expensive for all of us in all kinds of unwanted ways .
Furthermore , this proposal is of very dubious legal value .
Its legal basis is Article 95 ( 1 ) of the EC Treaty , which deals with the establishment of the internal market .
It should , therefore , apply in the same way to the fifteen members of the Union .
It does not , however , because three Members of the Union are not part of the euro zone .
Given these circumstances , it would probably have been more appropriate to make the regulation ' s legal basis Article 123 ( 4 ) of the EC Treaty ( last phrase ) concerning measures to adopt for the introduction of the euro , and does not , therefore , apply to the countries participating in the single currency .
Article 123 ( 4 ) , however , requires unanimous approval in Council , and Article 95 only requires a qualified majority .
This is probably the factor that tipped the scales in making some countries less reticent .
It is nevertheless difficult to imagine the reality of the legal situation in countries that are not members of the euro zone , that are forced to pay a premium for cross-border transfers made out in a currency other than their own .
To this bizarre situation we can add the absence in the regulation of any article referring to possible sanctions against recalcitrant banks .
Of course there is none , since the Community has no jurisdiction on this matter .
The European Parliament has sought to close this loophole by voting for an amendment that calls on the Member States to define and adopt sanctions that will act as a " deterrent " , but this type of request has no legal force .
. There are only 46 days remaining before euro notes and coins are introduced across the twelve countries that are participating within this new euro currency regime .
Phasing out national currencies and introducing a single new European currency is not an easy task .
There are over 290 million people who live within the twelve new euro zone countries alone .
However , I do believe that EU Governments have been very pro-active with regard to implementing broad information campaigns concerning the forthcoming practical changes .
It is very important that both small and large businesses contact their local banks and estimate how much currency they will require to carry out their businesses commencing 1 January next .
Surveys carried out within the EU have shown that banks are confident that all ATM machines will have all the necessary stock of the new euro currency notes .
The European Central Bank is satisfied that the requisite amount of the new euro notes will be dispersed to financial institutions in non-Euro zone countries .
I believe that the five-week period for the changeover is of the correct duration .
It would simply be too much to ask small companies in Europe to deal with two different currencies for what was originally planned as a six-month period for the changeover .
I welcome the fact that the different consumer associations in Europe will be vigilant during the changeover period so as to ensure that the interests of consumers are protected during the timescale of the euro changeover .
I , of course , support the need to introduce measures which reduce costs between domestic and cross-border payments .
There is a very strong consumer case to be made for changing the current system which is in operation .
We must strengthen confidence in the structures of the new euro currency .
However , this proposed regulation which is before us today does not discriminate between efficient and inefficient payment systems .
This regulation does not adequately address the relationship between the euro and other non-euro Member State currencies .
I believe it is fair to say that the euro tends to promote economic stability .
I think there has been clear evidence of this since the tragic terrorist attacks which took place in America last September .
We do not want to give international currency speculators an opportunity to play off one national European currency against another .
This would only result in broader devaluations in the value of the euro which is exactly what took place in the Autumn of 1992 .
The euro is good news for European businesses .
It reduces export costs .
It is good news for European travellers and it contributes to the medium to long-term economic stability of the European Union .
I have voted in favour of Mrs Peijs ' s report and wish to emphasise the quality of the work that our rapporteur produced .
I am very pleased that our House is finally making a statement on an issue as important as this .
The patience of European consumers has clearly reached its limit .
It has to be said that the banks have gone too far by making one promise after another that they fail to keep , content in their certainty that Brussels would not dare restrict their freedom to impose charges .
The Commission has now been negotiating with them for eleven years ... in vain .
The banks have always refused to make the necessary investment to keep the cost of cross-border transfers down .
At the same time , the current system allows them to build up a considerable pot of money for themselves .
Consumers are not the only ones to bear these unjustified bank charges : they have a particularly serious effect on SMEs that export their products and the competitiveness of these companies suffers for no good reason .
This situation , which has been incomprehensible to SMEs since the advent of the euro on 1 January 1999 , is in danger of becoming explosive , with the euro entering into circulation in less than two months .
How is it possible that the euro zone is only a single payment area for notes and coins , with all other means of payment being discouraged by punitive bank charges ?
How can banks justify a transfer from Lille to Bastia costing less than the same operation between Lille and Brussels ?
One fear still remains and that is that the banks will use their freedom to impose charges to increase domestic prices in order to compensate for the lack of earning opportunities in the euro zone .
Nevertheless , as Commissioner Bolkestein said , ' The banks know very well that the public has legitimate expectations ' .
We can only hope that the banks really are aware of this .
The European Union is made up of sovereign states , each with a seat in the United Nations and , so far , each boasting its own currency .
The banks form part of national payment circuits and impose a heavy fine on cross-border payments and money transfers .
From January 2002 , twelve EU Member States will act as if they are one country financially speaking .
The banks are in favour of this as long as this enlarges their own scope , but not if they have to forgo the additional payments from their customers .
It seems appealing to demand that the costs for national and cross-border payments in euros should become the same .
That has been Commissioner Bolkestein ' s wish for a long time and is now also being proposed in the report by Mrs Peijs .
I can endorse this , as long as it means that banks forgo their levies on cross-border payments .
However , recital 5bis does not prevent new levies from being imposed on national payments by way of compensation for the fact that revenue from foreign payments has fallen by the wayside .
Instead of imposing a heavy fine on a small minority of payments , including mainly business payments , all payments will then attract a minor fine .
That means that the large majority of customers will incur higher costs .
I shall vote against this , as this is highly detrimental to the ordinary account holder .
Chichester report ( A5-0363 / 2001 )
Mr President , the document tabled by Mr Chichester addresses the issue of energy supply and , in places , advocates the use of nuclear energy .
I have already stated on a number of occasions that both I personally and the Pensioners ' Party are in favour of using nuclear energy .
I would like to stress , in particular , before this House , that I feel the candidate countries ' nuclear power stations should be allowed to operate at full capacity .
In my capacity as a member of the joint EU-Bulgaria interparliamentary committee , I recently visited the Bohunice power station in Slovakia and the Kozloduy power station in Bulgaria .
Where their reactors meet certain safety requirements , these States should be allowed to use nuclear energy , for they do not have the economic resources to sustain an additional unnecessary cost just so they can replace one type of energy with another .
Where nuclear power stations are safe , we must allow them to be used , particularly those in the candidate countries .
Mr President , I very much welcome the tabling of the Commission 's Green Paper on a strategy for the security of energy supply .
It is with great regret that I see that yet again too little attention has been paid to renewable sources of energy .
We will only achieve the Kyoto target if we give preference to these sources of energy .
I am therefore very disappointed at the vote on the Chichester report because here too nuclear energy is still the preferred option .
With the consumption of energy increasing and the sources and reserves of mineral fuels decreasing , the energy supply issue is a very important aspect of the internal and external policy of the EU and the Member States .
The Chichester report may highlight the need to save energy , improve energy efficiency and develop more efficient transmission systems , but it places its hopes for resolving the problem in the liberalisation of the market and competition , on the one hand , and in controlling supplier countries , on the other .
This approach works to the benefit of more general imperialist interests and to the detriment of the workers and society as a whole , in both supplier and consumer countries , which are being sacrificed so that the multinationals which create and exploit recessions and provoke wars which allow them to control the energy-rich areas of the world can make a profit .
Energy policies to make use of domestic energy sources obey the same diktat , with adverse repercussions on grass-roots interests , growth and the supply of high-quality , safe and environmentally-friendly energy to the country as a whole .
The problem is exacerbated by the liberalisation of the energy market and the privatisation of power stations and transmission grids .
We consider that the strategically important energy sector ( supply of raw materials , generation , transmission grids ) should be in the public sector and should be subject to periodically adjusted national planning which takes account of national requirements and international circumstances .
Energy policy should safeguard cheap energy for grass-roots needs , guarantee the safety of workers and citizens and ensure that the environment is protected .
These should be primary objectives and should take precedence over any economic factors .
Transport policy needs to be revised so that greater use is made of public transport , renewable sources of energy need to be supported and encouraged and research is needed into the most efficient generating systems and the cheapest , least-polluting consumption systems .
The EU and the Member States need to respond to the need to protect the environment and to fail to reduce emissions to Kyoto levels is to practise wicked works .
Major climate problems , the hole in the ozone layer and so on must not be resolved at the expense of growth in the poorest countries , at the expense of the workers or by fatalistically accepting the destruction of our planet .
Workers in Europe and throughout the world and the 2 billion people with no access to electricity are demanding and fighting for a different energy policy which opposes imperialist interests and preferences and the monopolies which are usurping the energy sector .
A policy which respects and protects the environment , a policy which will create the foundations for humane living conditions .
This being so , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece have voted against the Chichester report .
By making as issue out of Europe ' s energy dependence , the report is masking the fact that we are dependent mainly not so much on other countries as on the huge oil corporations which often also control other sources of energy .
This is the dependence that Europe paid a high price for during the oil crisis in 1973 , when these corporations decided to impose a general price increase on oil to increase the profits of their less profitable wells .
It is this dependence on oil companies that has led to the ' serious risk of price instability in the short run and lack of resources in the long run ' , which concerns the report .
It is not the unfair distribution of the world ' s energy sources , a geological factor , that threatens the rational use of resources in a way that respects the natural environment , but rather the fact that their management is controlled by huge private groups , which are solely concerned with their profit margins , when they themselves are not suffering from the erratic fluctuations of the market or even of stock speculation .
The problem does not only affect Europe : the world ' s resources cannot be managed rationally and distributed amongst everyone if a collective effort is agreed on at world level , which would mean an end to the stranglehold of private groups on these resources and a completely different organisation of the economy .
During the debate in plenary on Tuesday evening , I stated my support for the ' Chichester ' package on the security of energy supply , despite its calls for the liberalisation of the energy sector that I could not have supported had they been proposed in isolation but which , as it happens , are part of a whole multifaceted and bold ' package ' , which takes the European discussion on this matter forwards .
This is why I have voted in favour of the ' package ' .
Incidentally , I still do not understand how someone can advocate a liberalisation that seeks to bring prices down and which takes the form of promoting the ' least costly ' sources of energy and , on the other hand , complains about being increasingly dependent on external sources as consumption increases ( or is not decreasing ) due to the fact that prices are very ( or too ) low .
I hope one day to receive a clear explanation of this point from the ' founders ' of liberalisation .
The Chichester report seeks to present a ' European strategy ' for the security of energy supply .
It is very difficult , however , to discern in the resolution , even one clearly stated guideline .
It could be saying anything and its opposite .
The resolution dodges the real issues underpinning a ' strategy ' .
Is it possible to restructure the energy sector without a real concerted public policy that is supported and has been fully discussed ?
Can we leave things up to the ' market ' , in other words , to the whim of private financial interests ?
Is energy a ' common asset ' or just a commodity ?
To what extent is the nuclear risk acceptable ?
The resolution is dotted with pipe dreams .
For example , in order to permit the renewal of nuclear power stations , it calls for " appropriate measures " that will guarantee the " elimination " of radioactive waste and the " safety " of the power stations .
This is asking the impossible .
Apart from being confused , the Chichester report falls in line with neoliberal policies .
Paragraph 18 wants to " promote further market opening in the EU " and paragraph 42 considers that " it is essential to complete the liberalisation of energy markets ' ' .
Whereas only a public service policy can meet social and environmental requirements and guarantee " sustainable development " in this economic sector .
We are voting against the motion for a resolution .
- ( PT ) Some of the amendments tabled by the rapporteur suggest that the increase in installed capacity of nuclear energy in Europe is crucial if we are to comply with the Kyoto protocol .
This argument is irrational and lacks objectivity .
All the information available suggests that the opposite is true .
The European Union has already reduced its greenhouse gas emissions by 4 % between 1990 and 1999 and will be able to meet the quota for remaining reductions by 2012 ( 4 % ) through low cost measures .
According to data from the European Commission , we will be able to comply with Kyoto by implementing measures costing less than EUR 20 per tonne of CO2 .
The promotion of nuclear energy does not feature amongst these measures proposed by the European Commission in the European Climate Change Programme and the Framework Directive on Emissions Trading .
The issue of Member States ' energy supply is a fundamental aspect of their security which falls mainly within the competence of national sovereignty .
Given the major interactions of energy choices , however , it might be useful to do as the Green Paper does and opt for a longer-term approach and study this issue at European level .
This study must , of course , be carried out without any ideological prejudices that might demonise or romanticise any particular source of energy .
Otherwise , we will be leaving rational discourse behind .
This is the approach adopted by the Chichester report , emphasising , as does the Green Paper , the need for Member States to maintain a balanced combination of energy sources , which gives nuclear energy its rightful place .
This is the only way not to make European countries more dependent on external sources .
It is also the only way to ensure that the European Union can fulfil its international commitments on limiting CO2 emissions .
Research and development in nuclear energy must , therefore , continue in order to build on our scientific and industrial lead in this field , in order to guarantee our countries maximum independence in the field of energy resources , to preserve the environment and to achieve a satisfactory elimination of waste end-products .
I am sorry , with regard to this last point , that the Caudron report has not attached sufficient priority to this line of research , which is crucial .
Unless we move ahead in this direction , the growth in demand will lead us fatally towards fossil fuels , which are as worthy of criticism in terms of the environment as they are problematic in terms of security of supply .
Flemming report ( A5-0341 / 2001 )
Mr President , just before I begin on the Flemming report I want to speak about the Katiforis report , which we rejected .
I feel very strongly that by rejecting that report we have done nothing today in this House to promote public health .
We should never forget that tobacco is the biggest cause of preventable illness across the EU and that each year half a million EU citizens die needlessly due to tobacco .
The Commission 's proposal would have helped people to stop smoking and it is very sad that we did not support this .
However , on to the matter at hand - the Flemming report .
Although the report was rejected , I should like to explain why I and my two colleagues from Scotland supported some of the amendments .
Firstly , we believe that , in line with Amendment No 3 , no country may be obliged to hand over water against its will and free of charge .
The amendment speaks for itself , and that it is why we supported it .
Amendment No 5 was concerned with the more technical matter of water basins .
We agree that water basin areas are not suitable bases for water pricing policies in all regions .
Much of our water in Scotland is in inter-basin management and , therefore , we had to support it .
Thirdly , the rejection of the Flemming report probably was ensuring that no one report could be hijacked by such a national interest .
I hope we will continue the discussion on water , as so many of our citizens are very concerned with this issue .
The report fully endorses the Commission communication , the philosophy of which is to treat a natural resource , water , as a commodity and as a basis for implementing other negative sectoral policies , such as agricultural policy .
We categorically oppose this philosophy and the negative proposals tabled in order to implement it .
The report is geared towards " pricing policies to enhance the sustainability of water resources " , which involve recovering the cost of water-related services and limiting the consumption and use of water by making it more expensive .
At the same time , the report is gripped by the familiar " polluter pays " principle , resulting in new incentives and profits for business .
The price - and it is a very high price - of the measures proposed on the hypocritical pretext of supposedly securing the sustainability of water resources , will be paid by the consumer , for which read farmers in southern Europe , given that , as both the Commission communication and the report state , it is they who consume the most water and pay less than the " real cost " for it .
This policy will cause costs to rise and will wipe out even more small and medium-sized farms , which are already suffering the disastrous consequences of the common agricultural policy .
Predictably , the report divides the cost into financial , environmental and resource costs and considers that only the financial cost has been calculated in the past .
Thus , to refer to the report yet again , it states that the cost of building and operating dams on rivers due to over-extraction ( by farmers ) " may be passed on to the users " or , if water needs to be treated because it has been contaminated , for example by fertilisers , then farmers should pay the cost .
We are opposed to any attempt to treat water as a commodity .
We categorically refuse to allow the Commission to appoint itself as the guardian of water resources and , on the pretext of " encouraging sustainable water use " to add , yet again , grist to the mill of private interests and allow them to penetrate and operate in what is a purely public utility sector .
The entire endeavour is nothing more than yet another chapter in the Community 's catastrophic policy . It will work to the detriment of consumers and farmers and , at the same time , champion the promotion of other policies , such as the policy to wipe out the agricultural sector .
Water resources cannot be protected and managed rationally using suppressive pricing policies and collection measures paid for by the consumer .
Only a few large companies charging a high price for their " environmentally-friendly " profile stand to benefit from this policy , which gives them yet another opportunity to rake in vastly inflated profits .
The report ' s recitals state that water " is not a commercial product like any other " and that " access to water is an inalienable human right " .
Such statements , however , carry little weight with Vivendi , Suez and other huge corporations , who have appropriated the water ' market ' for themselves in order to squeeze enormous profits from it , with the blessing of the State .
These statements look more like a desperate plea , considering the industries that pollute and ruin the planet ' s resources for the greater good of their shareholder ' s bank accounts .
In the twenty-first century , at a time when the world has never had such great technical capability , the fact that an entire swathe of humanity does not have access to running water , let alone drinking water is largely due to the social barbarity of capitalism .
The issue of water , which is vital for hundreds of millions of human beings far exceeds the geographical boundaries of Europe and , if we are to solve it , and many other problems , humanity would need to put an end to the dictatorship of the market , of profit and of competition .
The rapporteur supports this system and envisages the " sustainable management of water resources " by means of pricing and rate setting .
This would mean , once again , that those with the means , both individuals and particularly industrial groups , could continue to waste water , even to pollute , whilst others who are poorer , will continue to do without .
Society should provide water , this vital commodity , free of charge to everyone and its management should be planned according to the real needs of the population and subject to democratic control .
It is quite clear that the current organisation of the economy , based on the quest for profit , is fundamentally incapable of guaranteeing a " sustainable management of water resources " and consequently represents a threat to the future of mankind , in this area as in many others .
People themselves consist largely of water , and the bulk of our food is also made up of water .
Similarly , we very often deal with water in our jobs and households .
Without a continuous supply of water , we would not survive .
Whoever appropriates water , takes possession of their fellow people .
That is why the water supply should not end up in private hands .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy rightly concluded that access to water is a human right and water is therefore not a commercial product .
The question now arises as to how we manage water shortages and water pollution .
The fair principle that the polluter pays is useful to cream profits from polluting companies , but not a sound argument to considerably increase the costs for households .
It is better to increase the amount of clean and fresh drinking water available by desalinating sea water than by digging deeper for ground water or by redirecting rivers to storage reservoirs .
There was a time when the Soviet Union wanted to fill the Aral Sea with water from rivers which flow to the North Pole .
These days , Spain wants to tap half of the Ebro ' s water to promote tourism in southern Spain .
This will be at the expense of fauna and flora in the current river basin .
Thanks to criticism on this , the Right has blocked this decision .
This proves that money and prestige are still worth more than sustainable environmental management .
, in writing . ( PT ) Despite protests from Portuguese NGOs and myself , the Portuguese government is insisting on adopting an uncompromising approach to the Alqueva project , by preparing to fill the dam to a height of 152m .
This Communication and the report on sustainable water pricing show that filling the dam to a height of 139m , as I have been proposing , would not only enable more than 600 000 trees and habitats of enormous importance to be saved , but would also be more sustainable in economic terms .
We risk deforesting to a height of 152m and then , due to the price of water , seeing that filling to a height of 139m is enough for agricultural requirements .
Over the past few days , Member of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , Alexander de Roo , has insinuated both in this House and in the media that the Liberal shadow rapporteur , Chris Davies , has changed his position under pressure from the Aznar Government in connection with the possible election of Pat Cox to President of Parliament .
This was an absurd and unfounded allegation .
Mr Davies has conscientiously attempted to reconcile his own dislike of the Spanish project ( shared by myself ) with the position of the majority of the liberal group that it is inappropriate to criticise a specific country in a general report .
Today ' s vote illustrated that our group has abstained and that Mr Davis and various Green members of the ELDR Group have voted in favour of the criticism levelled at Spain .
However , by voting against the Liberal amendment ( which , in turn , led to the rejection of the entire report ) , the Greens have missed a major opportunity of stopping the Spanish project on the basis of general principles .
Although the intentions of the Group of the Greens may have been noble , their method was neither effective nor conclusive .
At the moment , the European Parliament does not have a single position in this weighty matter .
Riis-Jørgensen report ( A5-0373 / 2001 )
Shipbuilding has for years benefited from considerable subsidies from Member States and from the European institutions .
This has not stopped it from shedding its workforce or even from closing entire dockyards and sacking their employees .
Dockyard owners are attempting to have these subsidies extended in the name of competition , but the money that would be given to them would continue to increase the profit of these companies and to be shared with their shareholders even if the latter withdraw their capital as soon as the dockyards become less profitable and invest elsewhere , without a care for the fate of the workers .
This is made easier for them by the fact that many dockyards are tied to industrial groups such as Alstom , which have interests in several sectors and which make redundancies in some whilst receiving subsidies in others .
As we have no intention of giving any kind of help to the shareholders of the huge shipbuilding corporations , we have voted against the report .
If shipbuilding is necessary for Europe ' s economy , it must be brought under state control . The answer is not to subsidise its private owners with money that we will never see again .
. ( DE ) My group welcomes the Commission 's proposal to introduce a temporary defensive mechanism for European shipyards in the light of the breakdown in the negotiations to put an immediate end to the unfair international competition in the shipbuilding sector .
We also fully support the parliamentary amendments contained in the report , and in particular the one extending the duration of the measure until the end of 2003 .
For some time now , together with colleagues from other groups , my group has been highlighting the general problems faced by European shipbuilding and the specific problems resulting from the international situation .
In September , the Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left visited eastern Germany to familiarise itself with the situation faced by shipyards there and made renewed pleas to the Commission to take action .
We see it as positive that a Commission proposal has now at last been tabled , which assures the yards , which have clearly suffered considerable damage because of unfair Korean trade practices , that help is at hand in the form of solutions which can be implemented quickly .
Many of these yards are in structurally weak regions with very severe economic and social problems and form the core of the existing economic structure .
Their existence and prosperity are the only way to secure thousands of jobs and safeguard the economic development of these regions .
However , my group also believes that further measures are necessary to safeguard the future of European shipbuilding , which is one of the essential branches of European industry .
These might include , in particular :
programmes to promote investment , which will have a long-term structural impact and create jobs ;
the promotion of European cooperation on research and development in areas which affect the maritime economy ;
the development of a coordinated maritime policy at European level ;
the formulation and implementation of a European transport policy which seeks to move freight and passenger transport from the land to the sea .
We call on the Commission to take a stance on the fundamental issues surrounding the future of European shipbuilding in the first half of 2002 and to propose an action programme to resolve the medium- and long-term problems .
I have voted in favour of this proposal because it is the lesser of two evils .
Nevertheless , this feet-dragging over unfair competition , now with South Korea , is allowing business to shift to the Far East , leading to the eradication of all shipbuilding activity in the European Union , including repairs and renovation as well as the building of new vessels .
Without operational and technologically up-to-date shipyards , our strategies for maritime safety , employment and regional cohesion will be at risk , and will be hard to recover with palliative measures .
Katiforis report ( A5-0352 / 2001 )
. ( IT ) Like all the Members in Chamber , I feel that the protection and safeguarding of human health are vital .
I therefore consider that it is of the utmost importance to uphold the position calling for the introduction of both a minimum excise duty of 57 % and a minimum payment - EUR 70 - with the aim of increasing the sales price of tobacco .
The measure is very important in that it will discourage regular consumers from using tobacco . Furthermore , it will have a preventive effect in that it will discourage those tempted to use tobacco for the first time from doing so .
As I have already pointed out in a written question - reference number P-2140 / 99 - to the European Commission , I find it absurd that we should increase European financing and contributions to tobacco growers while , at the same time , declaring that we are working to combat smoking .
I therefore call upon the European Parliament to support this measure and throw some light on the matter .
Quite clearly , the proviso must be that the Member States , as Community bodies , also increase their endeavours to prevent , control and curb illegal trading and trafficking in cigarettes .
.
( IT ) I voted for the Katiforis legislative resolution on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 92 / 79 / EEC , Directive 92 / 80 / EEC and Directive 95 / 59 / EC as regards the structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco products , which calls upon the Commission to withdraw its proposal for a number of reasons unanimously upheld by the entire Italian section of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party ( Republicans , Democrats and members of the Italy of Values party ) .
The proposal to revise the current subsidies for tobacco growing would have had a disastrous effect on the economies of entire rural areas which are some of the most disadvantaged in the European Union , as can be seen from a recent European statistical analysis carried out by Eurostat .
The Commission addresses the ' tobacco issue ' purely from the point of view of health , which is why it attempts to question the provision of Community aid to growers and goes so far as to propose an early revision of the COM in tobacco in order to reduce quotas and cut subsidies to the sector .
We feel that this opinion errs in that it is too rash , and I am glad to say that it was amended at the Gothenburg Summit .
We are convinced that it would be wrong to penalise an agricultural sector which is at the heart of the economy of countries such as Greece , Italy and Spain .
Instead of reducing cigarette consumption , the Commission ' s proposal would have created nothing but problems for manufacturers , who would have been forced to change the process of importing supplies from third countries with the result that national productions would have been replaced by lower quality imports .
Lastly , we feel that the position of those who advocate combating smoking by abolishing aid to tobacco growers is ambiguous .
Strangely , in fact , the Member States which do not grow tobacco but which have not banned smoking would receive sums benefiting their Northern European style of agriculture , which is already sufficiently subsidised , and , what is more , they would hypocritically continue to rake in millions of euro in taxes and excise duties on tobacco products and accessories .
Schörling report ( A5-0356 / 2001 )
To its credit , the Schörling report points out that " The EU is the world 's leading producer of chemicals " and that " it is high time that we developed a new strategy for controlling chemicals " .
We know that the " vast majority of existing chemicals - that have been on the market for at least 20 years - have never been properly tested " and we discover that certain serious diseases are on the increase and that " a link between these diseases and exposure to chemicals is likely " .
The report therefore recommends the rigorous control of chemicals available on the market , testing prior to any distribution of these products - and the withdrawal of any products that do not pass these tests - and a range of restrictive measures for manufacturers and commercial distributors , intended to force them to guarantee minimum safety standards .
This position does consider the interests of the public but is unpopular with the Union des Industries Chimiques , a French employers ' organisation which , in a letter to Members of the European Parliament , protests about the constraints that we are attempting to impose on companies that manufacture or sell chemical products .
This shameless lobbying by chemical company owners is in itself enough to make us vote for the Schörling report and for the measures it proposes , even if the rapporteur elsewhere declares herself to be in favour of the market .
. Both the White Paper from the Commission and the report drawn up by Mrs Schorling are flawed , the latter fundamentally .
The report is based on the general assumption that there are a large number of chemicals that pose a threat to both human health and the environment , and ignores the positive health and environmental benefits to society arising form many man-made chemicals .
Paragraph 16 of the report seeks to extend the REACH system to cover chemicals manufactured in volumes of under one tonne per year ; this will lead to a possible twenty-fold increase in the number of chemicals requiring authorisation , and an impossible workload for those given that task .
The scope should be limited to those chemicals produced in volumes over one tonne , as set out in the White Paper .
Paragraph 38 , which sets out which substance shall be classified as being of very high concern , is too broad for any authorisation system to be workable .
The definition should be restricted to CMR ( categories 1 and 2 ) , and POP substances , as defined in the Stockholm Convention .
The provisions of the report will lead to an unacceptable increase in the amount of tests carried out on animals .
A report by the Institute of Environmental Health in the United Kingdom , estimated that 12.8 million animals will be needed in the testing of 30,000 chemicals .
These figures have been echoed by many European animal welfare groups .
The rapporteur recognises this problem , but places too much faith in the availability and acceptability of non-animal tests .
Furthermore , to gather " base-set " level of information simply for chemicals manufactured in volumes over one tonne per year will take approximately 36 years alone , according to the IEH report .
The timescale set out in the report ( 2008 ) is thus completely unrealistic .
The European chemicals industry has been consulted far too late , and its attempts at self-regulation ( e.g. Product Stewardship , the Long Range Research Initiative and " Confidence in Chemicals " ) have been completely ignored by the rapporteur in this report .
Since the proposals in the report look likely to increase the administrative burden on the industry ( particularly SMEs ) , as well as dent its competitiveness on a global scale , this is a serious oversight .
. ( DE ) I have just voted against the Schörling Report .
The Group of the European People 's Party / European Democrats , to which I belong , did not manage to secure a majority in favour of its constructive amendments .
What has now been adopted has clearly been influenced too much by ideology .
Of course this is about environmental safety , but it is also about competitive and innovative jobs in the chemical industry .
Over the last few weeks I have been investigating the consequences of the Schörling Report by talking to those whom it will affect .
I have visited production plants and had discussions with management , workers and unions .
None of those parties is calling into question the aim of the Commission 's White Paper , which is to secure the sustainability of the chemical industry .
From an ecological point of view , we obviously need the greatest possible protection of the environment and consumers .
From an economic point of view , we need uniform basic conditions so as to ensure that there is fair competition for SMEs , users and processors .
From a social point of view this is about having a high level of health protection and high standards of industrial safety .
At least we were able to prevent the registration requirement for substances with a production volume of one tonne per year from being introduced .
As it is , the current classification of substances above 10 tonnes per year and the reporting requirement before they are put on the market is only being managed by the authorities with great difficulty .
The European People 's Party Group did succeed in one respect : there was no majority in favour of double testing all chemicals .
This does not increase safety and is costly in terms of time and money ; incidentally it is completely unnecessary because the authorities already examine these data .
I do not consider it acceptable to find substitutes for dangerous substances and methods which should otherwise be banned .
You cannot define a substance as ' dangerous ' on the basis of its properties , but only on the basis of its uses .
Take a knife : it is extremely useful at home and in everyday life , but it becomes dangerous if it is used as a weapon for anything from attacking people to hijacking aircraft .
It is also regrettable that it has been agreed that confidential data should be made public : if production volumes , procedures or special compositions , which account for a market advantage , all have to be declared , then we may as well do away with competition right now .
This is the lifeblood of our companies .
Any competitor can easily imitate ingenious systems .
We need to establish once and for all which data are subject to property rights and which are not .
Before the second reading in Parliament , I hope that the three committees working on this will put their heads together and come up with a more balanced proposal .
- ( PT ) I am delighted , not only with the content of the European Commission ' s new policy on chemicals , but also with the importance it is attaching to this policy , as clearly demonstrated in the strategy approved by the European Union for the ' Rio + 10 ' Conference , which is due to take place in 2002 .
I welcome , in particular , the following points :
1 ) A complete ban , within a generation , in other words by 2020 , of discharges and emissions into the environment of all dangerous substances .
2 ) The creation of a single system for the registration , evaluation and authorisation of chemicals ( REACH ) , replacing the current system that treats new substances and existing ones differently .
3 ) The adoption of the precautionary principle , through reversing the burden of proof for substances that cause great concern .
It will now fall to the manufacturer to prove that a product is not dangerous .
I welcome the Schörling report but prefer , where the tonnage threshold is concerned , the position of the European Commission .
This system , if it proves feasible , will protect Europe ' s citizens .
Using the same system to evaluate substances produced in volumes below and above one tonne per year will make the system too cumbersome and , therefore , contrary to objectives that have been defined .
I wish to explain my reasons for voting in favour of this report as amended .
First of all , I feel that it adopts a balanced position , which will improve environmental protection and public health on the one hand and which maintains the competitiveness of the chemical industry on the other , in line with the strategy for sustainable development adopted in Göteborg .
We must understand the fact that only a tiny minority of the more than 100 000 chemical substances in existence have to date been tested and that , furthermore , they are being produced in greater numbers each year .
Consequently , only 14 % of chemical substances produced in a quantity of more than one tonne are given a classification under the current system .
The tragic events in Toulouse recently demonstrated the urgent need to close this gap in our knowledge .
At the same time , we need to create a system of registration , assessment and authorisation that is ' manageable ' for public authorities and that the industry can , in due course , supplement with the necessary data .
The report ' s approach seems to be equally balanced because , apart from purely environmental considerations , it takes account of various socio-economic aspects of prospective legislation , not least the fact that workers in the chemical industry are more exposed , and the specific constraints affecting small and medium-sized enterprises .
Similarly , the report favours transparency whilst respecting data protection and industrial secrecy , which I think is to be welcomed .
Clear references to the precautionary principle and the substitution principle have , furthermore , been added to the Commission text .
Lastly , one of the most important points , to my mind , is still the requirement for all substances to be registered , even if some of them are only registered in a simplified form .
It is often the substances produced in smaller quantities that are the most dangerous for health or for the environment .
I also feel that the timetables put forward in the report are appropriate because they are realistic .
I am very pleased that the White Paper will be followed up with a range of legislative proposals by the Commission and I look forward with great interest to seeing them .
The Committee on the Environment ' s vote on this report sends a clear message to industry and to the national authorities to thoroughly monitor chemical substances , and this must be accompanied by the elimination of substances that are toxic and harmful to health and to the environment .
We therefore fully support the approach of this report which improves , on a number of points , the already ambitious Commission proposal .
Having said that , in order to be understood , our message must also be balanced .
This is why we support a pragmatic approach and reject a raft of unrealistic demands that would heavily penalise the European chemical industry .
I wish to point out that this industry directly or indirectly involves no less than 5 million jobs .
I shall turn first of all to paragraph 16 , which calls for the registration of all substances of less than one tonne in weight : this means that 100 000 products are involved instead of the 30 000 proposed by the Commission , tens of thousands of files , impossible bureaucracy , a nightmare for the numerous SMEs in the sector and all of this for products which , for the most part , never reach the market .
Extending the scope of the authorisation procedure ( paragraph 38 ) is also unfeasible : in order to avoid an unmanageable situation , we call , in Amendment No 68 , for substances for which there is no proof of toxicity to be excluded .
In conclusion , although we must send a message that is powerful , it must also be credible .
Sending a declaration of war to industry , to the workers and to the national authorities seems neither appropriate nor productive .
Given the risk that chemicals present to people ' s health and to the environment , we Swedish Christian Democrats believe it to be obvious that , in accordance with the principle of ' no data , no marketing ' , chemicals which have not undergone certain tests should not be allowed to be marketed , either .
Furthermore , we support the substitution principle which has long been a well-established principle of Swedish chemicals policy .
In the same way , we believe that a reversed burden of proof should apply to substances that give cause for concern , which means that it is the industry , not the authorities , which has to demonstrate that a subject can be used in an acceptable way .
Because chemicals can involve significant risks in smaller quantities too , we believe that chemicals in quantities of less than a tonne which are imported to , or produced within , the EU should also be covered by the new system .
In that way , we shall in quite a few respects be departing from the position adopted by the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats .
Corbey report ( A5-0323 / 2001 )
These days , outrageous packaging is a form of advertising in order to entice buyers .
A great deal of material is wasted on it .
It sounds environmentally aware to blame the consumers who buy packaged food or packaged products .
However , those consumers do not create waste themselves , but are left with it following their purchases .
They become the victim of conditional sales , because these days , it is often impossible to buy anything without wrapping .
That is why we need to tackle the production and sale of waste at source instead of focusing on the consumers .
In the proposed resolution , Mrs Corbey is right to make manufactures and retailers responsible for the prevention of the production of packaging waste and notes that precious little has been achieved since the 1994 packaging directive .
The European Commission remains disinclined to present fresh proposals , and the Member States implement earlier recycling agreements with a delay of years .
The rapporteur ' s proposal is still torn between two ideas .
I wholeheartedly agree with her attempt to prevent waste .
However , I differ with her on the proposal to get the consumer to pay more for all that waste .
Re-use may be important , but is not the most important solution .
Salafranca Sánchez Negra report ( A5-0336 / 2001 )
We are voting against the report in spite of the sound initiatives it contains concerning partnership between the EU and the Latin American countries on , for example , conflict prevention , development cooperation and combating poverty and the drugs trade .
Our opposition is due to the fact that a number of the proposals in the report take supranational cooperation on , for example , defence , security and foreign policy , as well as on areas of institutional , legal and internal concern as something that goes without saying in the EU .
We believe that cooperation in the aforesaid areas can be fully engaged in through intergovernmental cooperation .
The few words the report contains on " health , education and the fight against abject poverty " , " the fight against drugs " and " protection of the environment " , some of the objectives that the European Union claims it is promoting in that part of the world , are nothing more than a smokescreen for considerably more disreputable intentions .
By proposing that " the aim of the new agreement should ultimately be the bilateral and preferential liberalisation , on a gradual and reciprocal basis , of the trade in all kinds of goods and services between the two regions , in accordance with WTO rules , " the countries of the European Union are showing that they could not care less about the fate of the peoples of Latin America .
They would like , first and foremost , to make up for their slowness in penetrating the Latin American markets , which are already in a parlous state due to the presence of even more powerful predators , such as the North American multinationals .
Instead of the promised development , the opening up of the markets to huge companies and to the financial establishment has plunged Latin America into poverty .
At least 224 million Latin Americans live in abject poverty , in other words , more than 40 % of the population of that region !
And there is not even any discussion of cancelling the debts that are strangling these countries .
We have consequently voted against this report .
- ( PT ) The Rio summit of 28 / 29 June 1999 marked the beginning of a new phase in bi-regional relations with a view to creating a strategic partnership between the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean .
The main objectives of the new Joint Strategy must , in line with the priorities adopted in Rio , be political , such as with the extension of the Bi-Regional Political Agenda ; the update and revision of political dialogue at ministerial level and the creation of a EU-Latin American Transatlantic Assembly ; economic , financial and commercial , such as the conclusion of various Association Agreements and the creation of a EU-Latin America Free Trade Area , which is planned for 2010 , and social and cultural , such as the creation of a Bi-regional Solidarity Fund and a global plan to combat drugs , amongst others .
I therefore give my total support to the rapporteur ' s position reiterating the need to establish the bi-regional strategic partnership approved at the Rio summit and in the recommendation to the European Council with a view to approving the EU ' s common strategy for Latin America and the Caribbean , on the basis of the objectives established in the Rio summit ' s priorities .
Lastly , the report highlights the need to improve cooperation on the basis of a sustained and integrated partnership , with a view to promoting human development and the development of civil society and the consequent benefits to all levels of society .
Motion for a resolution on air transport ( B5-0702 / 2001 )
Claiming that the airlines are suffering as a result of the 11 September attacks on the United States is a barefaced lie .
Although some carriers have had problems , these are not new and not all airlines are in that position . Far from it .
Air France ' s share dividends , for example , have increased by 22 % , and this happened three days after the attacks on New York and Washington .
It has just bought out Air Afrique and brought Alitalia under its wing as well as the Czech airline CSA .
And , like other large European airlines , it is also doing very well out of the bankruptcies of AOM-Air Liberté , Sabena and Swissair .
This is the result of giving free rein to the market , which national and European leaders claim should govern everything , the economy and the fate of workers .
In recent years in Europe , this has led to hundreds of thousands of job losses in the air transport sector alone , which does not cause national and European leaders to bat an eyelid because huge profits are consequently pocketed by the companies ' shareholders , such as the incredibly wealthy Baron Seillière , the French " bosses ' boss " .
The attacks of 11 September have simply been an excuse for the capitalists in the air transport sector to receive new subsidies while pursuing their offensive against their employees .
And they have been aided and protected in this endeavour by the various national governments .
We have seen this again recently in France , in Belgium and in Switzerland with companies going bankrupt and sacking tens of thousands of employees , at no cost at all to the key players who are largely responsible for these bankruptcies , such as Baron Seillière .
We have , therefore , voted against this motion for a resolution which is cynical enough to claim that it is for the sake of employment that it wants to give further subsidies to the companies and capitalists in the air transport sector , who are already responsible for making hundreds of thousands of people redundant .
The reason why I am unable to vote for this resolution is that it is mainly founded on the idea of protecting the expansion of aviation which , until recently , was deemed self-evident .
To date , this expansion has posed a major problem for the environment , leading to increasing levels of pollution , growing insecurity and increasing pressure on public space for airports .
Furthermore , aviation firmly had the edge on railways in terms of taxes , because kerosene is still not taxed , while all forms of travel on the ground are .
Even before 11 September , there was every reason to search for possibilities to stop and reverse this expansion .
The fact that the number of passengers has now dropped dramatically should not be a reason for supporting airline companies by granting even more tax money , but rather a reason for investing in the improvement of other forms of intra-European passenger transport .
A surcharge on the aircraft rates which have taken a nose dive over the last few years due to competition can cover the dramatic upsurge in insurance premiums .
There is no reason for injecting more public funding into aviation .
However , that money is needed desperately to protect the position of the workers of airline companies .
They thought for years that they had a secure , government-protected job in a growth industry , but the industry is now shrinking or even going bankrupt .
( The sitting was suspended at 2.00 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer
The next item is the report ( A5-0348 / 2001 ) by Mr Bouwman , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on amending Council Directive 80 / 987 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer [ COM ( 2000 ) 832 - C5-0017 / 2001 - 2001 / 0008 ( COD ) ] .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before we start the debate on my report - and I hope you are also keeping an eye on the time - I should like to raise a matter in connection with the way in which we will be dealing with this report further .
It was scheduled to be debated before twelve noon . It has overrun .
There is nothing that can be done about this , for that is how it is in this House .
It is a report in the framework of the codecision procedure on employees ' rights and insolvency .
I , as rapporteur , have nothing against the fact that we are debating it now , but I do disagree with the fact that we would subsequently vote on it during a very vague gathering of votes later on this afternoon .
I should therefore like to request - and I have already discussed this with the larger groups - to decide beforehand that we will debate the report now but that we will postpone the vote to the brief part-session in Brussels and possibly to a later date , although I am very much opposed to this .
That also gives us the opportunity of tabling a number of amendments and changes as a whole .
It seemed a totally uncontroversial report , but nevertheless , there are a number of elements which require further discussion .
That is why I would ask to postpone the vote until the next part-session .
I do not know whether you can respond to this now .
Thank you , Mr Bouwman , I have taken note of your request .
We can have one speaker in favour of your request and one speaker against .
Who would like to speak out in favour ?
That is Mrs Van den Burg .
You have the floor for one minute .
I should like to support the request because in my view , it is indeed inappropriate to be voting on a report in the framework of the codecision procedure in a very small gathering of this Parliament .
Furthermore , it will probably give us some more time to consider other compromises for issues which are currently controversial , because it is also a complex report which contains a number of ambiguities about the different amendments .
I would therefore like to support the request .
Thank you , Mrs Van den Burg .
Mr Gollnisch would like to speak against the request .
You have one minute .
I do not really need a minute , Madam President . I requested the floor on a point of order , but , in fact , my point fully echoes the concerns of the rapporteur .
I would like to know whether the Commission might be able to give us any indication of its reasons for withdrawing its communication initially scheduled on the agenda on the World Trade Organisation and , possibly , when this important communication might be given .


Thank you , Mr Gollnisch , I shall deal with that request in a moment , but let us first finish the point that is on the agenda , namely the request by Mr Bouwman .
( Parliament decided to refer the report back to committee ) I would now like to give the floor to Mrs Diamantopoulou and give her the opportunity to state briefly why the WTO debate has been taken off the agenda .
Madam President , I just wish to say that it was impossible for Mr Lamy to be here because the WTO meeting lasted longer than expected .
So the Commission will certainly make a statement to Parliament on the WTO , but I cannot say when that will be .
Mr Lamy will come here as soon as he can .
Thank you , Mrs Diamantopoulou , I can only endorse what you have just said .
I myself have only just returned from Doha , and it was a tough negotiating round .
Mr Lamy only landed in Brussels at 6 a.m. this morning , so I trust we can all be accommodating in this matter .
Mr Bouwman , I am giving you , as rapporteur , the floor for five minutes to present your report .
I should like to express my thanks once again , for the broad support for the proposals .
This might well be a Pyrrhic victory , but we shall have to wait and see .
I wanted to raise the following matter .
We have here a document on employees ' rights in the event of insolvency , that is to say when a business is no longer able to meet its financial obligations .
It is a revision of Council Directive 80 / 987EEC with a number of improvements on what was in there before .
A directive such as this aims to give a minimum level of protection in the event of insolvency .
Almost at the same time that I was appointed rapporteur for this dossier , a group of people turned up from the Sintel company in Spain - a company that was split off from Telefonica , sold by them , in fact . They had been campaigning in Madrid for months because they had not been paid for months .
In other words , in addition to what I already knew at the time , this realistic description was sufficient to show me at first-hand how significant this report , concealed behind a mass of insolvency terminology , is .
The old document , of course , dates back to 1980 .
A great deal has changed since then , especially within the labour markets , in terms of types of employees and descriptions of the same , the economy has become more globalised and internationalised , there are more businesses that operate both within a certain country and outside it .
In addition , there are still cases where it is unclear which country ought to pay out social security benefits .
Of course , there have been a number of procedures for the Court of Justice to deal with , and all these aspects combined have led to the Commission presenting a proposal to change the existing directive .
The three main problems at the time were : the concept of insolvency , the placing of a time-limit on the guarantee and , particularly , insolvency cases with a cross-border dimension .
I have great admiration for those who have submitted the Commission proposals and who have tabled a few amendments following detailed discussions .
These mainly pertain to the new legal basis following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the clarification of the scope and the possible scrapping of the annexes in which quite a few groups are mentioned which can be excluded or not , as the case may be , the new definition of the term ' intervention ' and especially the new provisions establishing the guarantee fund that covers cross-border cases .
In my view , it is important to revisit what I describe as the scope as a whole , for the question as to which categories could still be exempt is still subject to possible debate , especially in the field of domestic staff and the so-called share fishermen .
If I had my way , I would scrap this as a whole , as I have also said during the debate .
I think that the Commission would also be in favour of this , but a number of countries provide for exemption provisions , and we do not want to make life too difficult for them .
What we do consider important is that the Commission has meanwhile included a number of elements which were already being developed within this labour market , where , for example , part-time workers , workers with a temporary agency employment relationship , or workers with fixed-term contracts , are concerned via existing directives in these intervention directives .
Since we are as yet unsure about the implications of this , we have to point out - as have many , as will be clear in a moment - that these days , there are an ever increasing number of categories of self-employed , including the quasi self-employed as they are referred to by some , without staff , with staff who would or would not qualify , and then especially those without staff .
Those with staff are , in fact , employers .
In addition , we still have categories of home workers - mind the translation in this case - because it literally means those working from home , and this could well be the topic of a number of discussions .
In fact , it would also be very useful if some progress were made in the legislative work in line with the discussion in the framework of the social dialogue on modernising labour relations , and that is why we made a number of proposals that are now before you .
In this connection , I would therefore ask my fellow MEPs to back amendments which pertain to the self-employed without staff , so as to open the debate with the Council in any case .
I should like to point out that what is at issue is a codecision procedure and that we will be entering into negotiations after second reading in order to be able to take a step forward in the field of social security and social policy in Europe .
Madam President , it is a little odd that I should have to take the floor on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , but that is because Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , who has written the opinion for Mr Bouwman ' s report - on which I should like to congratulate him warmly - is unable to attend due to a change in schedule .
I can , in fact , be relatively brief about the opinion .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has particularly attempted to underline the legal aspects of this directive .
A number of elements have been adopted , while a number of other elements have not been adopted by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
In any case , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market deems it extremely important for the opinion to be thought-out well .
That is why it is also important to return it to the committee , so that it can re-examined very carefully .
That also - and perhaps mainly - applies to the position of the self-employed .
Indeed , I welcome the fact that the self-employed fall within its scope , at least the self-employed who can be compared to employees .
However , there is , of course , the risk that we give people who we actually do not want to fall within the scope of this definition at all , a tremendous opportunity , turning them into a kind of preferred creditor in a bankruptcy .
I am not certain whether in the texts as they are worded now , sufficient distinction is being drawn between the two situations , in fact .
That is a problem that will require further examination , also in terms of the position of the self-employed .
Madam President , Commissioner , before I start my speech I would like to inform Mr Bouwman that the company he was referring to is the Sintel company , which went bankrupt , forcing unemployment on a large number of its employees .
However , several months ago the Spanish Government took on the responsibility of making backdated wage payments to Sintel ' s employees , relocating or finding other such solutions for all those affected .
I say this so that you may be fully informed , Mr Bouwman .
Now I will move on to my speech on this report .
The document we are debating refers to the proposal for amending Directive 80 / 987 / EEC on the approximation of national laws relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer .
Mr Bouwman has , in fact , given a very clear example of this situation .
The amendment aims to take into account changes to insolvency law in Member States and the need for consistency with other Community directives on labour law already adopted .
All of this should be based on a political will to provide employees with a minimum degree of protection under Community law in the event of their employer becoming insolvent .

The difficulties involved in achieving the intended objective of the Directive are , in my opinion , threefold : firstly , the concept of insolvency ; secondly , the complexity of the arrangement introduced to allow a time and quantity limits to be placed on the guarantee ; thirdly , insolvency cases with a cross-border dimension .
With the aim of clarifying the situation , the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has once again tabled two amendments : No 16 , which includes cases of externalisation or similar , subcontracts , the ' fake self-employed ' , etc . , all of which could conceal a true employment contract .
In our opinion , we need to reveal the truth before protective methods are implemented , to protect the salaried employee .
To not do this would be to open the floodgates which would quickly exhaust the fund in question .
Amendment No 17 clarifies the notion of protectable earnings from the corresponding national fund and prevents fraud .
All of this is inherent to the protective nature of labour legislation and is inspired by the desire to clearly define the concepts needed for the fund to serve its purpose .
This is a clarification of ideas which aids progress towards legal certainty and harmonisation .
Regrettably , this is a case which , as we have recently witnessed with another Belgian company , is taking place in large companies , due to the restructuring of these companies and the relations which currently exist in the economic world .
Madam President , I do not know whether this afternoon was the first time that you have been in the chair , presiding over Parliament . If it is , congratulations .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur on his exceptionally good report and sound preparations for this dossier .
I fear that in the current climate , the report is indeed very topical and that this will continue to be the case for the foreseeable future .
All the more reason for ensuring that we protect those employees who are faced with bankruptcy and suspension of payment .
That is the rationale underlying the preparations for this report .
I am also pleased that we in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have reached overwhelming agreement .
There are a few loose ends that need tying up , a few points on which we do not yet see eye to eye completely .
A moment ago , I heard Mr Pronk say that it is indeed possible that there are still a number of misunderstandings concerning amendments .
I am thinking in particular of the point he made , namely the fact that on the one hand , we also want a number of self-employed , notably self-employed who are very much like employees , to fall within the scope of the regulation , but on the other hand , this should not open the floodgates to mutual aid between employers and service providers who would be able to use those funds .
We are agreed on the intention .
We should use the time we now have until the actual vote to consider whether those misunderstandings can be removed and whether this joint intention can be expressed in a compromise amendment .
In my view , the point about the self-employed is a very important one , particularly in this dossier .
However , it also crops up in a number of other dossiers .
That is why I should like to draw the Commissioner ' s attention to this point and ask him whether the Commission could show some more initiative both on this matter and on the matter of defining which categories should in fact be comparable with employees .
This is not only of paramount importance for the issue of insolvency , of course , but also for a lot of other aspects of employment protection and labour law .
Those definitions in European law are still left for the Member States to deal with .
We have noticed that there are rather considerable discrepancies between them .
As cross-border employment increases , and this will become ever more popular in the European Union , it will mean that we will be increasingly faced with different definitions and different groups which will cause disruption to labour market relations .
Enlargement in particular is a huge cause for concern , as we have already witnessed in the past and are witnessing at the moment in the EU ' s border regions .
I should therefore like to ask the Commissioner what initiatives she intends to take on this score and urge her to adopt a pro-active stance on this .
Madam President , my congratulations to the rapporteur on a job well done , together with my thanks for his help in ensuring that the amendments needed to the overall endeavour were accepted .
The amendments to this directive follow on from amendments to two other directives relating to mass redundancies and company transfers , the common objective of all of which is to protect workers ' interests when companies are restructured and we must not forget this .
They therefore ipso facto raise the question of coordinating the common concepts used and I think that we need to pay attention to this when the amendments are finalised .
Secondly , this directive also fails to address the question of communitising the definition of salaries .
Despite the difficulties inherent in this endeavour , the Fifteen need to adopt a minimum common definition of the concept of employee if the directive is to be applied uniformly .
Otherwise , every country , depending on whether it has a broader or narrower understanding of the concept , will differentiate the scope of the directive as it sees fit .
We need to tread carefully on this point .
The proposed amendments , which I too support , include extending the scope of the directive to employees under what qualify as " implied " contracts in national legislation .
If we are not mature enough to extend the directive to the self-employed , we could at least extend the scope of the directive to employees who are self-employed but who are treated as employees under special legislation .
Secondly , this amendment is an inclusion in the sense of covered claims and severance pay , as provided for in International Labour Convention No. 173 , and I fail to see why we cannot cover them in Europe .
Thirdly , it is the clearest redefinition of the meaning of insolvency so as to include any collective insolvency proceedings and not just traditional bankruptcy proceedings .
In any case it is also in the objectives of the directive and has not approximated any formulation .
The House would be well advised to approve these three amendments .
Madam President , I welcome the favourable reception that the Commission proposal has received and I would like to thank Parliament for its contributions aimed at further reinforcing the protection of workers affected by the insolvency of their employer .
The Insolvency Directive has proved to be an invaluable instrument for protecting employees in cases of economic downturns and it will be a key legislative instrument to respond to the present climate of closures and redundancies .
Although the basic structure of the directive should be retained , specific points of the directive need to be revised .
I welcome Amendment No 2 which aims to prevent the introduction of new restrictions beyond those currently in place in the Member States , and also Amendment No 9 which proposes to prohibit threshold provisions in order to qualify for claims under the directive .
I am also in favour of Amendment No 4 which proposes to extend the protection of workers of employers in other insolvency situations beyond those situations covered by the definition of insolvency proposed by the Commission .
Firstly , the broadening of the definition is fully acceptable .
However , on Amendment No 6 , the extension to any other procedure or even to " de facto " situations of insolvency can only be accepted as an option for the Member States and not as an obligation .
I can also accept Amendment No 11 , which proposes to add severance pay on termination of the employment relationship , with the addition of the term " where appropriate " .
The term " pay " should continue to be defined in the national law of the Member States .
Amendment No 14 , which proposes the abolition of a ceiling , is not acceptable in its entirety but I share your concerns on this point and I could accept a provision which allows ceilings which are compatible with the social purpose of the directive in order to avoid a level which is unacceptable for workers .
I am also ready to supplement this provision with a non-regression clause which impedes Member States from lowering the protection already provided when implementing the amended directive .
Finally , I can accept the reintroduction of the old Article 5 of the directive - Amendment No 15 - but this only in the old unchanged version of this article in the 1980 directive .
I am unable to accept the remaining amendments , in particular Amendment No 13 which aims to increase the minimum period for pay to six months .
Such an increase would seriously reduce the chance of the directive being adopted and would place a further considerable financial burden on the public purse and employers which would in turn cast doubt on the system of pay guarantees as a whole .
I cannot accept Amendment No 1 , which aims to prevent employees from being " converted " to self-employed persons ; Amendment No 7 which proposes the introduction of a Community definition of " employee " ; nor Amendments Nos 8 and 16 which propose to add categories of workers who may not be excluded from the scope of the directive .
Efforts to combat illegal " conversion " must be made at national level .
A Community definition of an employed person should not be included in a particular directive , and self-employed workers cannot be covered because they do not have an employer who could be insolvent .
In line with your comments I agree that there are different types of self-employed people .
There are some self-employed people who are economically dependent .
This issue was raised in 2000 when we had consultation with the social partners .
The responses of the social partners emphasised the need to clarify and analyse the situation in all Member States because there is a diversity of situations , there are many different kinds of self-employed people .
This was the reason why we have already launched a study which will provide us with an overview of the nature of the phenomenon across the European Union .
Once we have the results of the study , the Commission will analyse it and after a consultation with the social partners we will present the appropriate way to deal with this issue .
The other categories - home-workers and those in similar categories - are covered to the extent that they are considered to be employees under national law .
There is , therefore , no need to mention them specifically .
Finally , some amendments should be rejected because they would not help to achieve the underlying objective of the proposal .
To sum up , I can accept , subject to some minor redrafting , Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 6 , 9 , and 11 , and parts of Amendments Nos 14 and 15 .
I reject Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 16 , 17 and 18 .
I would like to thank you for your contribution .
I would particularly like to thank and congratulate Mr Bouwman for his contribution and for the report .
The vote was postponed a moment ago , just before the debate started .
You will hear in due course when this will take place .
The debate is now closed .
I thank you .
Oh , I am sorry , Mr Bouwman .
I should briefly like to take the opportunity to congratulate the Vice-President of this meeting at the end of the debate of her first report as Vice-President .
Thank you very much .
It was a pleasure to start off with a Dutch rapporteur .
The next item is the report by Mr Nobilia on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on new European labour markets , open to all , with access for all .
New European labour markets
Madam President , on behalf of my colleague , Mr Nobilia who is not present and on behalf of my Group , I wish to invoke Rule 146 and ask the House to postpone this debate until the December part-session .
Mr Nobilia has tried various other means to have the debate postponed but , unfortunately , Parliament ' s Rules of Procedure do not permit this . We therefore , have no option but to ask the House , pursuant to Rule 146 , as I said , to grant a postponement until December - of both the debate and the vote .

Mr Ribeiro , I have taken note of your request .
I should now like to give the floor to a speaker who would like to speak in favour of this request .
Mr Pronk , you have one minute .
Madam President , allow me to add my congratulations on your first debate in which so many Dutch people have taken the floor .
This sentiment is also shared by the Christian Democratic Appeal as the largest delegation in the largest group .
The request is logical in my view .
The matter has been reassigned , something which Mr Nobilia was not aware of .
It is an important report and it seems that we are doing the right thing .
I do not believe that this is the right time to conduct a proper debate , nor is this the right way . We have to postpone it .
It is not necessary to reach a vote at all cost today . That is why we support this request .
Mr Pronk is therefore in favour of postponement .
I would now put the request to the vote .
( Parliament decided to refer the report back to committee ) I believe that we do this regretfully , for there are so many things that are being shelved and the year has not long to run .
However , the debate has thus been held over until the next time .
That means , ladies and gentlemen , that we will be adjourning the meeting until 4 p.m. because that is when the topical and urgent debate will commences .
Thank you for your attendance .
I declare the sitting adjourned until 4 p.m.
( The sitting was adjourned at 3.35 p.m. and resumed at 4 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Accident in the Gotthard Tunnel
We shall start with the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0710 / 2001 by Mrs Wallis , Mrs Sanders-ten Holte and Mr Caveri , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the accident in the Saint Gotthard tunnel ;
B5-0718 / 2001 by Mrs Isler Béguin and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the accident in the Saint Gotthard tunnel ;
B5-0724 / 2001 , by Mr Simpson and Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the accident in the Saint Gotthard tunnel ;
B5-0725 / 2001 by Mrs Ainardi and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the accident in the Saint Gotthard tunnel ;
B5-0734 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the accident in the Saint Gotthard tunnel .
Mr President , the very recent and all too familiar disasters that have taken place in the Mont Blanc and Gotthard tunnels reveal the terrible truth about Europe ' s current transport policy .
And in this case , revealing the truth can only lead to condemnation .
The world of road transport seems to have broken free from any legal framework , from any control standards .
Freight companies exempt themselves from having operating permits , work permits are becoming optional for drivers who increasingly come from outside the Union , when their driving times verge on the limit and when they themselves verge on sleep .
How many more Gotthards and Mont Blancs must go up in flames before they are covered by strict legislation , by an effective system of controls which is both harmonised and trans-European ?
The residents of all sensitive or high-density areas and all professionals are calling for Europe to intervene and the matter is of the greatest urgency .
The most sensible course of action would now be to set up safety escorts for convoys of lorries in every major tunnel .
Until this first safety measure is put in place , lives will still be in danger when these two accident-stricken tunnels are reopened .
We must no longer be asked to show patience over this harmonisation of safety standards for tunnels . Instead , the finger must be clearly pointed and this political nervousness , this lack of commitment on the part of public authorities to the costly but necessary restructuring of underground tunnels must be condemned .
Although a review of practices in the road transport sector is required , an in-depth discussion of our transport policy is no less needed .
The tragedies that have taken place in these tunnels demonstrate the physical and ideological shortcomings of the ' everything by road ' approach , which clogs up transport links and chokes the environment .
Let us open up our eyes , then , and cast off the blinkers that force us to see only roads , and we will finally see the entire European network of stations and railway lines that are almost completely overlooked in terms of providing piggyback transport .
We will see that some ports , such as those in Italy , offer transit options that are likely to reduce traffic considerably on the road links of European trade .
The memory of the victims of Gotthard and Mont Blanc must inspire us to adopt a new approach , one that is more forward looking and more respectful of our means of transport .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you will recall , in the last Strasbourg week we had actually planned to have a debate to celebrate the opening of the Mont Blanc Tunnel .
In fact even then we were already discussing the tragic accident in the Gotthard Tunnel .
If we continue just to talk about this and do not take any measures then we will have to be prepared for the fact that there will be more accidents in these delicate and sensitive areas , in particular in the Alps .
However , in my opinion , and on the basis of my understanding of politics , this is unacceptable .
That is why we must do all we can to actually implement the proposals which the Commission has already rightly made in its White Paper .
I have no doubt that specific safety measures are also needed in the tunnels .
I have no doubt that stricter monitoring of working time , above all , is also required .
I hope that we will soon conclude the conciliation on this and that we will then move on to implementing and monitoring the measures on working time across Europe .
However , the fundamental problem is surely that there is too much freight rumbling through the Alps by road in heavy goods vehicles .
This is certainly not - as time and again it is wrongly assumed , appealing to popular sentiment - about standing in the way of economic links and cohesion ; it is simply about this cohesion , these economic links and trade in general being created in a way which firstly is environmentally sustainable and secondly minimises the risk of accidents .
We will never be able to avoid them altogether , but we can minimise them and in so doing we can also above all give the railways a golden opportunity .
I - and I myself have also produced a report on opening up international freight routes - am in favour of the railways being stronger competitors here .
At the same time , I am however , on behalf of my group , also in favour of the transport policy , as postulated and laid down in the White Paper - I will say this once more in conclusion - being implemented quickly , in fact very quickly indeed , so that steps can be taken as soon as possible to avoid there being more accidents like the one in the Gotthard Tunnel .
Who could possibly be against the content of this motion for a resolution when , following the Mont Blanc tragedy , a tunnel has , once again , caused loss of life ?
Parliament will , most likely , vote in favour of the resolution .
We will move down the agenda and things will continue as before , because calling for an integrated transport policy for the whole of the Alpine region in one resolution is not enough to ensure that it is actually implemented .
There must be a genuine rethink of transport policy at European level .
There must be the political will to confront the road transport lobby and , above all , there must be investment to develop rail networks to meet the needs of everyone , not just to make profit .
This would require a radical break with your policy of privatisation and of dismantling public services .
Furthermore , the organisation of goods transport is inseparable from the global economic system .
The development , for example , of the zero stock system , which is highly profitable for private interests , is an aberration from the social point of view , because it is responsible , to a large extent , for clogging up the roads .
Giving priority to private interests , therefore , is bound to conflict with the general interest .
This motion for a resolution , for which we will be voting , will just be added to the long wish list that the European Parliament is continually producing .
Mr President , it seems to be fate . On the final day of the last part-session - 24 October 2001 - we were discussing the reopening of the Mont Blanc tunnel .
There was a bit of an argument - some were in favour , such as yours truly , and some wanted to put back the date of this major event .
Suddenly , into the middle of the debate came the news of the other incident in the St Gotthard tunnel , an unforeseen incident similar to that which had occurred in the Mont Blanc tunnel and which we had thought would now never be repeated .
Those in favour of opening the Mont Blanc tunnel to traffic immediately were once again advocating this line of action on health grounds , basing their argument particularly on a document produced by the operating company , which , pompously - and maybe rightly - stated that the Mont Blanc tunnel , rebuilt after the accident , is now the safest in the world .
I remember announcements , official pronouncements , so to speak , describing the St Gotthard tunnel as the most important tunnel certainly in Europe if not in the world .
Now we know that a very run-of-the-mill accident was enough in the past , is enough now and will be enough in future to turn these megasafe tunnels into people traps , and the many victims always pay with their lives .
It is difficult to apportion blame for these incidents ; moreover , that is not for us to do .
However , one statistic does need to be mentioned here , for it concerns something for which we and , in particular , the Commission are responsible .
Indeed , considering that five times as many vehicles pass through the St Gotthard tunnel as usually run on all the other major routes through the Alps , we are faced with a transport policy error , and that is partly the fault of Europe , for most of the vehicles , particularly the heavy goods vehicles , are European .
I would therefore put two questions to the Commission .
What has happened to the directive on harmonising the minimum safety requirements for road and rail tunnels ?
And I would ask the Commission , what has happened to the action plan for an integrated transport policy in the Alpine region ?
When the answers have been given to these two questions , we can proceed to the usual road versus rail argument .
Lastly , Mr President , I do not agree that heavy goods vehicles should be banned from using the tunnel .
Road haulage contractors have a right of passage and a right to provide a service as well .
Mr President , the dramatic repercussions of the accident in the St Gotthard tunnel , especially after the equally tragic repercussions in the Mont Blanc and Val Thorens tunnels , have put the issue of tunnel safety right at the top of the agenda .
We need to push ahead on two fronts at European level .
First , we need enhanced specifications and , secondly , we need to support motorrail services through the Alps .
The Commission announced in the White Paper referred to by almost all the members that it intends to propose European regulations setting out minimum safety standards for tunnels .
These standards will apply to technical equipment , traffic regulations , user information , training for staff operating the tunnels , for staff dealing with accidents when problems arise and for rescue services .
It is a complicated endeavour which needs to take account of a plethora of different parameters , given the extent to which one tunnel differs from another in terms of geography , size and traffic density .
At present , the Commission is carrying out pre-preparatory work with the help of first-class experts , with a view to submitting a proposal to Parliament at the beginning of 2002 .
In the meantime , it also intends to convene a meeting of political and economic agencies operating in the Alps and the Pyrenees .
Of course , even the best legislative proposals are no good unless they are adopted and applied .
And as regards the safety of tunnels in particular , I should like to remind the House of other proposals which have yet to be adopted .
I should like to remind the House of the proposal to introduce digital tachographs which allow the time spent on the road by lorry drivers to be controlled accurately and which several Member States have opposed .
Or the Commission proposal on working conditions for lorry drivers , which Mr Swoboda has already referred to .
Then there is the question of certifying professional drivers and the question of small lorries which constantly exceed the 90 kilometre limit and have become accidents waiting to happen on the majority of roads in most Member States .
The fire in this tunnel also illustrates the need for information for tunnel users .
It is clear that , had users been informed , many could have escaped via the emergency exit or by getting out of their cars immediately .
And , of course , this particular accident again raises the question of freight transport through the Alps .
The absolute priority , in the medium term , is to provide rail links to alleviate freight transport with motorrail services as quickly as possible and this is one of the major priorities in the White Paper .
In the period between 1994 and 2000 , the European Commission funded studies into the implementation of the new Lyon-Turin rail link . So far 60 million has been spent , about 50 % of the total cost .
This project , in which the Community is , to date , indisputably the biggest provider of funds , is one of 14 projects approved by the European Union Council in Essen in 1994 which , unfortunately , it will not be possible to complete before 2010 .
The Brenner rail route also needs to be commissioned as quickly as possible , in accordance with the 1996 guidelines on the western European transport network .
So what can be done in the short term following the problem created by the closure of the St Gotthard tunnel ?
Immediate use should be made of motorrail facilities in the Alps .
This accident , and its dramatic repercussions , are yet another reason to make every possible effort to shift freight from the roads to the railways , a mode of transport which only accounts for 8 % of the market in Europe , compared with 40 % in the United States .
The European Commission has also taken new initiatives .
In January 2001 , it proposed that the Council sign the transport protocol annexed to the Alpine Convention on behalf of the European Commission , as a political message on restoring the balance of distribution between the various modes of transport .
Because of difficulty in funding these projects , the White Paper proposes Community legislation laying down fairer pricing principles which take account of all the costs incurred for each mode of transport , together with safety costs .
To conclude , the Commission has taken or intends to take various specific measures in order to resolve the particular problems besetting the Pyrenees , the Alps and other sensitive areas .
And I can assure you that it will make every effort to guarantee users the highest possible safety standards .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
That concludes the joint debate .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Massacre of 200 civilians in the Federal Republic of Nigeria
B5-0711 / 2001 by Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne and Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the human rights situation in Nigeria ;
B5-0712 / 2001 by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the human rights situation in Nigeria ;
B5-0713 / 2001 by Mr Bowis , Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Deva , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the incidents of 22 October in the State of Benue , Central Nigeria ;
B5-0720 / 2001 by Mr Swoboda and Mr Sauquillo Pérez del Arco , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the massacre of civilians in Nigeria ;
B5-0726 / 2001 by Mrs Morgantini and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the human rights situation in Nigeria ;
B5-0732 / 2001 by Mrs Maes , Mrs McKenna and Mr Rod , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the human rights situation in Nigeria ;
B5-0735 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the incidents in the State of Benue , Nigeria .
In order to achieve world peace , it is essential for people of different creeds and races to respect each other and live together in peace .
This is not the case in an increasing number of countries in the world , and that is an extremely worrying trend .
Unfortunately , Nigeria is an alarming case in point .
Precious little is left of the hopes which the democratically elected president had raised as successor of the corrupt military regime .
Ethnic and religious feuds are now the order of the day across the country . Not a month goes by without blood being shed .
The number of casualties is running into the hundreds and the situation is getting worse , not better .
In that light , the balance sheet for October is shocking .
There was fighting between Muslims and Christians in Jos and disturbances in Kano where , moreover , there has been a cholera outbreak . The government army carried out ethnic atrocities and massacres in the Middle Belt .
The government itself was shrouded in silence .
Only after two weeks did President Obasanjo announce that a special committee would investigate the murders .
The billion-dollar question is whether the president is actually up to the task of running this country which is extremely difficult to govern .
Apparently , his position is not strong enough in order to keep the country united and allow the different nations to live together peacefully .
It is frightening .
Just now when we are nearly free of the Taliban , we are lumbered with regions such as the north of Nigeria , where the shari ' ah is introduced .
Autonomy for those regions should not go as far as observing their own rules that are diametrically opposed to national legislation and that suppress the population and women , in particular .
To sentence a pregnant woman to capital punishment for having intercourse before marriage is barbaric .
My question to the Commission is : What can the European Union do ?
In any event , the dialogue with Nigeria will need to be intensified .
However , Europe ' s hands are tied if the president and the government themselves lack the courage to act and to do everything in their power to allow the Nigerians to live together in peace .
Mr President , two years ago , following fair elections in the multi-cultural and multi-ethnic state of Nigeria , the military dictatorship was replaced by a parliamentary democracy .
However , veteran President Olusugun Obasanjo is increasingly facing the difficult challenge of keeping riots under control between northern Muslims and Christian southerners , not infrequently culminating in gruesome blood baths .
For example , we were recently alarmed once again by a dubious military reprisal in the federal state of Benue .
I notice with some discomposure that the army seems to be taking the law into its own hands in various cases .
It is understandable that the Tivs , associated with the South , are very suspicious of the fact that the army was siding with the northern-oriented Jukuns , the population group to which the current Defence Minister belongs .
It is of the utmost importance for the military forces to act within the constitutional mandate and ensure the safety of all citizens .
Increasing tension in the Middle Belt has at the same time illustrated my growing concern for the ever-widening chasm between religions that is fanning out towards the middle and south of the country .
In a personal meeting with his American opposite number , President Bush less than two weeks ago , President Obasanja reassured President Bush once again of his support for the International Coalition against terrorism . On that same fateful Friday , 2 November , however , as the representative of the thirteenth federal state incorporating Islamic penal law , he was also faced with implementing the decree in Kaduna to introduce Islamic penal law , the shari 'ah .
This will do nothing to promote the peaceful coexistence of Muslims and the large Christian minority in that state .
Finally , I should like to express my emphatic support for the attempts by the Nigerian President and parliament to look into , and tackle , the causes of the continuing ethnic and religious conflicts , to which , inter alia , Paragraph 4 of the resolution refers .
I would ask the Council and Commission to contribute according to their means .
Mr President , those of us who were in Abuja and Kano last year for the ACP meeting welcomed President Obasanjo 's move from military dictatorship to democracy .
We were also aware of the simmering tension in the country , particularly in the north , with outbreaks of violence .
Sharia law has been a potent symbol of the cause of that tension , demanded by some Muslims , feared by most Christians and other faiths ; partly the result of northern Nigeria not benefiting from independence and oil as the south has done , and a resentment of corruption that they see as chronic in the country .
Thousands have died as a result of violence , especially in Kaduna and many Christian homes , churches and businesses have been destroyed .
The Zanfara state government has given local vigilante groups the power to implement Sharia law .
In reply seventeen southern states have demanded the right to set up their own police forces .
Northerners are leaving Lagos after riots that have led to deaths .
In the north , journalists in Kano are threatened with Sharia law if they represent it in a negative way .
Now we see in Benue and Taraba in east and central Nigeria tribal , not religious , wars .
The Jukun and Tiv disputes are about land and ancient rivalries , not about religion .
Nineteen soldiers who were trying to keep the peace were abducted and murdered .
Then we saw the awful reprisals in which Zakibian , a town of 20 000 people , was destroyed and over 200 people killed .
Of course we welcome President Obasanjo 's announcement of an inquiry .
Ethnic and religious violence must be stopped in Nigeria .
There must be equality before the law and not fear and violence .
Corruption from whatever source must be rooted out .
The European Union must support this .
It must also provide humanitarian support for Nigeria , where over 200 people have died of cholera in the last few weeks , and help the people who have been displaced as a result of this violence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the events in and around Afghanistan have obscured our view of trouble spots in other parts of the world , for example in Nigeria .
The European Union should not , however , be indifferent to what is happening in this the most populous country in Africa .
At the beginning of this year , the President of Nigeria , President Obasanjo , declared that 2001 would be the year in which the Nigerian people would reap the rewards of the transition to democracy .
We supported this statement when we met at that time in Abuja in the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
The trust has , however , suddenly turned to deep concern .
A split in the ruling party in Nigeria , the absence of economic improvements and the persistence of poor living conditions have made people increasingly willing to resort to violence , thus creating a breeding ground for political extremists .
To keep them in check , President Obasanjo felt it necessary to deploy soldiers in seven Nigerian states .
Since then more than 3 000 people are said to have been killed and there is renewed fear that the military might return to power .
The introduction and application of Sharia law in an increasing number of states has heightened religious and ethnic tensions .
Violent criminals often go unpunished .
The President and all of the forces of democracy in Nigeria are called upon to take determined action against violent criminals using the legal means at their disposal , to secure respect for universal human rights and to hurry through economic reforms which will benefit all parts of the country , if there is to be an end to this misery .
We expect the Commission to monitor this process actively and to do everything within its power to ensure that this trouble spot in Africa once again becomes a place of democracy .
Mr President , I am sure that , like me , when you call for a debate on the Democratic Republic of Nigeria , you know we are actually talking about a corrupt military oligarchy in an African country to which we give our support .
Nigeria is proof , Mr President , that the wealth and value of a nation are often measured according to the priority that it gives to human rights , and especially to women , children and workers .
Nigeria is the most densely populated country in Africa , which means that it has vast human resources .
It also has mineral resources and a high oil production that should protect its population from poverty .
Furthermore , its huge diversity could provide real dynamism .
And yet , for decades , a climate of violence towards democrats has been allowed to flourish there and Nigeria ' s rulers have never truly sought to punish the extra-judicial murders and violence .
By not taking any preventive action , the military powers have allowed a climate of latent ethnic conflict to evolve and one of these conflicts , in the East of the country , pitting the Tivs and the Jukuns against one another , has just led to the deaths of 200 civilians , who were massacred by soldiers .
The most shocking aspect , Mr President , Commissioner , is that the State authorities are trying to play down this event by explaining that the soldiers involved in the massacre were reacting to the murder of some of their fellow militiamen .
In my view , we must , as we confirmed at the ACP summit on 1 November , force countries that legitimately claim to be our partners in dialogue , that we choose as partners and that request financial support from us , to comply with commonly accepted rules and with international conventions .
With regard to Nigeria , this would involve fighting the implementation of the Islamic sharia - a woman was allowed to be stoned in front of television cameras a few weeks ago and not a single country reacted .
At the same time , a climate of Islamophobia is developing , with mosques being burned down , and this too is met with widespread indifference .
Lastly , an independent inquiry must now be opened into the murders that took place in November 1999 and in October 2001 .
We should be aware that our colleagues in the Nigerian parliament have called these massacres examples of ' ethnic cleansing ' .
I wish to end by saying that I have often called in this House for the debts of third world countries to be cancelled , but this debt cancellation must be conditional , Mr President , on these countries truly respecting human rights , workers ' rights and the rights of children and women .
We must no longer accept these countries calling themselves democratic and signing conventions , which they then fail to observe .
Mr President , between 22 and 24 October last , Nigerian soldiers raged among the people of Benue state .
Over 200 civilians were killed in this massacre and houses and market stalls were burned down .
There must be a swift , impartial , effective inquiry into these massacres .
The Nigerian Federal government must guarantee full respect for the Constitution and the rule of law without delay .
It is not doing so , despite the hopes placed in it .
The Nigerian army is incapable of restoring law and order ; moreover , this is not its role .
Only a police force which respects human rights would be able to rebuild trust between the different communities .
It is the duty of the European Parliament to condemn these massacres , which come on top of religious intolerance and miscarriages of justice .
The way the sharia is currently being wrongly applied in Nigeria is a violation of fundamental human rights , especially the rights of women .
Neither European Union nor United Nations resolutions have acknowledged the escalation of the ethnic conflicts in Nigeria .
There is an urgent need for a humanitarian aid system to be established for displaced persons and refugees .
Lastly , the European Union should implement the procedure laid down by Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
Mr President , the murder of hundreds of members of the Benue community and the stoning of the pregnant woman in northern Nigeria highlight the desperate situation this country is in .
The European Commission is monitoring the situation within the framework of its powers and capabilities .
In May 2001 , the Commission issued a common position making provision for political dialogue with Nigeria to be strengthened .
This common position is based on human rights and missions headed by European Union diplomats have been in contact with the Nigerian government .
One mission was concerned with the economic situation and the other with human rights and the problem of human rights and the need for the government to intervene and take action have been highlighted .
The government has acknowledged the problems and stressed that it intends to continue its efforts along these lines but I believe that parliament has also set limits on the potential for this particular government to intervene .
There are two points in the motions on which I should like to comment briefly .
The first is the education of the security forces in the human rights sector .
This is a new sector for the Community , which has come under military cooperation in the past .
However , the Community is currently supporting this sort of programme in Algeria , Guatemala , the Ukraine and the Palestinian territories .
The Commission is re-examining the potential for intervention in West Africa , Liberia and the Ivory Coast and , as far as Nigeria is concerned , the United Kingdom , France and the United States are involved in similar activities .
The Commission is monitoring the problems within the specific framework of human rights , but it cannot intervene in the education of security forces for human rights unless the Nigerian government asks it to do so .
As far as humanitarian aid is concerned , the European Commission is intervening wherever the national or local authorities are unable to deal with natural or man-made disasters , but only in countries which have asked for help from abroad .
So far , Nigeria has not asked for any help .
The local authorities are more or less coping with the problems arising mainly as the result of movements of the population within the country , but I must stress , as has already been said , that Nigeria 's problems are of a seriously structural nature .
Short-term development aid is not enough to cope with them .
However , the Commission thinks it is important to monitor recent developments directly on the ground , which is why it is planning to despatch ECHO delegates to Nigeria to record the dangers already referred to .
Thank you very much Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Íatural disasters
Mr President , before beginning my two minutes of speaking time , and as a point of order , I would like to point out to the Presidency that there is an error in the transcribed text .
In paragraph four of the Resolution there is a phrase missing , literally ' which should be compatible with European Union doctrine on cooperation , respect for human rights and democracy ' .
This was the text agreed by all of the groups according to a document given to the Presidency by the spokesperson for international relations from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
And now , Mr President , I would like to begin my allotted intervention by pointing out that this resolution aims to tackle the problem of the devastation caused by hurricane Michelle , which has particularly affected three countries : Honduras , Nicaragua and Cuba .
The effects of this disaster are exacerbated by the fact that the three countries in question have levels of poverty that I personally would call extreme .
Given that a simple reference was made in the resolution to our recent visit to Nicaragua , in order to provide illustrative evidence of the situation in this country , I would like to point out that Nicaragua is currently the poorest country in Continental America .
Fifty per cent of Nicaraguans live in conditions of poverty and 17 % in conditions of extreme poverty - to be poor in Nicaragua means living on USD 1 per month .
In macroeconomic terms , Nicaragua has foreign debt of USD 6 500 million , exports less than a third of what it imports and the country balances its payments and survives , ultimately , thanks to international aid and emigrants ' remittances , particularly from the United States and Costa Rica .
With regard to the situation in Cuba , on another delegation visit , I think we all will agree that the situation of that country is extremely gloomy .
Cuba is currently surviving mostly thanks to emigrants ' remittances and , secondly , tourism , which represent more than all other Cuban exports put together .
This being the case , what the resolution is aiming to achieve is , first and foremost , to show solidarity with the communities affected and with the human victims of the consequences of this hurricane .
Secondly , and I would like the Commissioner to take special note of this , I would like to express Parliament ' s satisfaction with the actions of the Humanitarian Aid Office .
Thirdly , I would ask that , in the case of Honduras and Nicaragua , estimated damages be considered within the framework of the Regional Programme for the Reconstruction of Central America .
Given that we are talking about Nicaragua , there is an amendment tabled by the Socialist Group , and I would like to address the rapporteur here , which says that , as there have been misappropriations of funds - and we are referring to European funds here - certain action has to be taken .
I personally took the trouble to call the Commission delegation in Nicaragua .
I have a fax here in which they tell me that in no case has there been any proof , nor has there been any investigation into these funds , therefore it cannot be confirmed that there have been misappropriations .
During the recent visit we discovered that these accusations had occurred at the same time as an election campaign , but there was no judicial decision in this respect .
For this reason , it seems extremely reckless to me to make statements on this subject .
Mr President , with regard to Cuba , the phrase we have added can be interpreted by the various political parties as they see fit .
But when we say that we want a cooperation agreement to be reached in line with European doctrine , we mean to agree with what was stated in the Newens report and in the common position ; that we will only reach a cooperation agreement when the Cuban regime makes significant progress in the improvement of respect for human rights and progresses towards a pluralist democracy .
This is the doctrine of the European Union , which is implicitly expressed in this resolution .
Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , we did not take into account the time taken up by your introduction so you have indeed spoken for three and a half minutes .
However , what you were saying was interesting . There is no need to worry at all .
I would just like to say that , three years after hurricane Mitch , Central America is once again being struck by the fresh tragedy of hurricane Michelle .
We must not forget that , since then , it has suffered an earthquake , drought and famine .
However , despite these disasters , democracy is slowly being established in these countries once again , and the European delegation , of which I am a member , which has just been to Guatemala , Honduras and Nicaragua , is unanimously agreed on this point .
The proper running of the elections which have just taken place in Nicaragua is also evidence of this .
Therefore , I feel that we can be proud of the decisive role played by the European Union action in the development of democracy in these countries .
That is why I call for two measures : firstly , to increase the funds appropriated to the Programme for the Reconstruction of Central America , which currently amounts to EUR 250 million for the 1999-2002 period , since the latest disasters were not taken into consideration ; and secondly , to review the European Union ' s outdated position on Cuba .
Also totally devastated by the latest hurricane , the worst it has suffered for 50 years , Cuba is currently the only country in Central America which has not signed a cooperation agreement with the European Union , and its only hope in these times of trouble is humanitarian , emergency aid .
I could smile and tell you , with regard to Cuba , not to be more Catholic than the Pope , in the knowledge that he had no difficulty in identifying the right choice , but the appalling situation of this countries prevents me from smiling .
Rather , I will warn you not to focus on the wrong enemy .
The enemy is no longer communism : it is terrorism and terrorism thrives on destitution ; democracy cannot be built on famine .
Cuba is an important , or rather essential part of the process of bringing integration and peace to Central America which is currently in progress .
Therefore , I urge the Council to instruct the Commission to reopen democratic cooperation negotiations with Cuba , insisting on total respect for European democratic values , which will not accept two different sets of values .
Mr President , it is quite sad that when we have these afternoons debating topical and urgent subjects of major importance , we almost always have to ask again for aid for catastrophes affecting the world ' s poorest countries .
Both the delegation which , as Mr García Margallo said , visited Cuba and El Salvador , and the previous delegation that went to Honduras and Nicaragua , were able to see first hand the situation in which these countries find themselves , which , it must be said , is gloomy .

Nobody would say , however , that the situation in Cuba is gloomy ; of course there are many problems that Cuba has to resolve , but these are nothing to be gloomy about , as anyone who has travelled to Cuba will tell you .
In any case , Mr President , I think we have to congratulate the European Commission for their speedy reaction to this catastrophe .
We also have to acknowledge the fact that in Cuba there have not been so many victims thanks to the very quick reaction and very good organisation of the public authorities serving both the general public and tourists .
Several Spanish tourists said on TV that they had been looked after very well during this situation of emergency .
I was very happy that the last phrase from paragraph 4 had been removed , which is a last minute amendment .
For the fact that there should be a common position that prevents there being a normal relationship with Cuba , as there is with other countries , is regretted by non-governmental organisations , the church , representatives of the European Union , and even dissidents .
It is quite a sad matter for the European Union that Cuba is the only country in Latin America with which there is no cooperation agreement .
We are aware that when a resolution such as this one is approved in this House , it has to be done by a majority .
If it is true that there was agreement on that phrase being included , then it should be ; but , naturally , it is regrettable that there is no cooperation agreement with Cuba , because what is required from this country should be the same as for all the others .
Yesterday we debated this issue and we saw that neither Turkey nor Morocco nor a large number of countries in Latin America have been asked to implement measures before an agreement can be reached .
We have only asked this of Cuba .
This is the difference , and it was made clear in this House , Mr President .
For this reason , if the phrase has to be included , then include it , but it is regrettable that it is only Cuba which is required to fulfil these conditions .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I too would like to express our solidarity with the people of Honduras , Nicaragua and Cuba , whose countries have been tragically devastated by the effects of hurricane Michelle .
Along with Iris , on 8 October , and Mitch , which we have not forgotten , this hurricane is one of a long list of natural disasters which regularly affect areas which are already suffering , adding tragedy to poverty .
These disasters , termed natural disasters , are a further reminder that climate change and non-sustainable development exacerbate the already substantial devastation and will continue to do so in the future .
Although the European Union is to be congratulated on the aid it is sending to Honduras and Nicaragua , it must be noted that Cuba is totally excluded from this demonstration of solidarity .
Cuba , which has suffered its worst disaster in 50 years , is unable to receive our help , for it is the only country in Latin and Central America which does not have a cooperation agreement with the European Union .
This situation is no longer appropriate : it is our duty to restate the need for a cooperation agreement focusing on environmentally sustainable development to be signed with Cuba without delay , and to review the European Union ' s position .
We advocate equal treatment for all countries , and Cuba is certainly not benefiting from the same treatment as other countries .
Moreover , the American embargo on relations with the island is preventing it from buying the food and medical supplies so desperately needed by the people of Cuba .
The pharmacies are empty and there is a shortage of everything in the hospitals .
We cannot tolerate a situation which deprives an entire people of the aid received by neighbouring countries which have suffered the same disasters .
In order to change this , we must also support the call for the embargo against Cuba to be lifted .
Mr President , our initial reaction is to express our sincere condolences to the families of the victims and their countrymen , but we must also immediately re-state our commitment to show solidarity with the affected countries , taking care that this solidarity is shown through immediate , generous and effective action .
The principal role was initially taken by our own European Community Humanitarian Office ( ECHO ) and it appears that the Commission acted with the necessary speed by means of this office .
But the action of the European Union should not stop at this point and we should make a significant contribution to the reconstruction of everything which has been destroyed or damaged by Hurricane Michelle .
A large proportion of our efforts will be included within the Reconstruction Plan for Central America and within the framework of the Union ' s agreements with Honduras and with Nicaragua .
This is where we fall down , due to the pitiful lack of a similar agreement with the Republic of Cuba .
This is something that we are continually denouncing here in this House .
It makes no sense that Cuba , for whom , amongst other things , the Member States of the European Union include their main economic , commercial and tourism partners , should be the only country in Latin America with which the European Union has not signed a cooperation agreement .
For this reason , at the present time , the European Union is restricted to acting almost exclusively within the field of humanitarian and emergency aid .
We in this House would ask the Commission to show a high degree of flexibility when considering the suitability of projects which , in addition to this type of aid , also contribute to surmounting the damage and helping with the reconstruction of those sectors that have been most affected on the island by the effects of the hurricane .
It is vital that we revise the European Union ' s common position on Cuba , which today is obsolete and even counterproductive , with a view to achieving the objectives that should have been pursued in 1996 when it was established , that is to say , the progress and prosperity of the Cuban people .
I would also have preferred that the paragraph added by the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats had requested the same from Cuba as is requested from other countries with which the European Union cooperates .
In any case , I do not think that the situation in Cuba is as gloomy as those who are determined to criticise that country would have us believe .
Mr President , we hope that the dialogue , without preconditions and without the exclusion of any particular subject from the agenda , that appears to have been re-initiated with the meeting this Monday in New York between the President of the Council and the Cuban Chancellor , will soon bear fruit and led to the signing of a cooperation treaty that will benefit Cuba and that will allow the European Union to act under normal conditions , with a greater degree of efficiency and with more influence in their relations with this country .
Floods in Algeria
Mr President , Algeria has been a troubled country for many years .
Its reputation and image abroad has been damaged by the violence , massacres and abuses of human rights there , but that is nothing compared with the pain and suffering of its people at home .
One million people died in the fight for independence and another 100 000 have died in the current power struggles between Islamic militants and the military and among the minority Berber community seeking political and cultural recognition .
Now in this country , four fifths of which - ironically - is Saharan desert , we have the catastrophe of flooding in Algiers with the death toll in flash floods rising towards 1 000 as the grim task of sifting through the mud and the rubble goes on .
It is not the first such calamity .
In 1994 , 30 000 people were made homeless in the Tindouf area , but the difference is that on that occasion seven lives were lost , while this time 693 people have already died and over 300 people are missing , with some 20 000 people thought to be homeless .

The urgency now is for the European Union to play its part in providing humanitarian aid .
There is a clear need for shelter , for food , for medical supplies and I certainly welcome the EUR 750 000 which has been given for this purpose under the ECHO fund , and indeed the promised EUR 225 million from the European Investment Bank for drinking water supply lines .
There is also a need for adequate heavy equipment to deal with situations like this and even picks and shovels seem to be in short supply .
Certainly no sniffer dogs appear to be available .
Given Algeria 's position in an earthquake area it would certainly be prudent to have such things available for the future .
I would like to hear from the Commission what proposals it has to deal with this .
There is also the need to look at the policy of sealing the floodwater drains against terrorist activities , which in this case has clearly exacerbated the situation .
Mr President , we are aghast at the large numbers who have fallen victim to these disastrous floods and I believe that it is the duty of the European Union , of the individual Member States and of the Commission to do all that we can now to give assistance to those affected and help them through this difficult time .
Even though Algeria is further south than our homelands , we know that it can be cold and very wet in winter .
That is why aid is absolutely essential and everything that can be done to reduce the suffering must be done , and it must be done unconditionally .
This does not mean that we will not hope that something good will nevertheless come out of this terrible catastrophe and out of our provision of aid , namely that Algeria will find a way to really step up the necessary dialogue with those who want peace and freedom in that country .
The sacrifices which have been made in Algeria , not only during the war against their colonial masters but also in recent years and months , are horrendous .
The acts are horrendous , and it is high time that the government and the president of this country found a way out of the crisis .
Expectations were high when Bouteflika was elected President , but there have also been many disappointments in recent months : disappointment that more is said than done ; disappointment that the people are addressed ex cathedra and not consulted .
The tragic events in Kabylia - a commission in Algeria itself investigated them and uncovered their causes , amongst other things - should be reason enough to change the dynamics of communication and political relations in Algeria .
In the case of the unrest in Kabylia - which , of course , then spread to the whole country or to wide areas of it - it was simply not true that it was started by a handful of anarchists and others who were following foreign orders : the Algerian commission itself established that it was above all the inappropriate behaviour of the security forces which was responsible .
That is why the tragic events of the last few days should also be seen as an opportunity in Algeria to try to pursue a different policy , a policy which consists of offering the people more opportunities and more chances , including economic and social ones .
Mr President , as Mr Swoboda stated , Algeria has already seen a great deal of suffering with the continual deaths in the country , more often than not of innocent people , and also with the poverty that is devastating part of the population .
Therefore , this catastrophe has only made this situation worse , with more than 600 victims , as has been stated , and with more than 20 000 people who have lost any standard of living they may have had .
Also , in this case , the resolution congratulates the European Commission on its speedy reaction , but special emergency aid will probably be necessary .
It is true that the European Parliament colegislates the budget with the Council , and , therefore , the result is what we achieve together , I know , but I am filled with sorrow - especially on these afternoons when we have to talk about so many catastrophes - that there is no sufficient budget heading that can be used in such cases , because we always find ourselves having to beg for , or to transfer some money from elsewhere to deal with these tragedies .
In the specific case of the resolution , the European Commission has also been asked if it could send experts and technicians to help evaluate the damage and find a way to rebuild what has been destroyed .
I know that we ask a great deal of the European Commission , but it is also true to say that the European Parliament is very sensitive to the situation in countries in Central America - as stated previously - as it is with countries in the Mediterranean .
We have to ask - and ask ourselves - as was stated the other day in the Committee on Development and Cooperation when talking about the reconstruction of Afghanistan ( after having first destroyed it ) , that that reconstruction should not be the cause of a reduction in the funds available for Mediterranean countries , countries in Latin America and Africa , who also really have great need of them .
Mr President , I would like to start by expressing my full solidarity and the solidarity of my group with the people of Algeria , which has once again been struck by a huge disaster .
We who support the Algerian people , particularly in their fight for independence , are shocked by the tragic consequences of the floods in that country .
Material and , above all , human loss are jeopardising the country ' s development and preserving its excessive structural and political shortcomings .
This disaster reveals once again the incompetence of the Algerian government : the way it builds houses and roads in flood plains and decides to block drains allegedly for safety reasons is proof of the utter irresponsibility of its leaders , and this is on top of the corruption and misuse of funds .
The government has failed in its primary mission of serving the general interests of the people .
It has done nothing to meet the needs of the people or ensure their safety .
Therefore , we must call upon the Algerian authorities to make good their past mistakes .
This situation must on no account be allowed to occur again either in Algeria or elsewhere .
We must no longer allow citizens ' lives to be endangered by irresponsible , self-interested or reprehensible behaviour .
Mr President , some people may wonder why we are devoting time to discussing flooding - even flooding on this scale - in Algeria .
In fact a debate is currently raging about this idea of concern .
Recently , at a large meeting in Nuremberg , a leading German Orientalist complained that in parts of the Islamic world people were not concerned enough about the atrocious events in New York .
At the time I replied that we too have shown very little concern about Chechnya , where over 100 000 people have been murdered , or Iraq , where over 100 000 people , mainly children , have starved to death .
In fact there is a kind of partial culture of concern which is divided along cultural and geographical lines .
That is why we need to ensure that we also have compassion for our Muslim and Arab partners when they are hit by catastrophes of this kind , so that terrorists cannot - and after all this was the aim of 11 September - play off one civilisation against another and actually orchestrate the ' clash of civilisations ' .
The dead in Algeria are also our dead .
The homeless in Algeria are also our homeless .
If we speak of a global village in economic terms then we must also speak of a global village of compassion and solidarity .
That is why , where our partners in the Mediterranean , in the Arab world , are concerned , who are on our doorstep and with whom we need to work more closely than ever , it is the European Union 's duty to provide substantial humanitarian aid , and also to ensure that Algeria is put in a position where it is more capable than it has been in the past of helping itself .
Helping people to help themselves must be our overriding aim , but of course our aim now must also be to provide the victims of this disaster with direct practical help , not only by giving them money , not only by writing them a big cheque , but also by making it clear to them that what happens to them is something which we Europeans are deeply concerned about , something which matters to us as much as what happens to ourselves .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Members of Parliament for their kind remarks concerning ECHO and I shall convey these congratulations to Mr Nielson , the Commissioner responsible .
Firstly , as far as Hurricane Michelle is concerned , the Commission has been closely monitoring its effects in Central America in the Caribbean area since the beginning of the crisis , in cooperation with our experts and partners in this field .
Michelle started on 29 October as a tropical storm off the northern coast of Nicaragua and Honduras , where it caused severe floods .
The communication systems proved their efficiency as they were the only working systems that allowed for a quick evaluation in areas of difficult access such as Moskita .
On 1 November , ECHO started discussions with the NGOs present in the field to establish emergency systems , particularly in the Moskita region in Honduras and Nicaragua - the areas worst hit .
On 4 November , Michelle became a hurricane that crossed Cuba and touched Jamaica .
Fortunately , the local authorities had undertaken timely evacuation measures .
ECHO services decided on funding once an initial evaluation of the hurricane damage had been carried out in Cuba .
This decision to allocate EUR 1 050 000 , should be approved by the end of this week and will cover the Moskita region in Honduras and Nicaragua , Cuba and Jamaica .
The decision will mainly involve the evacuation of people in danger , food aid for Honduras , the provision of temporary shelter in Jamaica and the distribution of water , sanitation and health packages in all countries .
Members of this House have raised two main issues .
One concerns Nicaragua .
I should like to assure you that all the distributed funds are regularly monitored and no irregularities have been detected so far .
That was the assessment of the Parliament delegation that visited Nicaragua .
The second comment concerned Cuba .
Some people wanted a revision of the EU Common Position on Cuba , announced on 25 June 2001 .
But it kept being said Cuba had not been given any humanitarian aid until now .
In fact Cuba has benefited from around EUR 125 million in aid since 1993 , largely in the humanitarian field , as well as the food security programme and some budget line assistance .
But for the time being , the line followed by the Commission is as proposed in the latest European Union Common Position which I have already referred to .
As far as Algeria is concerned , the situation in the country is very complex .
There are many different kinds of problems , but I will only refer to the problem of the flooding last weekend .
The European Commission has followed the situation with great attention and concern .
President Prodi sent a message to President Bouteflika to express the solidarity of the European Union with the Algerian flood victims .
Therefore the Commission , through its humanitarian aid office , has moved quickly in response to the floods .
A decision to allocate EUR 758 800 of humanitarian aid has been taken under the primary emergency procedure to help meet the urgent needs of the victims .
The funds are already being used for a range of support measures including temporary shelter , beds , clothing and blankets , water , sanitation and medical assistance .
Humanitarian operations funded under this decision will be implemented by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and by two NGOs - Médicins du Monde and Médicins sans Frontières .
With those decisions on Hurricane Michelle and the Algerian floods , the Commission underlines its determination to address the needs of victims of humanitarian disasters whenever they occur .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Trade in small arms
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0723 / 2001 , tabled by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the PSE Group , on small arms ;
B5-0729 / 2001 , tabled by Mrs Morgantini and Mr Brie , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on controlling international arms transfers and arms brokering ;
B5-0730 / 2001 , tabled by Mrs Maes , Mrs McKenna and Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on controlling international arms transfers and arms brokering .
Commissioner , Mr President , just as certain small-scale conflicts receive poor media coverage , so certain categories of what are known as light weapons could be said to receive poor legislative and financial coverage . I mean that the legislation regulating them is insufficient and that they are cheap to buy .
Why are we surprised , then , when it is this type of arms which keep these forgotten conflicts alive ?
Yet the number of victims alone should concern us , if it were not concealed by the effects of poverty .
However , evidence that the world does have a conscience has emerged in the shape of the United Nations Programme of Action aimed at containing and controlling the transfers , or rather the trafficking of these light weapons which are responsible for extensive loss of human life .
In the light of the current international situation , with the armed alliance in Afghanistan and the international fight against terrorism , there is even greater need for the Union to join and support this resolute , pioneering UN measure .
The European Union ' s military policy must be more than just defence measures controlled by senior military staff .
It must , in essence , be based on the prevention and control of the arms trade by an arsenal of binding laws covering all areas of this industry .
Our legislation must target arms brokering and export and detention licences , as well as extradition and police cooperation procedures , and national legislation governing these issues must be harmonised .
Instead of attempting to intervene in blazing conflicts , would it not be better to defuse them before they ignite ?
The Union ' s legislative structure would allow us to do this at the stage when we are still preparing for military action .
Europe must seize the opportunity afforded here .
Mr President , we are quite properly concerned about the spread of small arms and light weapons , particularly the illegal traffick in , and uncontrolled circulation of , these weapons .
I am not sure why Parliament has decided to bring forward an urgent resolution at this time , unless it wants to contribute something useful in the context of the current international crisis , the continuing threat posed by weapons held by terrorists or the consequences of the large accumulation of weapons in Taliban hands in Afghanistan .
There is some passing reference to these matters in the motion for a resolution which contains many useful elements .
For many years I have worked to overcome the problem of anti-personnel landmines but I have always sought to focus attention on the real culprits who use such weapons indiscriminately and irresponsibly .
Usually these were armed rebel groups in developing countries with no concern for human life and they had been supplied by non-western countries .
It is important , therefore , that when considering the matter of small arms we should take care not to become over-obsessed with our own authorities or industry : these are the easy targets .
Instead , we should focus on terrorist groups and other criminal elements that are sitting on stockpiles of weapons or continuing to obtain them from various sources .
It is scandalous , for example , that there has been toleration for so long of large stockpiles of weapons held by terrorist organisations such as the IRA in one EU Member State , in order that it may threaten or carry out attacks in another .
In relation to Afghanistan it is to be hoped that a legitimate government with democratic aspirations will be established there very soon , anxious to engage positively in the real world and begin the development of a sustainable economy and a better life for all its people .
There must also be efforts to remove weapons in Taliban hands and integrate ex-combatants back into some sort of mainstream society .
I am not referring to terrorists there .
Much has been achieved .
Our focus for the future in relation to small arms should be on identifying and destroying stocks of weapons held by insurgents , terrorists and criminals and cutting off their sources of supply .
This is the area on which we should be concentrating our efforts over the coming months and years .
Mr President , nearly ten years ago , in the early 1990s , I travelled through the Khyber Pass , a trip I can strongly recommend to all colleagues - though perhaps not at this moment .
At the top there is a small village where you can buy food , water and " souvenirs " .
The " souvenirs " are drugs , home-made Kalashnikovs and home-made surface-to-air rocket launchers .
With the money I had on me I calculated that I could buy ten Kalashnikovs or three rocket launchers .
The only problem was how to get them home through customs , so I did not buy them !
Coming forward to 10 October this year , at the United Nations in New York there was a speech by the American Assistant Secretary for Arms Control .
He used wonderful sounding sentences , such as " we must redouble our non-proliferation and arms control efforts " , " the entire globe faces a security challenge ! "
But he had no proposals at all for controlling small arms .
Why ?
Because the extremely powerful and wealthy organisation called The National Rifle Association - the NRA - helped to elect the present administration , which will therefore not stand up to the Association .
With the events of 11 September and the high murder rate inside the United States of America , I wonder just what it will take for America to cooperate with the rest of the world on this problem .
My Group supports the motion because it is a small step in the right direction .
- ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this problem - the trade and trafficking in small arms - is one of the most serious problems facing the world today .
The first observation I wish to make is that this expression ' small arms ' is misleading , because small arms include heavy machine guns , rocket launchers , grenade throwers and mortars of less than 100 millimetres .
We are talking about devastating weaponry .
To quote the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Kofi Annan , speaking at the Conference held in July , we must be fully aware of the terrible effects of the current trade in these arms .
It is estimated that there are some 500 million arms in circulation in the world today and that , every day , these arms kill on average more than one thousand people .
This is , therefore , an issue to which States must pay serious attention .
It is an area in which the fine line between seriousness and hypocrisy can be most clearly traced .
For many years I have called for the issues of the arms industry and trade to be the business of States alone .
Applying the market economy to this area can only have disastrous consequences , and instead of complaining about the trafficking and dealing in arms , we should be adopting stricter measures on the state control of the production and trade in these arms .
Unfortunately , however , governments themselves are not always entirely blameless .
Currently , in Portugal , a campaign is running , launched by Catholic missionary organisations and supported by the Portuguese section of Amnesty International , to draw attention to this scourge .
And why missionaries , you might ask ?
Because missionaries are , particularly in Africa , those who have most frequent contact with the appalling consequences of this situation .
Unfortunately , my country - it is not only France , the United Kingdom and other often-mentioned European Union countries - is not entirely free of blame in this matter .
According to figures that have been released , in 1998 , the year in which the European Union code of conduct was signed , Portugal sold around EUR 9 million ' s worth of arms to countries that it should feel unable to do so , such as Angola , Algeria , Colombia , Israel , Jordan , Kuwait , Sri Lanka and Turkey .
Portugal also sold around EUR 5 million ' s worth of arms to a further eleven countries that should , at the very least , be under strict observation .
We support the resolution that has been tabled .
This is a matter on which some progress has been made , but more energetic steps must be taken .
Above all , the European Union must set an example in this area .
We cannot shed crocodile tears on Thursdays over conflicts that are continually supplied by the legal or illegal trade in these arms .
Mr President , the accumulations of small arms dotted all over the planet are a cause of destabilisation and crisis and the European Union has promised to do what it can to combat this phenomenon .
The European Union has proposed , as part of its joint action on small arms and light weapons , to introduce a series of confidence-building measures , including measures to improve transparency .
The Union has promised funding and technical assistance to countries , international organisations and non-governmental organisations asking for support for this purpose .
The European Union welcomes the results of the United Nations conference on the illegal trade in small arms although , as the members have said , it does of course recognise that the results might have been clearer and more concrete .
However , we believe that the very fact that this first conference was held at all is an important step .
We particularly welcome the decision to organise another conference before 2006 so that the progress made can be examined and evaluated by then .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
As indicated on the display board , the next item is Mrs Lynne ' s report .
The debate is scheduled for 5.30 p.m.
I am therefore going to suspend the sitting for a short while .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.20 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Announcement by the President
I wish to speak about a very special matter : today , for the first time , If am not mistaken and if I am not misleading the House , we will have the opportunity to have twelve booths , because out of respect for this report and as a result of the rapporteur ' s invitation , we will today have sign language interpretation to my right , as you can see , which is a tribute to the communication between this Parliament and all of Europe ' s citizens , whoever they may be .
2003 , European Year of People with Disabilities
The next item is the report ( A5-0377 / 2001 ) by Mrs Lynne , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the European Year of People with disabilities 2003 [ COM ( 2001 ) 271 - C5-0306 / 2001 - 2001 / 0116 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , I welcome the sign language interpreter .
I only wish that we could have sign language interpretation for all our debates to make sure that all people could access all the reports .
The timing of this debate is very sad , when so few Members are present in the Chamber and , even more importantly , to vote later .
It is very important to demonstrate our commitment to disabled people .
Putting the report right at the end of a Strasbourg agenda does not demonstrate any commitment .
Having said that , I thank the Commission for their cooperation on my report and all the other Members of the European Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I have managed to incorporate a number of their amendments .
I believe that is one of the main reasons why we do not have any new amendments today .
The European Year of Disabled People , 2003 must not just pay lip service to the problems that disabled people face .
We need to have concrete outcomes .
For a start , we must truly move away from the medical model of disability to the social and rights-based model of disability .
We must make sure that we mainstream disabled people ; that all legislation takes account of the specific needs of disabled people , whether they are wheelchair users , someone with a visual impairment , someone with a hearing impairment , someone with a learning difficulty , or someone with a mental health problem .
All EU citizens should have equal rights .
I hope that in 2003 - if not before - we make sure that all of Parliament 's buildings are accessible to disabled people - they are not at the moment - and that all EU Member States are aware of the problems that disabled people face .
I shall tell you a story about what happened to Jenny , one of my constituents , the coordinator of Access Charter .
I invited her over to the Article 13 Anti-Discrimination hearings .
She uses a wheelchair .
For a start , she could not get into the Parliament 's buildings in Brussels without going through revolving doors because they refused to open the double doors .
I remonstrated with them .
They unlocked them , took off the rope that was binding them and then 20 minutes later they were locked and bound again .
We booked her a hotel room with disabled people 's access .
Somebody had put a bed across the bathroom door and so she could not get in .
She had to change hotels .
She then went out to try to get something to eat at night , with her colleagues - remember she was using a wheelchair .
No taxi in Brussels would stop for her .
She managed to get to a restaurant .
The manager then came out and said " You can 't come in here . Your appearance will put off other diners . "
When she got to the airport she was subjected to a full body search .
She remonstrated with the security people .
One of them said : " Have a nice trip . I hope your plane crashes . " !
That demonstrates the problems that disabled people face and the real need for a disability directive .
I hope we will hear the announcement of that in 2003 .
We have to have funding for major research into the status of disabled people .
We have to have a study into the situation disabled people face in institutions in particular .
It is essential that regional and local government are involved in this year but , more importantly , that organisations of disabled people and representing disabled people are involved in this year .
I have called specifically for a funding increase from EUR 12 million to EUR 15 million over the two years .
Particularly for sign language interpretation , for personal assistance , for accessible meeting rooms , for hotels etc . , there are added costs ; in addition , funding for impairment-specific NGOs is only for 2002 , not for the year itself .
Furthermore , in line with the Article 13 Action Programme on Anti-Discrimination , I have called for subsidies for the expenses for special events at European level to go up from " not exceeding 80 % " to " not exceeding 90 % " .
We must also have a proper evaluation of the year in clear and simple language , and in accessible formats .
I made my report available in all accessible formats at my own expense .
But I would like the Commission , in future , to make available on request any report at whatever stage in accessible format .
Finally , the year must be the step in the right direction to combat discrimination .
But more importantly , it has to be a celebration of disabled people 's contribution to society .
Mr President , I would just like to say that I am standing in for my colleague , Mr Andrews , and I am very honoured to do so because of the important issues in this excellent report by Mrs Lynne .
The purpose of the year is to provide for a coordinated effort to change attitudes and to promote the removal of social and environmental barriers to equality and to assist in legal and policy developments .
This means putting a value on diversity and celebrating diversity .
It also includes making us aware of issues relating to multiple discrimination .
I want to stress our full support for the designation of 2003 as European Year of People with Disabilities .
I know that the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs also supports the objectives of the year , as members unanimously backed my colleague 's opinion .
There are approximately 38 million people in the European Union who have a disability .
They face a wide range of barriers , including different forms of discrimination .
People with physical and sensory disabilities are just as much a part of our society as able-bodied people .
Very often , however , they are hindered from taking part in our society .
What makes it worse , as Mr Andrews states in his opinion , is that they are not hindered by their disabilities , but by their environment and the attitudes towards them .
They suffer multi-discrimination .
This must change .
Some of the problems include public transport and access to buildings , stairways and doors which are not wide enough to allow wheelchair access .
Surveys show that the intellectual capacity of people with physical disabilities is very often under-estimated .
They can be discriminated against when applying for jobs .
The exclusion of people with disabilities from society not only denies their fundamental rights , but also deprives society of diversity and inclusivity .
People with disabilities can make a positive contribution to society .
Their experiences can encourage more tolerance , understanding and awareness of the needs of others besides their own capacities and abilities .
Our own goal must be to end discrimination and safeguard their rights .
It is important that discrimination against people with disabilities is tackled as a mainstream issue .
The four amendments presented by my colleague , Mr Andrews , were fully supported by the rapporteur , Mrs Lynne , and endorsed by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
They are now Amendments Nos 20 , 45 , 47 and 48 .
I have nothing else to add , only to congratulate Mrs Lynne on her excellent report and on the very touching speech she gave to us in the presentation of the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , sign language interpreter , I would like to express a few thoughts on the World Year of People with Disabilities . I am also speaking on behalf of Mr Mantovani , who is particularly interested in this subject and cannot be here with us today .
This a truly vast subject , as can be seen from the statistics : today there are approximately 30 million people suffering from disabilities in the European Union .
This means that one European in ten encounters barriers not just in the field of work but also in access to public transport , buildings , private services , education and training - in other words , in all areas of daily life .
However , there are other barriers as well , maybe less obvious but just as insurmountable , which restrict the freedom of European citizens with disabilities , such as the barriers to movement within the Union and to going to live in another Member State .
All these barriers too often prevent people with disabilities from playing the active role they would like in society , work , school and daily activities .
We need a multifaceted strategy to ensure that these people are guaranteed equal opportunities in full respect for the European citizens ' Charter of Fundamental Rights .
However , there is one right which stands out above the others : the right to full citizenship .
That is why our group , the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will vote with conviction for the proposal for a Council decision on the Year of People with Disabilities - or , as we used to say in Italy in the olden days - people with different abilities - 2003 .
I therefore thank the rapporteur , Mrs Lynne , for her good work and for accepting the 17 amendments tabled in committee .
Three of those were tabled by us , and we feel they are particularly important because they uphold three concepts : firstly , recognition of the importance of the role played by the family at all stages in the lives of people with disabilities ; secondly , promotion of a culture of solidarity within society , meaning an understanding that a person ' s value is not expressed solely in terms of what he does or is able to do , but primarily in what he represents , namely a human being in all respects ; thirdly and lastly , reflection on the concept of the quality of life of a person with disabilities , understood not just to be access to employment or training but also all the other aspects of daily life , in the family and in and as part of society , a quality of life which is genuinely high and equal for people with disabilities too .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Lynne , ladies and gentlemen , it is a happy coincidence that this week , just a few metres away from the Chamber , we can see an exhibition organised by Bernd Posselt entitled , ' chain of understanding ' .
It shows hands , helping hands , joining hands , hands expending energy , and this exhibition is devoted to disabled people and includes work done by disabled people .
At this point I should therefore like to thank all of those who give time , patience , energy and love and make sacrifices for those who need their help .
This includes the families of disabled people , but many more besides .
We should not leave them out in the Year of Disabled People .
My second point is that I am glad that 2003 is to be the Year of Disabled People , particularly now , because for me it also shows that the Stability and Growth Pact and an aggressive disability policy are not only not contradictory , but also not mutually exclusive , if we are serious about the European social model , defending the dignity of all human beings and ensuring respect for human rights , which are principles to which we feel committed .
We still have much to do , however .
We need more equality in everyday life .
This involves firstly actually implementing all of the constitutional provisions .
We need to move from principle to practice .
Secondly , we need more comprehensive integration .
Integration must not end at the school gates , but must also encompass working life and social life .
Thirdly , we need disabled people to have the right to receive support to live the life of their own choosing .
Disabled people must be able to decide for themselves how they wish to live their lives .
Fourthly , we have to change the images we have , such as the image of a disabled person doing handicrafts .
Here , PCs , the Internet and integration using the new media could be very helpful .
With this in mind , we are looking forward to the Year of Disabled People , because we hope that it will sharpen the focus of our work and that we will be able to take further initiatives to eliminate the injustices and barriers which exist in our society .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mrs Lynne not just on this particular report , but for her constant faith in and fight for policies for the disabled .
I should also like to make a point of thanking Parliament for the support and enthusiasm with which it accepted the proposal for 2003 .
We need to make 2003 the year in which we send out a clear message that policies for the disabled are not just solidarity policies .
They are not just humane or charitable policies .
They are policies based on fundamental human and civil rights .
The second important point is that 2003 should not just galvanise governments into action .
It should also galvanise social and business circles and the scientific community into action .
Governments themselves should start up action plans for a package of policies .
Transport , urban planning , special policies for the job market , education .
Society should do everything it can , especially through the civil society and non-governmental organisations , to foster collaboration and take innovative initiatives which can be used as a basis for new proposals for the European Union .
Business circles can also play an important part .
Support for research and new product technology can bring about exceptional new products for people with disabilities and new technological products can be adapted to the specific requirements of different types of disability .
As Mrs Lynne referred to the Commission reports , may I inform you that only yesterday I started up my new web page , which can be read by Braille .
2003 should be seen as a year in which we push ahead with European priorities , such as those set out in the Commission communication on a " Europe without frontiers " , while the individual Member States promote their national objectives , which differ from one country to another , given that policies for people with disabilities are at various stages of development .
I must say that I accept most of your amendments , in both spirit and letter .
I should like to highlight the following points : first , I totally agree that we need to concentrate more on awareness-raising about various types of disabilities and the fact that some people with very serious disabilities are victims of multiple discrimination and , of course , the plight of those kept in institutions .
The second important factor are the special policies on education and employment .
Access to the job market depends on education and we need to focus on this .
The third important point is the need for all the agencies involved to work together .
We cannot propose and implement policies for the disabled .
We need to work with their organisations so that we can present policies in which they themselves are involved .
We believe that 2003 will be the start of a new form of collaboration , a new type of innovative policy at European level for people with disabilities .
The budget , which is EUR 12 million , is small but we should point out that it is not for implementing policies but to back specific events of local or national importance , the main function of which will be to kick start societies and organisations .
I should also say that we believe that it makes sense to leave the funding ratio at 50 % of activities at national level because this will allow for more events while , at the same time , allowing governments to take additional action in a range of policies .
May I again congratulate Mrs Lynne on her personal stand . I should also like to inform you that the Council will take its final decision on 3 December 2001 , the same date as the European Day of Disabled People .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 6.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5.55 p.m. and resumed at 6.30 p.m. )

Mr President , I have just one question : on Tuesday morning we approved requests for urgent procedure for the items on financial aid for a series of Balkan countries , and I regret that these are obviously not going to be taken until the mini-session , because we would have had sufficient time to deal with this issue in this afternoon 's sitting , which has been suspended twice .
In the past , of course , anything which we added to the agenda on Tuesday morning was always taken on the Friday .
I hope that it will soon be possible to revert to this practice when Friday sittings are reinstated , but I wanted to take this opportunity to ask when these items will be taken in the Brussels sitting because you did not announce this just now .
Mr Posselt , according to my information , these will be adopted on Thursday 28 ; in other words , they will appear on the agenda for Thursday 28 .
As for the rest of your comments , Mr Posselt , you are entirely within your rights to make them , but I hope that the Conference of Presidents consider