Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 4 May 2000 .
- Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , on Saturday , a horrific accident struck the people of Enschede , in the Netherlands .
There was an explosion in a fireworks warehouse which has already caused at least sixteen deaths and has injured over six hundred people , six of whom are in a critical condition , with many more people reported missing .
Around four hundred homes have been destroyed by the explosion , and more than a thousand have suffered damage .
This is one of the most terrible disasters in the Netherlands since the second world war .
I have contacted the Dutch authorities to express our deepest sympathy , both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the European Parliament .
At this sad time , our thoughts go out to the victims , to their families , and also to the emergency rescue teams who are working tirelessly .
Ladies and gentlemen , I invite you to observe a minute ' s silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Madam President , on behalf of the 31 Dutch delegates of this European Parliament , I would like to convey to you my heartfelt thanks for the words you spoke a moment ago and for the respect this Parliament has shown for the victims of this terrible disaster in Enschede and for their relatives .
Madam President , on behalf of the 31 delegates , there is actually little I could add to your words .
I would , however , like to underline how we have been moved not only by what you said a moment ago and the silence that was observed , but also by the prompt assistance across the borders to relieve the distress following this disaster .
At a moment ' s notice , German colleagues joined forces with their Dutch friends to carry out the frequently dangerous activities which were necessary to control the disaster .
German hospitals too have been involved in the care of the wounded , dozens of whom are still in hospital .
I find this an example of European solidarity which is what we stand for in this Parliament .
On behalf of the 31 delegates , I would also like to thank the Commission which immediately expressed sympathy in the form of a letter from Mr Prodi to the municipality of Enschede .
I would like to ask the Commission to consider what kind of a role it sees for itself in relieving distress and in preventing terrible disasters of this kind in which so many citizens are involved .
I am extremely grateful to you on behalf of the 31 for the sympathy this Parliament has shown , and I can see in our Parliament a true representation of the European solidarity which this continent so desperately needs .
- Thank you , Mr Oostlander .
- On 7 May last year , terrorism of the most undiscriminating and brutal kind once again struck in Spain with the murder of José Luis López de Lacalle , a journalist and co-founder of the Forum d ' Ermua , a peace movement of Basque intellectuals .
The terrorists intended to strike a blow at one of the most precious assets of democracy , freedom of expression .
This forum was founded after Miguel Ángel Blanco Garrido , a municipal councillor in Ermua , was murdered by ETA in July 1997 .
This forum means to affirm that intimidation and blackmail are not enough to silence consciences .
Throughout his life José Luis López de Lacalle fought to defend freedom and democracy .
After spending five years in prison under the Franco regime , he fell victim to another dictatorship , that of terrorism .
That very day , I made a point of staunchly condemning this act of barbarism and of expressing , both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the European Parliament as a whole , our deepest sympathy and condolences to his family and the newspaper he worked for .
I also notified the Spanish Government of our utmost support in the fight against terrorism .
Agenda
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 11 May 2000 has been distributed .
Relating to Thursday :
We can have five items in the Human Rights section . At the moment , we only have four .
We therefore have the opportunity to add a further item , and I have received three requests .
A request from the GUE / NGL , the Greens and the TDI to add a new sub-item entitled " Tunisia " ; one from the PPE Group to add an item on " Spectator safety and the prevention of hooliganism at the forthcoming European football championship " ; and an item from the Union for a Europe of Nations Group to add a new sub-item entitled the " Situation of Bhutan refugees in Nepal " .
I shall therefore put these requests to the vote in the order in which I received them .
Firstly , though , Mr Cohn-Bendit wishes to speak in support of the request by the GUE , the Greens and the TDI .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the association agreement between the European Union and Tunisia has been in force since 1 March 1998 .
Since then we have not had a single major debate on Tunisia , and there have been no topical and urgent motions .
Every time one of the groups can be relied upon to say , " Yes , it is important , but you must see that Mr Ben Ali is still just settling in . "
We have all read the reports in the papers of the status of human rights and freedom of expression in Tunisia .
I find it outrageous that every time we attempt to discuss this , we are prevented by Members of Parliament and the Tunisian Government .
I find it outrageous that one of the two major parties is trying once again to put off any debate or any topical and urgent motion on fundamental freedoms in Tunisia .
Our Group is therefore asking everyone to stop listening to the leaders of the two main parties , and instead to act like independently-minded adults and resolve at long last to have a debate on the situation in Tunisia .
Let us have the topical and urgent motion , and we shall see what majority there is for human rights , and what majority uses human rights purely in the interests of its own party and resorts to tactics when the situation is sensitive .
In opposition to a tactical stance on Tunisia , and in favour of frank and open debate , I urge you to vote in favour of the topical and urgent motion and to table the situation of human rights in Tunisia .
Madam President , for my part I wish to speak on a constructive rather than on a polemical basis .
I think this is indeed an opportune moment to have a debate on human rights in Tunisia .
It must be held this week because today the trial of Taoufik Ben Brik ' s brother is taking place in Tunis and tomorrow a delegation of Members of the European Parliament , from my Group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Party of European Socialists will be returning from Tunis .
This week we are also due to be visited by the President of the Tunisian League of Human Rights and perhaps by Mr Taoufik Ben Brik himself .
In view of these circumstances and the importance of the European Parliament decision to take action to encourage the release of Mr Ben Brik , I think it particularly appropriate for us to enter this item on the agenda .
Madam President , firstly I would like to say that , out of self-respect , we should not create false arguments amongst ourselves .
Human rights should not only be defended when we come here , but they should be defended constantly . I believe we are all united in this fight .
There are no substantial differences between us .
It would have been a good thing if , in the past , when the Socialist Group proposed an urgent debate on the situation in Tunisia , we could have counted on the votes of those people who are protesting today , because we have not managed to have that urgency approved .
However , I would like to remind you - I was the first speaker at the last Brussels part-session and I asked you , Madam President , on behalf of all of us , to write to President Ben Ali of Tunisia - that what we have to do now is wait for the President of Tunisia to reply to you in your capacity as leader of this Parliament .
Secondly , I would like to point out that the matter of our relations with Tunisia does not end with an urgent debate .
It is a much more important and substantial issue and my Group has agreed today to present an oral question to the Commission and the Council in order that we may hold a full debate on this issue .
I believe that if Mr Cohn-Bendit , for example , wishes for a full debate on this question , he should support our proposal so that we can include it in the next agenda .
Thank you , Mr Barón Crespo .
I think the House is now sufficiently well informed to proceed to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
And now to the proposal from the Group of the European People ' s Party on hooliganism .
Madam President , I wish to thank my own group for allowing this resolution to come this far .
It is not often that we discuss urgencies that might be able to change something for the better .
We are always very reactionary and talk about things that we really cannot affect .
However , next month , before we sit again in Strasbourg , the European football championship starts .
A number of problems have already been raised by people such as the Belgian Police Federation , and there have been many documentaries in various countries about various games and the security arrangements for Euro 2000 .
I know this is meant to be a human rights issue , and indeed it is about the rights of ordinary people .
Every real supporter of football has the right to go to a football game and spectate , and then come away without a threat of violence , without problems on the streets and without being harassed unduly by people we do not particularly like to meet at any time : football hooligans .
This is what this motion is about and I very much hope Members will support it .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
Madam President , on Friday of last month , the four votes could not be held because of the absence of a quorum which had been requested .
Now , I do not think that this is the appropriate place to debate this .
Those who took the initiative have sent a letter to all Members to explain what exactly their intentions were in taking this action .
We will all have the chance next month , of course , to speak our minds regarding Fridays because we will then be discussing the 2001 Agenda .
However , that does mean that we have a problem in the short term , namely what we will be doing this coming Friday .
That problem has been addressed by this Parliament ' s Bureau and , if I understand it correctly , the Bureau issued an opinion to the Conference of Presidents with a proposal not to hold any votes this coming Friday .
As I understand it , this has not been discussed by the Conference of Presidents .
Since it is , of course , up to this House to draft the agenda , I would like to propose simply moving all votes scheduled for Friday to Thursday because , whatever you may think of what happened last month , I think this would be the best way of avoiding the problem .
We can then decide next month what we want to do in the long term .
Thank you , Mrs van der Laan .
As you can see , this provides some incentive for you to attend in great numbers on Friday in order to vote .
I would address my very good friend , Mary Banotti , and ask what the situation is regarding Danish TV here in the Parliament building .
We are , of course , one of the small countries which are always oppressed , but we should like to be able to watch Danish television so that we can keep up with what is happening . We are Europe ' s most important country .
We are simply the best . Just look at who won the Eurovision Song Contest .
But we cannot keep in touch with what is happening .
What are you going to do about it , Mary ?
Thank you , Mr Blak .
Mrs Banotti will reply immediately .
Madam President , this is becoming a regular item .
We were not getting interpretation throughout .
So , dear Freddy , I did not understand a word you said - but I am sure it was wonderful !
Mr Blak will explain it to you .
Madam President , I should just like to say that last year in this House we democratically rejected a motion to cancel Friday sittings by a large majority .
We decided in favour of maintaining sittings on a Friday and said that on that day we would put items on the agenda which were uncontroversial , matters which had nonetheless to be dealt with and yet could also be properly settled with a rather smaller number of people .
Last Friday , a minority of people abused a provision in the Rules of Procedure in order , as it were , to undermine the Friday sitting and to prevent the votes from taking place .
In my view , this is an abuse of a rule which , in itself , is perfectly reasonable because , after all , a majority of this House made a decision on Friday sittings last year .
The matters which were not put to the vote that Friday - including the important issue of Ethiopia - were voted on in Brussels and the results were almost unanimous .
We could have voted on them almost unanimously on the Friday too , and I should like to ask colleagues to stop this sabotage , to let us get on with our work and to discuss the issue of how we organise our work separately and calmly .
But let those who want to work here on a Friday do so in peace and quiet .
At the end of the day , the votes had to be repeated because those who had asked for there to be a check on the quorum were themselves no longer present and did not take part in the vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you are well aware , we are not going to start a debate on this sensitive issue .
I will allow two more speakers and then we shall move on to the order of business .
Madam President , I think there is a misunderstanding here .
Mrs Van der Laan spoke about the proposal made by the Bureau to the Conference of Presidents .
As I understand it , the Conference of Presidents has not discussed this matter any further .
According to Mrs Van der Laan , it is not the intention that we now pass judgement on an action regarding the use of the Rules of Procedure .
I would not want to term it misuse because then I would not know what else these Rules could be used for .
What matters is that we too discuss a proposal from the Bureau here and now .
Surely a proposal from the Bureau cannot simply be sidelined . All we want is that it should also be discussed and that a vote should be taken on it .
Ladies and gentlemen , I shall now give the floor to Mr Wiebenga , since he was in the chair for the Friday of the last part-session and he will be able to tell you that we have discussed this within the Bureau .
Madam President , for those Members who do not know , I would like to make it clear beforehand that I do not belong to the action group which started this Friday action , but that I was the acting President who had to contend with it .
I would like to remind you - and I am at liberty to say this here because I have also said this outside the Bureau - that I referred this point to the Bureau , to you and colleagues in the Bureau , and have , for the short term , suggested four possibilities for Fridays , before we decide on the agenda for the year 2001 , because then we might just as well , of course , vote here in plenary .
The first possibility is to scrap Friday sittings altogether .
The second possibility is to have Friday sittings with a full agenda and hold votes at 12.00 , at lunch times , or such like .
The third possibility is to hold debates on Fridays without voting and then delay the votes until Brussels or subsequent sittings .
The fourth possibility is to carry on as we are , that is to say , to hold minor debates on Fridays and round them off with votes .
Clearly , this last possibility will lead to situations in which other Members can request that the quorum be checked , meaning that we will once again be unable to hold votes this coming Friday .
Madam President , the competent body in these matters is not the Bureau but the Conference of Presidents .
I think that , whatever your opinion may be , whether you are for or against Fridays and whether you are for or against Strasbourg , our Parliament would benefit most if we were not to argue every Friday about the quorum and - I also told the Bureau this - if we were not to hold any votes this coming Friday .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Conference of Presidents which is to meet on Thursday will look into the situation in any case and will see what grounds there are for holding the votes on Friday .


I must also inform you that Mr Provan is to present a report to the Bureau on the internal reforms to be applied to the operation of Parliament and , of course , the organisation of the Friday sitting , which Mr Wiebenga has just been discussing , will be one of the areas under consideration .
Having said that , if you wish to continue to discuss the matter , I see no objection to this .
We shall hear your comments , presented as procedural motions .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I was simply making a protest about the electronics here .
I was unable to receive interpretation , and I am sure that certain other Members were having difficulty with interpretation earlier .
I think I was getting Swedish at one point and I could not hear Mr Blak at all .
I just wanted to point that out .
I think Mrs Banotti referred to it but as I could not hear her , because I was getting Swedish at the time , I do not really know what she said .
Thank you , Mrs Ahern , we shall take steps to ensure that this does not happen again .
Madam President , on a point of order .
It is the same point , and for once I agree with Mrs Ahern .
This must be a first !
Madam President , I should like to start where Mrs van der Laan left off .
On the Friday of the last part-session , she announced that , from now on - for as long as there is still a sitting on a Friday - there will be a request on each occasion for a check on the quorum . This means that the group which made the request last time has itself made it plain that its only objective is destruction and not proper work .
The Bureau cannot tolerate this because the plenary has decided - Mr Posselt referred to this - that sittings should be held on a Friday , and not even the Bureau can overrule this .
We cannot allow a handful of people who , up until now , have seldom been present on a Friday , to make a mockery of us and blacken our public image .
When a roll-call vote took place at 10 o ' clock , hardly any of the 30 proponents were still here .
We really cannot tolerate behaviour of this kind !
Madam President , I should like to respond to what my fellow Member has just said .
I am among those who are in favour of the Friday sitting and who think it important to keep the sitting on that day , just like on the other days of the week .
I should like to add that some of us who , quite rightly , requested that that quorum be checked so that the sittings could be conducted in due order , remained in attendance throughout the votes .
It is inaccurate , therefore , to accuse Members of sabotage .
There are Members in the Chamber who attend from Monday to Friday , and remain until the end of the sitting on Friday .
Madam President , I could not agree more with the observations made by Mr Wiebenga .
The least we can do is to carefully examine once more how we have filled Fridays .
But I would add - also because a number of misconceptions have made their way into the media - that I am not one of those people who would like to solve the ' Strasbourg ' discussion via the back door , but that I do belong to the group of people who want to examine , via a vote , whether we can hold a proper sitting in Strasbourg on a Friday , which also involves our French delegates .
I wanted to highlight these two aspects .
But that also means - and I must get this off my chest - that all those Members who criticised me last time because I had levelled criticism at them , must have left the Chamber before 12.00 .
( The last vote was held after 12.00 . )
That was very hurtful because , unfortunately , the activists , comprising pro-Europeans from my own country and a large number of anti-Europeans , had left by the time the roll-call vote was held .
Reference can be made to the last roll-call vote for this .
Let us examine in a fair manner and through sound discussion how we can fill this part-session .
Madam President , I have little to add after Mrs Oomen ' s intervention .
I only hope that you will understand this .
The Dutch group which made Fridays a subject for discussion in this way did not do this because they are against Strasbourg or anything like that .
They did so because time and again , there is heavy criticism , also in the Netherlands , regarding these Friday sittings and also because most of us prefer to work in our country on Fridays .
This is because we already spend a great deal of our time in Brussels and Strasbourg as it is , and because we need the time to talk to our electorate .
I think that a serious discussion about Fridays is urgently needed and this should not be confused with the discussion about Strasbourg .
It is a discussion on the question of whether we organise our work efficiently and well and whether we have any time left to spend in our own constituencies .
I support the action in this sense .
As I said , there is scope for discussing this when we come to examine Mr Provan ' s report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I was among those who were present throughout Friday .
It is easy to check up on , because electronic voting took place that day .
In fact , there is no question of sabotage . Rather , it is a question of taking Parliament seriously enough to find it actually embarrassing that there are only 70 Members here when we vote on important matters such as school milk or Ethiopia .
This has also given rise to quite a major debate in my own country , Sweden .
We must get a serious discussion under way about these matters .
Either we make Friday a proper working day or we do away with it .
I will be very brief , Madam President . Moreover , I feel that this issue should be discussed in more detail , perhaps at a more convenient time .
I subscribe to the view that Parliament should work on Fridays .
Solutions can , in all probability , be found by putting debates rather than voting sessions on the agenda , for we are all aware that Fridays are convenient for interaction with the Commission and , therefore , important in terms of our political work in the area of our function as MEPs representing our home territories .
When we discuss this issue , it would , however , be preferable for Members to refrain , when considering the action to be taken , from laying themselves open to misrepresentative publicity regarding the nature of Parliament ' s function .
There are certain types of action which give our countries and our electorate the impression that , in actual fact , the European Parliament spends its time fooling around and doing no work . The effect of these actions is therefore damaging , whatever the motive behind them .
I therefore hope that we will be responsible enough to reach a point at which the debate can brought to a definitive conclusion without going down a path which none of us want to take and without laying ourselves open to criticism .
As Mr Wiebenga said , and as I said myself , we are currently investigating the best solutions .
Madam President , all I asked for is whether or not it is possible to put the request that we do not vote this coming Friday to the vote . After all , this is now the item on the agenda : determining the agenda for this plenary session .
No , Mrs van der Laan , you ought to know that according to the Rules of Procedure , this is a request that should have been presented in due form and at the due time , and this was not the case .
I cannot therefore put this request to the vote .
It only remains for me to express the hope that there will be a good attendance this Friday , votes or not .
I am counting on you all , if only for the benefit of the public that attends our debates .
Agricultural prices
The next item is the report ( A5-0115 / 2000 ) by Mrs Jeggle , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Commission proposals relating to the prices for agricultural products ( COM ( 2000 ) 77 - C5-0121 / 2000 to C5-0126 / 2000 - 2000 / 0045 ( CNS ) to 2000 / 0050 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that you had a wonderful weekend and that you were able to relax somewhere in Europe in our fantastically beautiful - and , above all , undamaged - agricultural landscape , which is responsibly and lovingly tended by our farmers .
It is in this spirit of optimism that we can begin this debate on our report on the prices for agricultural products in 2000 / 2001 .
In the past , this report was always the subject of fierce debates on farm incomes .
The decisions made under Agenda 2000 established many principles , not necessarily always for the best as far as agriculture is concerned .
This Commission proposal , too , contains a series of points which will again lead to a reduction in farmers ' incomes .
In my report I make my opposition to this absolutely clear .
The Commission is proposing to further reduce the additional charges on the intervention prices for cereals in two stages and then to fix them .
The Commission ' s proposal to reduce the monthly increments would mean another substantial deterioration in farm incomes .
In this context , we also reject the Commission ' s plan to make the intervention criteria stricter .
If the minimum moisture content threshold were lowered this would reduce the compass of the intervention safety net and increase the proportion of the cereal crop which is , in principle , excluded from intervention .
A third point - and here , judging by recent press releases , the Council appears to be coming round to the Agriculture Committee ' s point of view - relates to Mrs Schreyer ' s proposal to cut the agriculture budget by EUR 300 million per year in favour of the EU 's foreign policy , despite the fact that additional money has still not been made available to remedy the extensive forest damage .
At this stage I should like to state clearly once again that however important the EU 's commitment to the Balkans is , the agriculture budget does not constitute an inexhaustible supply of funds which we can use to finance all our other desirable policies .
The agriculture budget is neither a self-service shop nor a high-yielding dairy cow .
Mrs Schreyer says that , of course , the EUR 300 million will not come out of direct support , but that is irrelevant because in the second pillar of agricultural policy too - that is , promoting the development of rural areas and stewardship of the countryside - each and every euro is necessary and well-spent .
Our farmers are already experiencing uncertainty of a kind which ought to make us stop and think .
Structural change is not , in itself , a bad thing ; it is much more the consequence of a huge improvement in training and therefore in knowledge , skills and technology .
But if an increasing number of farms are going out of business , farms which we have classified as viable from a political point of view , and if farmers are complaining about their workload , which is becoming unbearable , then something is wrong , and perhaps something is also wrong with our policy .
It is our job to put in place tangible and enduringly reliable or - with your permission I will borrow a word from our definition of modern land management - sustainable framework conditions and not to turn the screws - including the tiny ones - even further .
After all , we have already tightened the large ones as far as they will go .
We need to change fundamental aspects of our agriculture policy for the long term !
We need a new vision for our farmers which is forward-looking and geared towards future needs .
At this point I should like to ask the Commission whether , and to what extent , it is prepared to accept the amendments we adopted unanimously in committee .
I am obviously asking because there is the possibility of referring this back to the committee if the Commission is not prepared to take on board points which are important to Parliament .
I refer in particular to the moisture content of cereals and the monthly increments .
On the other hand , I recognise that the budget year begins on 1 July and that a referral back to the committee might mean that the Council would not be able to decide in time , which would again be disadvantageous for agriculture .
That is what I want to prevent at all costs .
I started the report by reminding you of the beauty of the European agricultural landscape .
I should like to finish with the sentence : ' Food and drink hold body and soul together ' .
Let us not forget this , even in our political considerations and decisions !
Madam President , a large contingent within the Committee on Budgets is of the opinion that , as far as next year ' s agricultural prices are concerned , we should adhere to what was agreed in Berlin .
Nothing more , nothing less .
This is an achievement in itself in certain sectors of agriculture .
In various European countries , large groups of farmers are in dire straits .
At present , there is a great deal of suffering in silence .
So far , it would seem that the agricultural budget was born under a lucky star .
The euro-dollar rate impacts favourably on the budget , although certain figures are a cause of concern .
There is nothing to say , however , that things will remain the same forever .
Despite this , the Commission has made various proposals to benefit from the agricultural budget , if possible .
Sometimes , these discussions focus on the sugar sector and other times they home in on other sectors of the agricultural budget .
The Committee on Budgets is of the opinion that we must keep to what was agreed in the plenary a number of months ago , namely a situation in which the agricultural budget serves as a primary source of funding for external EU action should never arise .
The budget will stick to this principle .
Secondly , according to the Committee on Budgets , the European Commission should come up with proposals to reform the sugar sector without delay .
If we start to discuss the budget for 2001 in structural terms in September or October of this year , then it is essential to know what the Commission has in mind for the sugar sector .
Am I not right in thinking that sugar fell outside the scope of the Berlin agreements ?
And in order to evaluate the 2001 budget effectively , we need to know this .
I hope that Commissioner Fischler will be able to tell us this afternoon when he intends to produce reform proposals for sugar .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when our farmers read in the press that we in the European Parliament are debating agricultural prices for the 2000 / 2001 financial year , many will certainly cherish the hope that we might just be considering a few price increases .
But that is not the case !
In fact , we are discussing the proposals which the Commission has tabled following the Agenda 2000 reforms .
May I , at this stage , specifically thank the rapporteur , Mrs Jeggle , for her work .
Hitherto , people have regarded it as a routine annual exercise when we have had to debate prices for agricultural products .
Year after year , blows were exchanged and , in that respect , I now welcome the fact that the fixed multiannual price proposals really can give farmers a rather more reliable framework in which to plan their production .
However , I should like to warn you that , with this system , the annual review by the Council , the Commission and Parliament might not perhaps receive the attention which it deserves .
The market situation , the outlook in the individual sectors and the trends in farm incomes as well as employment should continue to be examined by the European institutions on an annual basis .
The proposals on setting institutional prices and monthly increments cover the products already mentioned .
Most prices were fixed under Agenda 2000 , but the Commission is proposing to cut the monthly increments for cereals by 7.5 % .
I should like to fully support the rapporteur ' s stance in this regard .
In our group ' s view , the reduction in the monthly increments for cereals cannot be supported , not least because the Commission ' s proposal undermines the Berlin decisions on Agenda 2000 .
We should not continue to exert pointless pressure on farmers ' incomes .
I now turn to a topical issue , Commissioner Fischler , which is of interest to me . During the last plenary part-session , we once again discussed with Mrs Schreyer whether this EUR 300 million for reconstruction aid in Kosovo for 2001 / 2002 really could be taken out of the agriculture budget .
I am familiar with the argument that we would save this amount because of the exchange rate mechanism .
This was also reiterated when we were discussing the organisation of the market in sugar .
But have I deduced correctly from the press that , at the beginning of last week , the Council in any case rejected this Commission proposal ?
I interpreted the press report as meaning that it did not support this , and I would be grateful to have the answer from your point of view , otherwise we will provoke a discussion here and debate the reality afterwards .
Personally , I was extremely pleased at least by this admission from the Council at this stage .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no longer much point in discussing the package of agricultural prices since the 1992 CAP stipulated the gradual transition from a production price support system to a direct aid system , increasingly required to be dissociated from the production volumes .
And as Agenda 2000 adopted and extended this approach , the establishment of agricultural prices is henceforth multiannual .
While , however , it must still be possible to make annual adjustments , they must nonetheless comply , for the most part , with the commitments made in Berlin covering this period .
This leads me , together with my colleagues on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to refuse to endorse the Commission ' s proposal to reduce the monthly increments for cereals in two phases , by 7.5 % each time .
The same applies to moisture content in cereals .
The Berlin agreement must continue to be our benchmark .
This is the principled position that the European Union adopted in Seattle with regard to its trading partners and competitors within the World Trade Organisation .
Logically , then , it should also set the standard in our debates on internal CAP matters .
In particular , the European Union must fulfil its commitments in order to enable European farmers to have a clear idea of the policy as it affects them , in order to be able to manage their farms as wisely as possible .
I therefore think it imperative to lift the veil from this notion of making the agricultural sector pay for Kosovo .
In this connection , then , I would urge the Commission to provide us very quickly with its proposed reform of the COM in sugar .
Mr President , the opinion of the Committee on Budgets and that of the Liberal Group more or less coincide .
This is purely accidental .
I will therefore not repeat what I said in the first two minutes .
All these points which I mentioned are also backed by the Liberal Group .
I would like to add a few more points , however .
We are living in an era in which the agricultural budget is extremely tight .
The slightest movement in the dollar and euro rates would get us into great difficulty .
This being the case , the Commission will have to make a choice as to what to do with the money that is available .
Potentially , however , there is another very large gap .
Over the past few years , we have been faced with outbreaks of epidemics of infectious animal diseases .
We had the BSE crisis in Europe and several European countries suffered from swine fever outbreaks .
These combined outbreaks have cost the European budget billions .
It has so far been possible to finance them from categories other than the agricultural budget .
It was agreed in Berlin that this can no longer be the case .
If I am not mistaken , the agricultural budget only comprises one item of approximately EUR 100 million for the control of animal diseases .
This is peanuts compared to what was needed in the past to control outbreaks of infectious diseases .
This is why the Liberal Group is expressly asking the Commission to produce proposals as soon as possible for coping with any disasters .
One of the options is possibly to set up an insurance system throughout Europe , which would also promote fair competition .
In anticipation of the budgetary discussions in September , we would like the Commission to provide us with the necessary data so that we can take this into consideration in the discussions of the budgets for the year 2001 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , adoption of the 2000 / 2001 agricultural price package involves a commitment to save EUR 300 million from the agriculture budget and to use the appropriations released for reconstruction work in Kosovo .
In this context the report rightly points out that the Commission ought to submit a general document on this to Parliament , in the form of a concrete plan , before further austerity proposals can be accepted .
Without a doubt , the issue of funding the whole reform package plays a decisive role .
What I do not find satisfactory in this process , however , is the fact that we always speak first of reducing expenditure and revenue while at the same time transferring ever more tasks to the Commission , which , of course , does not reduce costs either .
Up until 2006 the Commission should work on the basis of the realistic targets set and should deduce its financial needs from them .
As a result of Agenda 2000 , European farmers had to accept a EUR 5 billion reduction in their income .
This meant that the agriculture budget was fixed at EUR 50.5 billion and it should stay as such .
To achieve its objectives , the Commission should , in my view , be invited to present a report showing how costs have changed in the agricultural sector .
Today , more deals are concluded in a second than used to be in an entire day and change is the only constant .
Agricultural prices change particularly quickly .
In the EU in 1999 , the prices of crop products fell by 4 % and livestock products by 6 % .
As a result of excessive over-production , pig prices fell by 9 % .
All the important agricultural products such as milk , beef , cereals and pork are suffering from increased turbulence on the world ' s foreign exchanges , reducing farmers ' incomes still further .
That is why we are still far from answering the question of how European Union farmers should make a living in the future .
In the saturated marketplace , only products produced economically can be sold .
The price reductions will destroy farmers ' livelihoods in Europe and thus temporarily ease the pressure on the market .
Following this structural change the agricultural holdings which have been able to survive will further increase their output and wield even greater power on the world market .
Another price war will lead to a new round of market redistribution .
Further developments will show whether the reform of the EU ' s agricultural policy by means of Agenda 2000 is capable of achieving its overall aims or not .
Mr President , notwithstanding the fact that Agenda 2000 has set the parameters governing agriculture for the period up to 2006 , the annual price package is still very important .
I agree fully with those who expressed their reservations today in relation to the Commission proposals on the cereals sector .
I am very pleased to see Commissioner Fischler here to listen to this debate .
To farmers the price received in the marketplace should represent the real value of their professional endeavours , rather than what they often perceive as social support for the products of their labour .
While not in any way wishing to detract from the overall success of CAP reform , as agreed in Agenda 2000 , and acknowledging that without income support farmers would not survive , I must , at the same time , confess to some unease about a situation in which the produce of the land , as produced by our farmers , has to be sold at below production costs .
This happens in many instances .
In this context the support for agriculture - it is substantial and I acknowledge that because it represents almost 50 % of the entire budget - must be seen also as a subsidy to consumers .
With the availability of employment outside agriculture and the advances made by the EU and Member States in reducing unemployment , there is now a serious threat to the sustainability of Europe 's traditional family farm .
In recent weeks we have heard much talk about a review of the agricultural budget which was agreed in Berlin only a few months ago .
I get the feeling that those concerned only with book-keeping have absolutely no understanding of what is happening out there in the real world .
I warn that unless we become more vigilant and show a greater understanding of the unique and irreplaceable role of farmers in society , future generations and parliamentarians will be forced to react to save agriculture .
That is what we are now doing in our attempt to rectify the rural-urban imbalance which we have allowed to develop over a period of years .
Remember : that it was not the people who created this major problem for society ; it was a lack of vision on the part of politicians and planners .
Let us take a fresh look at how better we can plan the long-term survival of agriculture as the profession responsible for food security and safety , taking account of the unique role of farmers as managers of the environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Jeggle on the report that she has produced , on the work she has done and on having achieved the practically unanimous support of the Committee on Agriculture for her report .
I would also like to congratulate the Commission on having included a multiannual element in the proposals .
Nevertheless , although this is a little repetitive , I would like you to bear in mind and reconsider , with regard to cereals , both moisture content and the monthly price reviews , since they are issues which could cause us considerable harm .
There is also another question , and I feel that harsh words are required : every time a problem arises in this European Union or in its political positions - positions which I do not question - we consider taking funds away from the agricultural budget .
This issue is of serious concern to us , since the Commissioner for Budgets has repeated that she intends to take EUR 300 million away from sugar to send to Kosovo .
There are also other matters which I would like to stress , which do not appear in the proposal on prices , such as my concern for the nut sector , hazelnuts and almonds , which is facing such great problems at the moment , since , in some cases , the improvement plans implemented by the Commission are coming to an end .
Since its review is not finished , and until the problem of the nut industry is resolved , an extension of these improvement plans should be reconsidered , until its correct place is found , which should be the COM in fruits , where it will be treated in a genuinely differentiated fashion .
Other issues of concern to me do not appear , such as the case of asparagus intended for processing .
Article 10 ( 3 ) of the Regulation on processed fruits and vegetables provides for lump sum aid .
This aid is going to stop very soon ; it comes to an end during this season .
How does the Commission intend to ensure that , in Europe , this aid is used to promote competitiveness and continues to be given to asparagus producers ?
With regard to table grapes , on 31 July aid expires for the production of juice , which is included in the COM in wine .
In my opinion , it should be included in the next amendment of the COM in fruits .
Once it has expired however , that is , from 31 July , what are we going to do , until the new reforms are approved , about the aid for table grape processing ?
Will it be extended ?
What is the intention here ?
Regulation No 2275 also provides for aid for promotion in the flower and plant sector , and this aid is also coming to an end .
How can this happen , given that the Council has asked the Commission to carry out a study on the evolution of the aid , in order to justify whether or not it should continue ?
I believe that , while waiting for this study to be presented - and we still know nothing about it - and then for a reform to be proposed , Regulation No 2275 should perhaps be extended .
Does this fit in with the Commission ' s plans ?
They are important sectors because they affect very specific areas .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Agenda 2000 has created a certain kind of stability for the European Agricultural Policy .
I consider it a matter of great importance that we can have a clear and firm view of the future , at least until 2006 .
The departure from the Berlin Agreement - these sums are significant to agriculture , but extremely small on the level of the Community as a whole - the question in principle of departing from what has been agreed , is a very serious matter .
It is necessary for this Parliament to make decisions on a new and ongoing agricultural policy after 2006 .
This kind of policy , which departs from what has been agreed upon , is not likely to create the stability and spirit that would enable us to share a common view of the future .
One thing of which we seem oblivious , is the present everyday reality of agriculture .
There has been a considerable rise in agricultural costs ; fuel prices have gone up , and the level of costs in general is showing a constant upward trend .
In addition to this , farmers as well as the food industry have invested a great deal in quality , in order to rid us of the scandals which have marred the European agricultural model .
It is the farmers themselves who will ultimately have to pay these costs .
The farmers for their part have carried out all their duties and obligations .
We may only hope that the other party will also hold to those mutual agreements that have been made .
Mr President , in its proposals to the Council of Ministers , the Commission has not set out the prices of products and subsidies , as it falsely claims it has done ; in our opinion , it simply wants to remind us of the prices and subsidies which will be in force for the period from 2000-2001 in accordance with existing regulations , and at the very most , to amend some monthly increments to the intervention prices of any products to which this system still applies .
We should like to take this opportunity , however , to note that first : producer prices and subsidies have been frozen for numerous agricultural products for twelve consecutive years , as is the case with sheepmeat and goatmeat , whereas for other products they have been falling due to the constant increase in production costs , thereby reducing net agricultural incomes , as the Eurostat figures also show .
The question therefore is : what are the farmers doing about this ?
Secondly , eroding or even abolishing the intervention system will leave farmers at the mercy of traders , who buy from producers at derisory prices and then often resell at substantially higher prices .
As a result , while nominal producer prices have fallen , often quite sharply , consumer prices have risen .
In other words , both producers and consumers are being bled dry in the name of protection , which is what the European Union claims it is doing .
The question is what will farmers and consumers do about this ?
Will they step up their fight ?
Thirdly , low quotas and the resultant extortionate fines are eating up the subsidies for the 1999 harvest .
Thus the subsidies end up becoming a white elephant .
A blatant example is that of oil , which also concerns my country , and in particular my native island of Lesbos .
Despite declarations that the 1998-1999 subsidy would be GRD 460 , producers were only paid GRD 330 , one year later .
The same applies to cotton where , although the minimum price is EUR 101 per 100 kilos , Greek producers will be paid less than EUR 65 because of the co-responsibility levy .
We have the following comments to make on the issues addressed in the report : as regards cereals , we disagree with the reduction in the monthly increments of the intervention price , which should have been increased .
Also , it must be said that this approach is further eroding the intervention system and , as with other products , it will apparently be abolished altogether for cereals .
We also disagree with the monthly increment being paid in November , since harvest time in Greece is in June .
And similarly with rice , we recommend that intervention commence on 1 October or November and not on 1 April because otherwise , our producers are at the mercy of greedy profiteering traders for six months ....
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to support Mrs Jeggle ' s report and the statements she has made by asking a few very simple questions .
Commissioner , I think it is in your interest to use the support offered by the Members of the European Parliament in order to attempt to safeguard your budget for agriculture .
When we see the way in which money is being used and diverted to finance other measures , we have good cause to wonder if we shall still have the resources to implement a European agricultural policy after enlargement , and moreover to ensure rural development .
When you achieve savings on cereals through moisture rates , how many millions does that amount to throughout Europe ?
And how are these millions going to be used ?
Do not forget that it is the intermediate regions that will be the first to suffer the effects , not the good cereal-growing areas , the main cereal-growing areas , but rather the regions where there are average production levels , where many farmers are currently experiencing problems .
Looking across the board at agricultural regions , I am forced to note that it is these small- and medium-sized farms whose continuity is not assured , where the farmers ' children are looking for careers outside agriculture .
I therefore think that this policy calls for caution , Commissioner .
And you have our support .
The agricultural budget must be used to promote rural development and to step up support to the family-type farms that exist at grass-roots level , rather than containing only budget measures whose sole purpose is to make savings .
Commissioner , we are counting on you a great deal .
We are speaking from the bottom of our hearts . Within Parliament we are aiming to defend the family farm .
- ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Jeggle , on her work , and say that , in fact , this price package is no longer as important as it has been in the past , since , fortunately , it has started to turn into the presentation and definition of agricultural policy in the medium term .
This is why , only recently , we carried out a reform of Agenda 2000 : these price packages tend merely to make annual adjustments in response to one-off situations .
The current price package comes at a time when the Commission has promised to present proposals for reform in various sectors over the current year , specifically the rice , sugar , fruit , vegetable and oil sectors . I hope that these reforms do take place .
There is one particular situation that I would like to highlight , which concerns the issue of fruit and vegetables and which is of particular importance to my country .
We are all aware of the iniquity of the present regulations of the policy on processed tomatoes .
Changes to quotas are made between Member States , and this happens every year within a framework which does not take account of unforeseen changes in the climate or the market , and this creates a permanent state of instability in the sector .
A short while ago , therefore , following Mrs González ' report , the European Parliament approved the urgent establishment of guarantee thresholds at Member State level and the Commission was asked to present these proposals as a matter of urgency .
However , in the price package , the Commission has not presented anything in this regard to remedy the situation , and the Commission does not appear to be in any hurry to put forward a proposal either .
My country is likely to lose 10 % of its quota if the COM proposal is not adopted quickly , and this , quite frankly , is unacceptable .
So the question is , why has the Portuguese Presidency not adopted initiatives to ensure that a proposal would be put forward with due haste ? And why do they use the argument that " the tomato industry cannot be reformed because there is no money " when we spend the money we have on things other than agriculture , such as the financing provided for Kosovo ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank you , Mrs Jeggle , very much for your report .
After all , it is the first which you have tabled in the House .
I should also like very much to thank the Members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the other committees , which have actively participated in the consultations , for their constructive cooperation .
I am pleased that Parliament agrees with the main thrust of the Commission 's proposals , namely that we need more continuity and that prices therefore need to be fixed on a multiannual basis .
With your permission , I will first comment on the background to , and the content of , the proposals which we have made .
It is absolutely right - as has been stated here - that the price package is no longer as significant as it was in the past .
As a logical consequence of the multiannual approach which we chose for Agenda 2000 , the Commission has now also proposed to set the institutional prices and amounts for those sectors for which this is actually still necessary for an unlimited period of time .
This offers our farmers a considerably more stable framework for their longer-term planning , although we do not , in principle , rule out making any changes which may later prove to be necessary .
The only exception to this multiannual approach in our proposals concerns the sugar sector , where the production quota regime currently in force - as most of you here probably know - will expire in the 2000 / 2001 financial year .
That is why it would not have been appropriate - given that this final year has to be fixed now first - to introduce a change here .
That is why we are also proposing that the current prices for sugar be kept for this final year of the production quota regime now in force .
I shall now turn to the individual amendments put forward . Amendment No 4 seeks to leave the monthly increments unchanged .
I cannot , to be quite frank , agree to this proposal , because you are wrong to claim that the reduction which we have proposed contravenes the decisions made in Berlin .
On the contrary , this is the logical consequence of the decisions made in Berlin !
You see , in Berlin it was decided to maintain the system of monthly increments .
But that has nothing to do with adjustments to the amounts .
In the past , too , we made adjustments- more or less - every year .
On the other hand , I should also like , as it were , to warn you against believing that it would not be sensible to make this adjustment , because you have to bear one thing in mind : if the amounts are not adjusted and this leads to market supply being disrupted and to cereals being held back in the hope of higher carryovers , then farmers will lose more in the spring when they market their products than they would gain through these higher monthly increments .
That is why I cannot accept this proposal .
The second issue , which involves updating and tightening up the quality criteria , has , of course , been under discussion for months now .
In the meantime , since we are , after all , dealing here with an area where the Commission has exclusive competence - I should also like to emphasise this - a vote has been held in the relevant Management Committee .
That actually puts an end to the debate because , as of 19 April , Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 824 / 2000 was enacted .
I do not think that we should reopen this debate now .
That is why I cannot agree to Amendments Nos 2 or 5 .
Since the issue of moisture content has been raised here today , I should like to point out that the price of cereals might have been fixed in Berlin , but not the price of water ! 14.5 % is the maximum moisture content which traders customarily accept nowadays .
It does not present a particular problem to farmers .
After all , if a farmer does have bad luck and has rather higher moisture levels in his cereal crop , then all he needs to do is to pay the drying costs and the problem is solved !
But we can no longer accept the idea of having grain in intervention storage which does not comply with usual international trade practices .
Unfortunately , I also have a problem with including mustard seed in the support system , as you propose in Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , because that would be contrary to the Marrakech Agreement .
It would run counter to the peace clause which states that no new products may be incorporated into the support system .
I now come to Amendments Nos 6 and 7 . Some clarification is probably called for here .
Firstly , the funding of foreign policy measures for the 2000 / 2001 financial year , which is what we are discussing here , is not in any way linked to the setting of sugar prices .
Secondly , the proposed reduction in the ceiling under heading 1a for the year 2002 does not prejudice the measures in any particular production sector either .
Thirdly , Mrs Jeggle also addressed the situation in 2003 and subsequent years . Here , the Commission has decided that appropriations are only to be withdrawn once the political situation in Serbia has changed dramatically .
If this is the case , the Commission will decide when it reviews the financial perspective in 2002 - as it decided to do in Berlin - how to meet any possible needs .
At this stage , the Commission has specifically decided not to prejudice anything here either .
In addition , the Commission has decided that , as a general rule , funds can only be taken from heading 1a if sufficient funds are not available from other sources , and at the moment it is far from certain that this will be the case .
Mrs Jeggle , you proposed that we should at least utilise the appropriations in 1b - i.e. those for rural development - and you linked this to the disastrous storms in Badem-Württemberg in which many trees were uprooted by the strong winds .
This is a much more complex problem because here the Commission had originally intended to make it possible precisely to transfer funds between the two sub-headings .
However , this was rejected by Parliament .
That is why a transfer of this kind is not possible on the basis of the Financial Regulation currently in force and the Interinstitutional Agreement .
I now come to the question which Mrs Keppelhoff asked concerning what ECOFIN actually did decide . Well , the proposals which Mrs Schreyer circulated to ECOFIN were rejected for the time being .
At the moment , however , we are , of course , still in the discussion phase ; the actual budget debate on the 2001 budget is yet to take place .
The rejection does not primarily or exclusively concern this issue of the 300 million ; the proposals as a whole were given a negative reception by ECOFIN .
Amendment No 8 , to which Mr Mulder , in particular , referred , concerns a study on alternative ways of covering financial losses arising in the event of outbreaks of animal diseases .
The study which Mr Mulder mentioned was also intended to examine the possibility of introducing a compulsory insurance scheme .
We will commission a study of this kind .
However , I have to tell you that the results will not be available until the end of the year .
We will not obtain the results from those carrying out the study any earlier than that .
I also share the view expressed in the amendment that producers ought to take on more of the financial responsibility for eradicating animal diseases .
However , in principle , it is the Member States who are responsible for this issue .
That is why initially all we can do here is carry out an evaluation of the possible ways in which we at Community level might support the Member States in setting up schemes of this kind .
In any case , this issue ought to be dealt with in the context of the review of veterinary legislation which is currently being carried out by the Directorate-General responsible for public and animal health .
Mrs Redondo asked a number of questions about the organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables , about nuts and about ornamental plants , and Mr Cunha asked about processed tomatoes .
As planned , the Commission will submit a report on the functioning of the organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables before the end of this year .
This report will not only cover fresh fruit and vegetables but also processed fruit and vegetables , and therefore processed tomatoes .
We expect this report to be ready at the beginning of the second half of this year .
As far as promoting ornamental plants is concerned - or to be more precise , Mrs Redondo , publicity for the ornamental plants sector - it is true that the Commission is carrying out a review here .
In fact , we made this a requirement when the legal arrangements were introduced and , depending on the outcome of the assessment , we will table a proposal in sufficient time to ensure that there is no interruption in the publicity campaign .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Flax and hemp for fibre
The next item is the report ( A5-0124 / 2000 ) by Mrs Schierhuber , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1251 / 1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops to include flax and hemp grown for fibre [ COM ( 1999 ) 576 - C5-0280 / 1999 - 1999 / 0236 ( CNS ) ] and on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in flax and hemp grown for fibre [ COM ( 1999 ) 576 - C5-0281 / 1999 - 1999 / 0237 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at first sight the importance of the flax and hemp sector may perhaps not be obvious , particularly to those colleagues who work less frequently on agricultural matters .
Flax and hemp are crops with a very rich tradition in Europe , whose popularity has nevertheless declined over the years and whose versatility is only now being rediscovered .
It is precisely the possibilities which this branch of agriculture offers of developing products with a promising future which we need to support at European level .
Insulation for houses , filling materials for vehicle bodywork and presses for furniture manufacture are just some of the examples of this modern technology .
The production of these materials from renewable raw materials should offer a real alternative to synthetically-produced ones and , at the same time , provide a new and attractive source of income for farmers as suppliers of those raw materials .
The need for reform is justified , above all , by misuses of funds and subsidy fraud in recent years .
I am firmly opposed to this subsidy hunting and strict controls are necessary to ensure compliance with legal provisions .
All the same , in my opinion , the Commission proposals overshoot the mark a little .
Allow me briefly to outline the basic considerations underlying my report . Area payments should be set at EUR 126 / t - or EUR 600 / ha - and should only be disbursed if proof of delivery to the processor is furnished .
The area payments are being established under the regulation on the support system for producers of arable crops and , for this reason , this regulation also needs to be adjusted to take account of the specific characteristics of flax and hemp .
It goes without saying that the regional base areas envisaged in this regulation need to be expanded to incorporate the areas for flax and hemp .
Since flax and hemp are mainly grown for non-food purposes and no surpluses are produced , there should be no set-aside obligation , because set-aside serves as an instrument to regulate markets where surpluses are possible .
The processing aid which is to be paid out to the primary processor will only be granted if proof can be provided that processing has taken place within the last 18 months .
Since this aid is supposed to take account of the economic viability of the sector , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development proposes setting this at EUR 120 / t for long flax fibre and EUR 70 / t for short flax fibre and hemp .
Of course , it is not only the premium for long fibres , but also that for short fibres which needs to be secured as a long-term measure because it is precisely short fibres which are of prime importance for innovative projects .
Commissioner , the national maximum quantities and the maximum quantity for the EU , which the Commission is proposing , need to be reconsidered .
The maximum quantities for each Member State should be calculated on the basis of existing processing capacities and adjusted to take account of planned processing capacities for which irreversible investments have already been made .
Allow me to make one further comment on hemp because there is still some misunderstanding here . There is no risk of drugs being cultivated in Europe and the use of hempseed for nutritional purposes is deeply rooted in certain regions .
The existing control mechanisms and limits are sufficient , in my view , to prevent hemp from being cultivated for the production of psychotropic substances .
Specialities have developed in the individual regions - such as hempseed oil and hemp beer - which help to enrich regional identity through the food chain .
Mr President , I should once more like to point out that a reform , which is admittedly necessary , of the flax and hemp sector , which , on account of its multi-functionality , is so important for the future of European agriculture and for the future of farmers as suppliers of raw materials for new spheres , must not be allowed to render the entire sector unprofitable .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted this report by a large majority .
That is why I should like to extend my warmest thanks to all those who supported me when I was drawing up this report .
Mr President , according to Mrs Schierhuber ' s present report , if something goes wrong with a certain regulation in Europe , in this case flax , it is quite possible to ensure that that regulation can remain intact by means of new proposals .
Flax , like hemp , is a special product , with a long European tradition .
The mere fact that both my trousers and jacket are made of linen and flax which is processed in Flanders and partly in Zeeland , and grown in France , bears out this product ' s long-standing tradition .
The reason we are having to hold this debate is to do with the fact that the regulation has gone off the rails .
We all know what happened to short flax .
We also know that that derailment occurred in Southern Europe and we need to be prepared to adapt the policy .
But what is now happening with the Commission ' s proposal is tantamount to throwing out the baby with the bathwater .
People have overstepped the mark .
At the same time , it is quite possible to tighten the flax and hemp regulations so that we can manage on a normal budget such as the one we have had over the past couple of years and , despite this , continue to grow flax and hemp in Europe at a profit .
I am saying this because , although the cultivation of flax and hemp is traditional , they are also used in special applications in linen for clothing and in other applications in the non-food sector . I am thinking of dashboards and bumpers for cars .
At the same time , they form a true complement to agricultural policy . They are special products which offer a great deal of added value and employment .
It is exactly because of these three facets that we have to be so much more careful about drafting a sound regulation .
This is why I give my full backing to Mrs Schierhuber ' s report .
The amounts which have been mentioned guarantee that cultivation remains profitable and also ensure sound processing .
What we need is tighter control on processing to ensure that malpractices are prevented in future .
I would like to end on a historical note .
My country suffered an eighty-year war at the hands of Spain , which was eventually settled with the Peace of Münster .
The people who met round the table came from the southern Netherlands - Belgium as it is known today , - the northern Netherlands - the Netherlands as we know it today - and Spain , and all three wore linen jackets , most probably made in Flanders , the linen being grown in Northern France and Belgium .
An eighty-year conflict failed to destroy the cultivation of flax along the North Sea coast .
Surely , we cannot afford to let the current regulation go under on account of a minor derailment in Spain which has meanwhile been rectified and which has led to crops being cultivated there over an area reduced to 50 000 hectares .
I would like a new flax regulation for Europe to reflect this historical awareness that was achieved with the Peace of Münster .
Mr President , we agree with the objectives pursued in the Commission ' s proposal on the new regulation on flax and hemp : to regulate and balance the markets , simplify the common agricultural policy and prevent fraud .
However , we do not agree with the chosen method .
This is because we consider that this proposal , since the amendments improving it , which were presented by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , have not been accepted , may lead to the total disappearance of hemp and flax crops in small- and medium-sized holdings , and as an alternative crop in certain areas of the Union .
We believe , Commissioner , that it is unacceptable that , in order to put an end to fraud , we should seek to end cultivation within a certain sector .
This is a good time to point out that the best way to combat fraud is through the total transparency of public aid and of the investigations into fraud that are under way , and publishing the names of fraudsters , as the only way of preventing all farmers and the whole of the sector from having to pay for the consequences of fraud on the part of a few speculators .
The inclusion of flax and hemp within the general regulations on herbaceous plants requires the establishment of a single yield for all areas of the European Union .
The existence of different yields in northern and southern areas , in the different regions of the Union , may lead to real discrimination in payments per surface area with regard to this crop .
Therefore , we request that the inclusion of an average yield be accepted for all regions of the Union , and that this be the average yield for cereals .
With regard to aid for processing , we feel that it is completely inappropriate that there should be transitional aid for the processing of short-fibre flax , as the Commission proposes , which would end in 2006 .
We believe that it should be long-term aid and that it should be brought into line with the aid for the processing of long-fibre flax , which is the only way of guaranteeing the commercial production of short-fibre flax in an industrial sector which provides a genuine alternative to synthetic products .
Commissioner , we are in complete agreement on the need for stabilisers with regard to this crop , but we completely disagree with the national guaranteed quantities established in the Commission ' s proposal , since we feel that they are absolutely inadequate and represent quite the opposite of the actual situation in each of the countries .
We therefore also ask you to consider the proposal presented by the Committee on Agriculture .
Lastly , we absolutely agree with the existence of controls in this sector .
Therefore , the existence , in every single case , of the sales contract between the farmer and the processor , seems to us to be essential .
We are therefore voting against the report with regard to the disappearance of these contracts .
The existence of a contract is the best way of proving that the crop has been sold and processed .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Schierhuber , for this report , not least because it takes into consideration processing in those countries in particular , which , as Members of the EU , have also taken up the cultivation of flax .
It is quite natural that they have considered the market and consequently also the support for and emphasis on processing to be matters of paramount importance , particularly in the case of short-fibre flax , which can be used for buildings and as insulation .
I would also like to say I agree with the previous speaker , Mrs Rodríguez Ramos , regarding average yields .
The average yields of flax and hemp are very similar across Europe , in the North as well as the South .
There are no great differences between them .
As far as cereals are concerned , however , the differences are considerable .
Such being the case , it would be unreasonable if the fringe areas - i.e. the areas around the Mediterranean and the North - were to be placed in an unequal position with regard to aid payable on the basis of area in the case of hemp and flax , which represents such small-scale production in the context of agricultural production as a whole .
Amendment No 38 is therefore particularly sensible ; I endorse it and hope that it will receive wide support , expressly in order to prevent the Mediterranean and Nordic countries from being placed in a position of disadvantage in comparison with the central regions of the European Union , as far as this area of production is concerned .
Mr President , I am pleased to have this opportunity to address Parliament on this very important issue .
The main thing to stress is that misuse of funds in one place should not prevent innovation continuing in other areas .
Excellent schemes are already being developed and should be supported .
In an unstable agricultural industry , the opportunities offered by flax and hemp in a developing market for natural fibres should not be lost .
It will provide farmers with the opportunity to diversify - something that they have continually been urged to do by respective Member State governments and by the European Parliament - to produce new employment possibilities .
In my own nation , Wales , flax processing plants are already being established using European Union aid .
The report from our Agricultural Committee also includes amendments to extend grant aid for producing flax and hemp to non-arable land , thus providing opportunities to diversify areas of the European Union unable to obtain monetary support under the present regime .
This is a crucial matter as it affects thousands of hectares of European land with low productive possibilities .
For example , 80 % of the land mass of my nation , Wales , is non-arable .
The higher than average incidence of rainfall there makes it ideal terrain for growing short-fibre flax and yet it could not apply for European Union support under prior regulations .
Its peripheral location , something which has already been stressed here from other areas , and its small family farm units having to compete in a wider market , coupled with the high value of sterling , has meant that it has lost 80 % of its income in less than three years .
The importance of flax production being subsidised in such areas of the European Union cannot be overemphasised .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for accepting our amendments in this regard .
We also reject quotas and a ceiling for this production , as this would limit the possibilities to develop diversification and employment possibilities in disadvantaged regions .
We also believe there should be a balance of support between farmers and processors .
The rapporteur , Mrs Schierhuber , has agreed to put a limit of EUR 600 per hectare to farmers directly , provided that the farmer proves to the competent authorities , within 18 months after having applied for the subsidy , that he has delivered the fibre to a processor .
We also agreed if this proof could not be provided to the competent authorities within that period , the subsidy should stay at the level of the premia for set-aside land .
I congratulate the rapporteur and call on the European Parliament to support the Agriculture Committee 's report .
Mr President , first and foremost I would like to thank Mrs Schierhuber for the work she has done , the main merit of which is the fact that it introduces some sensible elements into a proposal which makes no sense whatsoever .
It is true that the regulation in force is deficient in terms of control , and some people have taken advantage of these deficiencies in order to obtain aid which stretches the bounds of legality .
These situations obviously required modifications which logically should have concentrated on strengthening controls .
Nevertheless , we have seen another example of the unique way in which the Commission fulfils its function of producing legislative proposals .
The Commission ' s proposal takes an extraordinary approach : instead of strengthening the control mechanisms , it abolishes aid for short-fibre flax .
To be honest , the Commission is behaving here like the doctor who proposes decapitation as a cure for a headache .
Furthermore , the Commission ' s proposal , if put into practice , would lead to the disappearance of the crop in some Member States , which would have a negative affect on many farmers who had found an alternative crop which did not produce surpluses and which was destined for non-food use .
In Spain , for example , practically all flax grown is short-fibre flax , since the heat and the lack of rainfall restrict the growth of the plant .
Furthermore , the dryness of the ground in summer makes it practically impossible to pull up the plant together with its roots in order to obtain long fibre .
Furthermore , short-fibre flax is perfectly suited to dry conditions , there is a certain market for it and , at least in theory , it is the type of production which we are intending to promote .
The elimination of aid for short-fibre flax would hinder the innovative non-food use of agricultural products , fundamentally affecting regions with low rainfall and more difficult conditions .
The Commission is therefore proposing to concentrate aid in the areas with the best conditions and deny it to the least-favoured ones .
I would like to remind the Commission of Article 158 ( ex Article 130A ) of the Treaty , which lays down that social and economic cohesion must be strengthened , and the differences in levels of development between the different regions and the underdevelopment of the least-favoured regions , including the rural areas , should be reduced .
Lastly , I think it is essential that the Commission ' s proposals are not accepted ; however , in any event , the inclusion in the regulations on herbaceous crops would lead to unfair situations as a result of the use of yields conditioned by drought .
Mrs Rodríguez Ramos ' amendments therefore seem to me to be a good solution to the problem .
Mr President , over the past couple of years , we have seen a sharp increase in the acreage of fibre flax and hemp as a result of subsidy-hunting in Member States such as Great Britain and Spain .
Producers in those countries destroyed their harvest , whilst they pocketed the subsidies for the crops .
It is only right that the Council clamped down on this type of misuse of Community funding by amending the flax regulation .
The original objective of production support was to bolster the traditional fibre flax crops which are mainly grown in Belgium , France and the Netherlands .
It is vital not to lose sight of this objective .
We therefore reject the proposal that the Committee on Budgets outlined in its opinion , namely to pitch the support granted to short- and long-fibre flax at the same level .
The production costs for long-fibre flax are higher than those for short-fibre flax and for hemp .
It is precisely with the short-fibre variant that farmers fiddled the system .
We can go along with the proposal to bring the cultivation of flax under the general support regulation for arable crops .
But the cereal support level is too low for long-fibre flax and therefore acts as a disincentive to producers to grow this flax variant .
This is why we have made our approval of this report dependent upon whether the support level for producers of long-fibre flax will be double that for cereal .
As long as support for processors continues to be varied according to whether the crop concerned is short- or long-fibre , we can do away with this differentiation in the support for producers .
An increase in support should , however , be accompanied by the following three control measures .
Firstly , a compulsory contract with processors who , in turn , must prove that the flax has been processed . Secondly , a certain quota per Member State , shared between long-fibre and short-fibre flax and hemp .
Thirdly , the use of certified seed .
Finally , I would point out that , as it is late in the season , this regulation will not be able to come into force until the 2000-2001 season .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are discussing a Commission proposal on the reform of the COM on flax and hemp in two respects .
Firstly , the Commission is explaining the need for the reform in terms of an increase in budgetary cost .
I do not believe that that is the best way to try to justify the need for a reform , although I agree that it is needed .
Amongst the objectives which this reform should have , as well as simplifying and updating the regulations , is also improving control , which is something we always forget about later on .
The Commission proposal offers a good , coherent and precise analysis of the sector in the European Union .
It explains the importance of flax and hemp production from both an economic and an ecological point of view .
However , it seems to me that the Commission ' s considerations with regard to hemp fibre and short-fibre flax are not very realistic , either as regards its future viability or its range of uses .
However , the thing that seems least appropriate to me is the proposal on processing aid .
In this case I would like to draw your attention to the increasing number of uses for this type of fibre , as several speakers have already pointed out .
If we were to follow that route , the European Union , which already falls short in terms of using this type of fibre , would cease to use it altogether , at least in some countries .
Today I read in one of my country ' s newspapers that one of the autonomous regions has abandoned more than 95 % of its cultivation of short-fibre flax .
These were the words of the local Minister for Agriculture for that region .
This type of situation will become inevitable if this amendment is put into practice .
With regard to payment for processing , I cannot agree with the Commission ' s proposal , either in terms of the distinction between short- and long-fibre flax or its proposals for hemp .
It appears to me that they have not made any precise calculation to justify the different amounts for the premiums .
Neither does there appear to be any precise calculation to justify the maximum guaranteed quantities , either at European level or on the different national levels .
Consequently , these quantities are going to hinder development in the European Union with regard to short- and long-fibre flax and hemp .
In addition , it also seems to me to be problematic to apply these regulations during this , the 2000-2001 season , since we are already at a late stage .
I believe that Mrs Schierhuber ' s proposal is a balanced one .
It has been approved by a majority in the Committee on Agriculture and we should adopt it as a basic regulation .
Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for her handling of what is a very complex matter where both producing and non-producing Member States have serious reservations regarding the Commission proposals .
In very broad terms , I welcome the Commission proposal to bring flax and hemp into the arable area payments scheme .
A single area payment is in line with the view that growers should respond to market demands rather than be driven by CAP subsidies .
However , I shall not repeat the many reservations about the proposals that colleagues have already mentioned .
We should note that flax and hemp are environmentally-friendly crops .
Compared with mainstream crops such as oil seeds and cereals , they require low levels of chemical and fertiliser treatment .
They also produce renewable raw materials that can displace synthetic fibres derived from petroleum and other mineral resources .
We should welcome , therefore , the expansion of industrial crop activity and the opportunities provided for diversification .
However , I wish to raise the question of land eligibility , which appears to be a particular problem in the UK .
Most of the flax and hemp grown in the UK is on land ineligible for arable area payments .
The Commission proposals , as I understand them , threaten the UK growers and would leave UK processors with no domestic supply of raw material .
It has been suggested that the land eligibility rules should be disregarded for flax and hemp so that any land could be used for those crops , but without an increase in the base area .
This would allow expansion , should market conditions encourage growth , and allow new growers to enter the market .
It would be helpful if the Commissioner could comment on this matter when he responds to the debate .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Schierhuber .
I have a feeling that this type of subject matter is right up her street .
I can only say that I agree with the thrust of her report .
I think it is indeed time that the Commission intervened in a support regulation for flax and hemp .
Large-scale fraud , misuse and so forth can only give agricultural policy a bad name , and this must be avoided .
That is why the Commission was right to intervene .
At this stage , however , there is another reason why the Commission would do well to devote special attention to this subject matter , as I am still of the opinion that it is necessary to develop agricultural crops other than the traditional crops grown at present .
Flax and hemp are typical crops which could help us find new markets for new agricultural products .
' Agrificatie ' ( agrification ) is the correct Dutch term for this and I will have a look in due course to see how this has been translated in the different languages .
Encouraging initiatives have been taken in this field and large investments have been made in various countries .
In my opinion , the Commission should , more than anything , ensure that investments already made in factories and processing materials are used to the best effect .
I am thus not persuaded that it is absolutely vital to tie certain quotas to certain countries .
Instead , they should be tied to certain user capacities .
There is one aspect , however , not covered by the regulation , which works out quite well for Commissioner Fischler , namely that it will not cost him a penny .
Could he not consider making the use of these products made from flax or hemp compulsory ?
It could be laid down in the law , in the interest of the environment , that dashboards for cars should be made of such and such products .
Maybe this could culminate in excellent relations with the Environment Commissioner , because I have the impression that she has a habit of hampering agriculture in other areas of the environment .
Perhaps this initiative could help us to turn the corner .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , the Commission appears to have made a sound proposal , but in actual fact , this is not a sound proposal .
It may possibly prevent fraud because there is no longer an incentive for farmers to pocket the higher flax premium instead of set-aside or cereals premiums .
The only problem is that if you cut the flax premium to the level of the cereals premium and the set-aside premium , then no more flax or hemp will be cultivated in the EU and that will be that .
But if you introduce processing aid , where , in your view , fraud cannot be committed - and incidentally it can actually , but let us assume for now that it cannot - then the result might be that the raw material is grown outside the EU and imported .
If we want to ensure that flax is cultivated here , then we need to do precisely what we have proposed here , what the rapporteur has proposed , namely to go back to the level of the cereals premium .
When proof is then furnished that processing has taken place the amount is doubled , and this proof will not require very many checks because it has to be provided by those who wish to have this premium .
I should like to make the following comment on the maximum quantities : the fact that the budget has expanded because of fraud - and here the Commission has not distinguished itself in terms of controls - is not something of which we can approve .
Obviously , we have to push back the tide of fraud and the money which has been lost because of fraud needs , of course , to be traced . But the overall budget for this important , environmentally-friendly crop needs to be increased , and that is why the quotas which are now being laid down are inappropriate .
Mr Fischler , I am curious to hear whether you are going to accept the proposals made by the rapporteur - and I should like to thank her for her report .
You know what procedure this is .
If you say that you cannot accept them , we will react tomorrow and then we will have to negotiate this sound proposal from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development at another level .
Mr President , the aid scheme for flax and hemp has turned into pure subsidy-hunting .
It is almost criminal how grossly the scheme has been misused , and we must put a stop to this .
For a number of years , aid for hemp has been much higher than that for other crops .
Per-hectare aid for hemp is more than twice as high as that for cereals .
This means that , even though there are almost no legal uses for hemp , the area used for hemp cultivation has quadrupled in the course of the last year .
The desire to retain the high per-hectare aid for hemp is , in reality , a result of the very odd collaboration between , on the one hand , those who want to see cannabis legalised and , on the other hand , speculators in EU subsidies , for it is , in actual fact , impossible to see any difference between cannabinol-free hemp and the hemp which is used to produce hashish .
The Commission proposes that aid for hemp should be reduced in three phases to the level of aid that has been set for cereals .
I should ideally have liked to see aid reduced immediately to the aid level for cereals , but I can happily live with the Commission ' s proposal .
It gives farmers time to adapt .
I cannot , however , live with the recommendation from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
It cannot be in accordance with modern , forward-looking and enlargement-oriented agricultural policy to propose that the transitional arrangements should be further extended .
That would be " far out " of place ! Moreover , it is something I shall be voting against .
Where flax is concerned , the Commission also proposes to limit the opportunity for subsidy-hunting and , here too , the Committee is in favour of improving the scheme .
I take the opposite view , namely that the aid should be limited .
It should be the market and consumers who decide what should be produced , not sky-high EU subsidies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my particular thanks go firstly to the rapporteur , Mrs Schierhuber , for her comprehensive survey of the situation and her excellent report .
The debate on reforms in the sphere of flax and hemp grown for fibre has been going on now for almost five years , if you take 1996 and the proposals which the Commission made then as the starting point .
In place of the reform proposed by the Commission at that time , however , the Council simply stepped up controls .
This certainly increased administrative expenditure considerably , but largely failed to achieve the desired , and necessary , effect : subsidy-hunting continued and the area under cultivation increased from around 100 000 hectares to 240 000 hectares , with the result that budgetary expenditure on this sector was , virtually , more than doubled .
The proposal before you today has three main objectives . It is intended to put a stop to subsidy-hunting once and for all .
The Commission wishes to foster rural development by supporting traditional cultivation and production methods , and it wants to help farmers over a limited period of time to find profitable new sales outlets and to increase their sales potential .
You see we are not under any illusions !
In the light of budgetary constraints - with which everyone is familiar - the sector has to be more market-oriented .
An even more important point is that , following the Berlin decisions , no new money is envisaged for the promotion of new products .
Such new products may be perfectly interesting for agriculture , but our message must be honest here : the overriding objective with innovations of this kind has to be profitability .
The Commission has carefully examined Parliament ' s amendments .
Many of them are acceptable to us , at least in essence ; others are not acceptable in their current form but prompt further reflection .
Then there are others which , I am afraid , we cannot accept .
I now turn to the first proposal on including flax and hemp grown for fibre in the arable crops regulation . I am prepared to accept Amendment No 2 , which concerns the formulation of the objectives , and Amendment No 1 , at least in spirit .
The idea of doubling aid per hectare when proof is provided that the straw has been processed into fibres seems , at first sight , to be very tempting , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
However , in my opinion , it is doomed to failure .
This is because , by introducing it , we would de facto be creating first and foremost fresh incentives for renewed subsidy-hunting , and ultimately we would again have to rely on controls which have hitherto already proved to be insufficiently effective .
Consequently , I do not agree with Amendments Nos 3 , 9 , 10 and 12 nor , for similar reasons , with Amendment No 38 .
In Amendment No 4 , however , fears about the rules on land eligibility are expressed which were addressed in particular by Messrs Adam and Wyn .
I agree with them that we need a sensible solution here , and that is why I can agree in principle to Amendment No 4 .
The same goes for Amendment No 37 which is along the same lines .
Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 15 , regarding derogations from the provisions for arable crops in respect of surface area and set-aside , are acceptable to the extent that they are in line with the agreement on Agenda 2000 , but only within this framework .
In my opinion , they are actually no longer necessary because there is land all over the place within the surface area on which flax and hemp can be grown without limiting the amount of other crops that are cultivated .
Nevertheless , problems could arise in some areas .
We will try to find a solution here , so as to reduce the possible constraints which might arise .
I can accept Amendment No 6 on hemp .
However , irregular plots cannot simply stop being subject to checks altogether , as is recommended , at least implicitly , in Amendments Nos 5 and 16 and I cannot therefore agree to these amendments .
There could be room for a certain amount of flexibility , however , where it is a question of achieving high control levels .
That is why I can state my agreement with these amendments and with Amendment No 14 at least in this respect .
It is because of the risks for the image of hemp that the Commission is proposing a ban on hemp and hempseed being used in food , despite the fact that the varieties which have to be used in Europe do not contain any psychotropic substances .
This is a highly political issue which we can certainly discuss further .
However , at the present time , I do not wish to agree to Amendments Nos 11 , 13 and 32 .
But the actual objective is clear .
I now come to the second proposal , on the regulation on the common organisation of the market in flax and hemp grown for fibre .
Processing aid has to be in reasonable proportion to production costs and take account of the market value of the products .
It is a fact that processing long-flax fibres entails higher costs .
A distinction must therefore be drawn between processing aid for long-flax fibres and aid for short-flax fibres and hemp fibre .
Maximum permitted impurity levels also need to be fixed because the aid is intended to promote the production of high-quality fibre and not of the waste entailed in fibre production .
Our policy for the sector has to be unambiguous .
We can only accept investment in products which are profitable under market conditions .
This principle also applies here .
That is why I cannot agree to Amendments Nos 18 and 34 , even though they definitely contain further food for thought .
I do agree , however , with the ideas underlying Amendments Nos 23 , 25 and 26 , that is to bring the aid payable for long and short fibres more closely into line and to make the granting of aid dependent on the result of checks .
Nevertheless , the limits given in the budget cannot be exceeded .
The second important subject is the national guaranteed quantities .
In view of the well-known difficulties with checking harvest results , these are absolutely indispensable .
The Commission proposal mitigates the risk of abuse at the processing stage without quotas having to be set for the individual processing plants , and thus without the disadvantages which quotas of this kind would have on an expanding market .
A maximum guaranteed quantity for the whole Community would not be a solution .
Experience shows that this only leads to disputes between Member States and makes it more difficult to find a real solution .
Dividing the maximum guaranteed quantity between the Member States annually , on the basis of processing capacity - which cannot be verified - is not really a practicable alternative .
That is why I cannot accept Amendments Nos 20 , 21 , 27 to 30 and 35 .
But the idea of introducing a kind of newcomer quota and dividing this each year between those Member States where there is only very little flax and hemp production at the present time , or none at all , is , I believe , definitely worth exploring .
I can accept Amendments Nos 24 and 33 for those instances when the farmer and the primary processor are one and the same person .
As far as the import of hemp and hempseed is concerned , I agree that we need a practicable solution .
However , I cannot agree to Amendments Nos 22 and 31 in their current form because they implicitly say that no further controls need to be carried out .
Turning , in conclusion , to the timetable , I am also prepared to accept Amendments Nos 17 and 36 , in accordance with which the new rules would only enter into force on 1 July 2001 .
But this would mean that the aid per hectare for the next marketing year would have to be set this year in accordance with the system currently in force .
In this case , I would be bound by the figures in the 2001 budget .
A reform of this sector is absolutely essential !
I think that you agree with me on this .
We need to make the fibre flax and hemp sector more market-oriented so that it is able to make an effective , indisputable and useful contribution to the economy and is no longer the target of public criticism .
Under these circumstances , I would have thought that you would have attached great importance to adopting the resolution this week , so that the Council can also take a decision as soon as possible .
In this way we can avoid the market disruption which would ensue in the 2000 / 2001 financial year if the level of the aid was not settled by 1 August .
For all that - as I have told you - I can accept 13 of the amendments and , as regards many of the others as well , I have specifically emphasised that , although I cannot accept them as they stand at the moment , some of them definitely provide further food for thought and material for debates which I will initiate in the Council .
However , because the market really will be severely disrupted if we do not have a scheme in place in time , we would either have to adopt temporary preventive measures - which would have to take account of the initial budget estimates for 2001 - or we will have a harvest where the producers will not know what payments they can expect to receive .
We really should not allow this kind of situation to develop .
It would be simply unthinkable to have to explain to the producers and also the processors why they should have to suffer because we cannot manage to decide on a proposal which , after all , has already been on the table in this House for eight months .
Mr President , allow me to ask the Commissioner one more question . Commissioner , you mentioned the controls which will need to be carried out in connection with the processing premium , and these must indeed take place .
Now if you combine our proposal to double the aid per hectare when proof is furnished with the proof for the processing aid , which also has to be provided , and if you join these two things together - of course this is not elaborated upon in the report - then the controls which need to be carried out for both kinds of premium are guaranteed and farmers do not lose out .
If you implement your scheme , as proposed , you will be depriving European flax and hemp growers of land and that has nothing to do with controls .
Mr President , with your permission I should like to ask the Commissioner a supplementary question .
I fully agree with you that we must not let it reach such a point that the poor farmers and processors do not know what lies in store for them or what their prospects are for the future .
That is why I should like to ask you this specific question , Commissioner : can you envisage - and I am referring here to Amendments Nos 27 and 28 and to my previous comments - that the Commission might , after all , consider rethinking its proposal on quotas and restructuring it ?
Perhaps I will begin with the second question , which was asked by the rapporteur .
If I have correctly understood what this is about , you are referring first and foremost to the so-called newcomer quotas .
In this regard , I have said that we are prepared to accept a quota of this kind .
I now turn to the first question , which was asked by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
I am sorry , but what you are proposing is still based on an assumption , namely that this check is carried out .
It is simply the case that the current system is not working and that is why I believe we have no choice but to change it .
And so I do not want us to turn the system completely on its head .
If we go back partly to the old system again then I do not see how we can make it work and why it should work any better than it has in the past .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Civil liability and motor vehicles
The next item is the report ( A5-0130 / 2000 ) by Mr Rothley , on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , adopted by the Conciliation Committee , on a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles and amending Directives 73 / 239 / EEC and 88 / 357 / EEC ( Fourth Motor Insurance Directive ) ( C5-0111 / 2000 - 1997 / 0264 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I must , and can , be brief .
This week we are able , for the first time , to adopt a European Union legislative act which has been drawn up on the initiative of the European Parliament and on which , thank God , the Commission and the Council have cooperated positively .
It is about improved protection for accident victims in the European Union .
This directive resolves a large number of the problems which usually arise when people are involved in an accident in another country .
First of all , however , and before looking back , I wish to take a look into the future .
Commissioner Bolkestein , a draft fifth directive already exists .
I have drawn it up and it will soon be put before Parliament .
I very much hope that we will also be able to cooperate closely on this issue .
The fifth directive is therefore already in the pipeline .
At the beginning of June - this is also part of our glance into the future - we will be holding a conference at the Academy of European Law in Trier on another important issue , the reform of personal injury , and this may give rise to a further parliamentary initiative .
As you can see , we wish this debate on improved protection for accident victims to gain a certain momentum .
I would be very grateful to you in particular , Commissioner , if we could achieve this together .
I would be grateful to you because you made an important contribution - and this is where I start to look back - to the debate on the fourth directive .
You see there was the major problem of deciding whether this directive ought to apply when the accident had taken place in a Member State of the European Union .
I have never understood why the Commission initially fought against this so stubbornly ; its stance could not be justified from a logical , political or legal point of view .
Then , thankfully , when we discussed this in Parliament at the end of last year , you prepared the ground for us to make this possible .
This directive will now apply in all countries which are members of the green card system , meaning that approximately 90 % of all accidents in which Europeans might be involved will be covered .
And while I am on the subject of figures , we are talking about approximately 500 000 accidents a year in the European Union alone - not counting third countries - where we will be able to settle claims much more easily in the future .
In the past there was the problem that people had to cope with a foreign language , foreign laws and so on .
Sometimes the process dragged on for ages .
When I look at the petitions which have been sent to the European Parliament ' s Committee on Petitions because claims arising from traffic accidents in another country have taken years and years to settle , I am quite sure that this directive constitutes a very decisive step forward .
Obviously , we cannot in any way change either the law which has to be applied or the legal jurisdiction , but by now proposing a system whereby each insurer has a claims representative in every other country , we will probably be able , as far as the accident victim is concerned , satisfactorily to settle the claims arising from 90 % of all traffic accidents which take place in another country .
That is a very big step forward .
When we debated this , some questions were still open .
I did , and I would just mention this point , rather regret the fact that the compensation bodies - and these were , after all , the Commission ' s idea - were gradually watered down during the political consultation process .
Nevertheless , at the end of the day , we did find a solution which is satisfactory , but in three to four years ' time we will review what this directive has achieved and , if necessary , propose improvements .
In conclusion , I should like to say that thanks to your intervening , Commissioner , important progress has been made on this directive , and I should specifically like to thank you for that .
You overcame resistance from within your own Commission .
This was a great achievement and we thank you very much for it .
I hope that , where the protection of accident victims and its improvement is concerned , we will also enjoy fruitful cooperation in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Rothley for his work , for this measure will put an end to a series of worrying and embarrassing situations which have arisen in our Community .
The joint draft adopted by the Conciliation Committee certainly represents great progress for our Community .
Nevertheless , although I will vote for the motion , I have to say that I am very perplexed by the response I have received from the Commission to my question on an issue which is not completely related to the question of accidents which take place abroad but which nevertheless concerns the insurance sector , a sector in which , as far as I am concerned , in Italy , truly unimaginable events occur , which leads me to suspect that Parliament ' s inspection system is , indeed , defunct .
I tabled a question to the Commission , calling upon them to do something about the genuinely appalling issue of those insurance companies which set high premiums and then do not pay citizens from certain parts of the Community what they are entitled to .
A conference , sponsored by the ' Automobile Club d ' Italia ' , was held in Naples and attended by leading lawyers , because insurance companies , as was also the case in the past , are making Italian citizens pay different premiums according to where they live , claiming that they have to recoup their costs in the areas where there are a greater number of accidents .
So I wonder , and I put the question to Parliament , whether this could be an example of blatant discrimination among the citizens of a single State and among citizens of the European Community .
Although it is true that in certain areas a decidedly larger number of accidents is recorded , it is also true that , when people belong to the same state and the same Community , events are shared by citizens who live in the same district , the same area , the same country and the same Community .
With regard to the payment of premiums , absolutely incredible , unbelievable things happen : in a town such as Alexandria , for example , premiums are less than half the level of those in a town such as Naples or Catania .
Therefore , I feel that , like Parliament , in addition to developing this type of measure , such as that presented in the Rothley report , we should endeavour to take further steps to avoid blatant discrimination against citizens of the same country , and also extend an invitation to the insurance companies : while it is mandatory to be insured , it is also mandatory for the insurance companies to insure the citizens .
In certain regions of Italy , the fact is that insurance companies refuse to insure the Italian citizens , which is an extremely serious offence .
In this regard , I would like to repeat the question I tabled , to which the Commission replied that the European Parliament has no competence in this sector .
Nevertheless , although we are competent when it comes to regulating the matter , as the Rothley report is doing in relations between the different Member States , I feel that we ought to challenge the insurance companies to avoid blatant discrimination , to set the same premiums for all , to pay claimants what they are actually entitled to and to ensure that this sector is improved , or adapted in some way to the changing requirements of our society .
In making these statements , I would like to declare that I particularly support this report and , once again , I thank Mr Rothley and the Commission for their endeavours on behalf of our citizens .
I urge them to take action to resolve this matter as soon as possible .
Mr President , I wish to express the heartfelt thanks of the Commission to Mr Rothley , the rapporteur , who has had a considerable intellectual and political input into this fourth motor insurance directive .
Mr Rothley was extremely kind in thanking the Commission for what it has done .
The Commission has perhaps been constructive in the formulation of this fourth motor insurance directive .
However , as Mr Rothley said , it was in response to an initiative from the European Parliament .
The Commission is duly thankful to him for that initiative .
I wish to say that the Commission welcomes the adoption of this fourth motor insurance directive by Parliament .
As Mr Rothley pointed out , every year there are more than 500 000 car accidents involving vehicles from different Member States .
However , the current system of compensation for people involved in an accident outside their home country does not work satisfactorily .
The new directive will provide for improved information , easier procedures and quicker settlement of claims , and these are things which concern the citizens of all our Member States most directly .
This is also a measure which will bring the European Union closer to the citizens of the Union .
As I have just said , the Commission 's proposal was a response to a parliamentary resolution in which Parliament made use of its new powers under Article 192 of the Treaty on European Union .
I should again like to thank Parliament explicitly and , of course , Mr Rothley , but also the competent committee and its chairperson , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , for the constructive discussions in the first and second readings of the directive and the subsequent negotiations in the course of informal trialogues .
Mr Rothley has announced a fifth directive .
He said that there will shortly be a conference in Trier on that directive and he has asked the Commission to help steer it through its legislative process .
Perhaps it is a bit early to discuss the fifth directive now but I should like to take this opportunity to assure Mr Rothley that in any further legislative work in which this Parliament would like to engage , the Commission will take the same constructive attitude as it took with the fourth directive .
Lastly , Mr Bigliardo draws attention to the fact that the premia for motor vehicle insurance in Italy vary from region to region , according to the number of accidents .
He objects to that differentiation in premia according to the frequency of accidents in the various parts of Italy and he would like the Commission to intervene .
I have to tell Mr Bigliardo that this is a matter which does not concern this directive .
Strictly speaking , I could end my response there but his comments deserve a fuller answer .
Therefore , I should like to say that if the situation had been that motor insurance premia were different for Italian citizens as compared with French or German citizens living in Italy , the Commission would be able to object .
You cannot ask French or German citizens living in Italy to pay a different premium from Italian citizens .
That is a clear case of discrimination .
But that is not the case .
The premia differ according to the number of accidents in each region and are therefore the same for Italians and non-Italians .
They relate to the different areas of Italy .
I do not think that the Commission can intervene on that point .
It is a matter of how insurance companies calculate their premia , and if there are objective reasons for charging a higher premium for a particular region then the Commission is powerless .
If Mr Bigliardo would like to substantiate his claim in more detail , I should be pleased to receive his letter and answer it .
But if he would like a straightforward answer now , then it has to be that the Commission cannot intervene .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Development cooperation with South Africa
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0114 / 2000 ) by Mr Martínez Martínez on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on development cooperation with South Africa ( C5-0100 / 2000 - 1999 / 0070 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a few days ago the Committee on Development and Cooperation unanimously approved the recommendation which is today being considered by Parliament .
It had previously made a considerable effort to speed up and rationalise the negotiation of the issue , believing that voting on the new European Parliament and Council regulation on development cooperation with South Africa was an important and urgent matter .
It was important because South Africa is one of the countries which receives the most funding from the European Union for its development process .
It was urgent because the regulation which forms the basis of this cooperation and which has been in force for five years expired on 31 December 1999 , from which date the different procedures in operation were left without a proper legal basis .
It is very worrying that we should find ourselves in such a situation .
In fact , in the first six months of 1999 , our Parliament considered the first text proposed by the Commission , adopting six amendments and forwarding them to the Council for their consideration .
This is where the delay occurred , since the Council took no less than eight months to present their position to us .
This took us past the expiry date and led us to the legal vacuum which I just mentioned .
The Council finally presented its proposal .
Their text adopted most of the amendments which Parliament had approved on first reading and , in particular , the Council put considerably more emphasis on the references to combating poverty and achieving the international development objectives , agreed on the basis of United Nations conventions and resolutions .
Having examined the Council ' s proposal , the Committee on Development and Cooperation considered it necessary to try to prevent the negotiation being prolonged by a third reading .
In other words , we intended to accept everything that seemed reasonable and limit our amendments to things which were absolutely essential , and even then in a spirit of great moderation .
There only remained two questions which appear in the amendments and which , in the form of a recommendation , our committee is submitting to the plenary .
The first question refers to commitology .
The Council wanted the Committee of Experts to control all cooperation projects relating to South Africa with a budget of over EUR 3 million .
However , we believed that this committee should guide and monitor the broad approaches to development cooperation with South Africa and only directly control larger projects , leaving the smaller ones to the normal procedures , which are the Commission ' s responsibility .
Having considered all the main issues , the amendment we are presenting today finally raises the Council ' s proposal from 3 to 5 million , and this committee , whose members represent the various Member States , will therefore have fewer projects to deal with and will therefore be able to concentrate more on a global view of such an important field of action .
The second proposal concerns the budgetary framework for development cooperation between the European Union and South Africa for the 7-year period , including 2000 , which is referred to in the regulation under discussion .
During the previous five years the budgetary framework had been EUR 125 million per year .
The Council , with a view to budgetary restriction , decreased that allocation in its proposal and set it at EUR 112.5 million per year .
For our part , while we are signing an important Trade , Development and Cooperation Agreement with South Africa , it does not seem politically acceptable to send a message of financial cuts .
On the contrary , we should at least maintain and , where possible , increase these contributions , if only as a token gesture , although we share the concern with regard to the available resources .
Finally , the proposal approved by the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on whose behalf I am speaking , was extremely reasonable : the EUR 123.5 million already allocated for 2000 and the EUR 127 million for each of the subsequent six years , amounting to a budgetary framework of EUR 885.5 million for the seven years laid down in the regulation .
Both amendments seem well-considered .
The aim is to avoid a third reading , put an end to the current intolerable legal vacuum and provide significant political impetus to our development cooperation with South Africa .
By asking you to support our proposals , we hope that the common sense and moderation which Parliament is showing will be understood by the Council .
We also hope that these proposals are acceptable to the Commission , despite the fact that theirs - 25 million for the commitology question and 850.5 million for the budgetary framework - are somewhat different to the ones that we are presenting .
If we are not understood , it will be entirely down to the Council or the Commission that we become involved in a third reading , with the consequences which the lack of a proper legal basis may have on the projects in operation in our development cooperation with South Africa .
The figure for the budgetary framework suggested by the Commission , which is very close to our own proposal , should in any event have arrived at the Committee on Development and Cooperation on time , so that Parliament could have approved it and above all with the certainty that , in the event that we had adopted it , the Council would also have accepted it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report under discussion here on the Union 's development cooperation with South Africa , on which I particularly congratulate the rapporteur , is , leaving aside its content , a striking example of the Council 's delaying tactics towards the European Parliament .
This is actually an unproblematic regulation and also , in fact , an unproblematic report .
That the Union should support development cooperation with South Africa , bearing in mind that it is one of the more successful countries on the subcontinent , has never been called into question .
This is therefore predominantly about renewing the legal base for this cooperation , as the preceding regulation expired in December 1999 .
Our former fellow-MEP , Mr Fassa , presented the report for its first reading in Parliament in May of last year .
The Council accepted nearly all of the amendments .
Nevertheless , I do wonder why the Council 's common position was officially only sent to Parliament in March of this year .
Of course , the rapporteur also referred to this .
Delays of this kind , which might perhaps be explained by the trade agreement being negotiated in parallel , never fail , however , to amaze me .
No doubt people in South Africa itself are also asking themselves what conclusions they should draw from the Council 's behaviour .
This is why I should specifically like to thank the rapporteur for making it possible , thanks to the fast-track procedure , for this report to be on the plenary agenda now , as early as May , thus allowing us to avoid any potential problems caused by a lack of legal bases in our development cooperation .
As far as the content is concerned , some areas of uncertainty had been clarified in preliminary informal consultations with the Council , which meant that this report could restrict itself to two points , the first of which is increasing the total budget to EUR 885.5 million for the period for 2000-2006 , a customary parliamentary request and a necessary one .
Secondly , the threshold of EUR 5 million , which has now been settled on , constitutes a good compromise in my view .
Small projects can be planned and implemented efficiently by the institutions and organisations on the ground .
The limit of EUR 5 million gives sufficient room for manoeuvre .
In making these efforts , the rapporteur has , for his part , done everything within his power to present a proper report on the regulation .
I very much hope that we will indeed still be able to avoid the danger of a third reading , Mr Martínez Martínez .
For the time being I offer you my warmest congratulations on this .
The full significance of this report is , however , only appreciated when it is seen in the context of the other efforts being made to intensify cooperation with South Africa , first and foremost the trade agreement already mentioned .
The Union continues to attach great importance to stable development in South Africa , not only for the sake of the people there , but also because this is in the interests of the development of its neighbours north of the Limpopo .
The South Africans have already managed to put an end to legal discrimination against the majority of the population and to hold democratic elections .
Today it is a question of anchoring the rule of law more firmly in the State .
All sections of the population and all civil servants must feel a duty primarily to this State , which is under the rule of law and no longer , as they did in the past , only to their own section of the population or even to their personal associates of whom they need to take care .
From a political point of view , the Union ' s adoption of this new regulation is not only an acknowledgement of the results achieved by the reform process hitherto .
It comes with definite expectations for the future , including securing law and order in all parts of the country .
I read with concern reports about the misuse of tax revenue at provincial level .
I hear with unease that corruption is also gaining ground in the police force , and that in rural areas and in townships there are police no-go areas where the poorest of the poor are left at the mercy of gangs .
Conversely , those who have something to lose wall themselves in and for their own security hire those who previously had professional roles in the army and the police .
Thus a two-tier society again emerges , and , what is more , this is in the sensitive area of internal security .
Since law and order were de facto suspended in neighbouring Zimbabwe , the morale on commercial farms south of the Limpopo has hit rock bottom .
This illustrates another decisive expectation which we have of South Africa : to set an example and be a stabilising influence on its neighbours to the north .
I expect the South African Government to take on its regional responsibilities .
President Mbeki should adopt just as clear a stance as has the former President , Mr Mandela - whom we all hold in high esteem - on the events in Zimbabwe .
Standing by and letting it happen or talking up the situation helps neither the farmers nor the hundreds of thousands in Zimbabwe who are dependent on the farms for a functioning infrastructure .
Food , housing , and sometimes clinics and schools are made available to farm workers and their families .
The situation is similar in large areas of South Africa .
Obviously these are not exemplary structures , but before they are abandoned we have to ensure that those who ought to be benefiting from them receive something better in their place .
South Africa must now , in its own interests too , exert massive influence on Mugabe ; otherwise it too will soon be threatened by waves of starving refugees if seed cannot be sown on the farms there now .
In its own country , not only would the rand come under increasing pressure , but the faith in the government shown by important sections of the population who would normally supply the nation 's food would be severely shaken .
This cannot be in the interests of South Africa and it cannot be in our interests either !
By adopting this regulation , the Union is showing that it still backs the economic , political and societal reform process in South Africa .
The South African Government needs all sections of society to have lasting confidence in the development of the country .
I hope that this expectation too will be taken seriously in Pretoria .
The PPE-DE Group will be voting in favour of the report .
Mr President , I also warmly congratulate the rapporteur who has shown enormous commitment to this report .
We thank you very much for it .
We are clearly in a very serious situation .
The regulation for South Africa expired on 31 December 1999 .
It is clear , as the rapporteur has suggested , that we need to proceed with some urgency in order to provide a legal base for our essential work in South Africa .
This budget line is the work of the European Parliament .
I was the budget rapporteur in 1994 when the Development Committee established the line .
That was because we wanted to see practical and tangible assistance for South Africa 's peaceful transition to a free and democratic country .
Surely that has been one of the most encouraging events in recent history .
Now the Republic , with its new President Mr Thabo Mbeki , faces new challenges which , in my view , require sustained partnership with the European Union .
This is not the time , as others have suggested , to have the kind of mean-spirited delays that we have seen from the Council ; neither is it the time for political point-scoring by other institutions of the European Union .
Indeed , it is my view that the Council has rather cynically orchestrated the eight-month delay in response to the first reading in order that it could better manage its negotiations on the South Africa trade and development agreements .
This has put life-saving programmes at risk and any delay now would exacerbate the existing impression in South Africa of a European Union which seeks only to serve its own interests first .
Coming as this does after ouzo and grappa , we are in danger of sending a very bad signal to South Africa .
Decisions need to be made .
We cannot risk delay .
For example , I am very familiar with the South African Human Rights Foundation .
That would be endangered .
The Foundation for Cultural Initiatives programme , the South Africa Labour Development Trust , policing in the Eastern Cape - all these programmes would be very seriously threatened by delays .
If there is delay , if agreement is not reached on the regulation , then new programmes will be affected too .
Even the 2000 budget of EUR 1.54 million would not be committed .
Let us be clear what we are talking about .
We are talking about water and sanitation programmes which do so much to improve the quality of life of people in the townships and rural areas .
We would endanger the SADC HIV / Aids Programme , regarded by all as being one of the most efficient the European Union operates .
We risk jeopardising economic developments in the Eastern Cape and work in the Eastern Cape with the Ministry of Education .
We risk jeopardising support for social housing programmes in South Africa .
In this Parliament we have to make every effort now , as the rapporteur has said , to make it possible for this money to move as speedily and as efficiently as it can to the people of South Africa .
The European Parliament position is , and always has been , realistic and morally right .
However I must express my grave concern about the possible misery which would be caused were we to delay .
As usual we should make it very clear that we in the Development Committee regard the budget figure that we have here before us , as purely indicative .
We see it as a reference point only , not as anything that we will not seek to change when it comes to our committee .
It is the first year of the South Africa Trade Agreement .
How does it look in our first year if we do not fully commit the funding and meet our obligations ?
We must continue our commitment to supporting South African efforts to overcome the legacy of apartheid .
To do that we have to have a regulation sooner rather than later .
I hope that after we have heard the Commissioner we will have the opportunity to discuss his views further and to discuss the very deeply worrying issues which delay on this regulation raises .
Mr President , apartheid in South Africa may have been abolished but it has not yet disappeared .
For example , the disparities in income between the population groups are still shocking and deprived areas in terms of housing , education and health care have not caught up by a long way .
Frustration is mounting , as is evident from the unprecedented crime rate and outrageous violence both indoors and outdoors .
They may want to escape their past , but they are compromising their own future in the process .
The key goal of development strategy should therefore be to correct the imbalance in growth created by apartheid .
If not , that country will not be able to enjoy stability , will deter foreign investors and will remain poor when it could be rich .
Needless to say , it is South Africa first and foremost that has to set its own house in order , but Europe can and must make a substantial contribution to the development process .
We therefore lend our support to the cooperation agreement , on the basis of the EUR 885.5 million , as proposed by our excellent rapporteur .
The Council has sat on the regulation for far too long .
All the signs are there that its association with the negotiations regarding the trade agreement was spurious .
The involvement of the Member States via the committee should focus more on the strategy and the indicative programme rather than on the individual projects .
A maximum of 5 million seems very reasonable to me .
This does not , however , relieve the European Union of its task of monitoring all projects well , down to the tiniest , and to evaluate them at regular intervals .
The Commission delegation must be sufficiently equipped to be able to do this independently and to a professional standard .
Mr President , South Africa has enormous potential .
There is so much there which so few have enjoyed .
Economic growth is a necessary but not an adequate condition for development .
What is needed is for resources to be better distributed and correctly allocated to meet all social needs .
The apartheid regime has been abolished , all that is left to tackle now is apartheid itself .
Mr President , I would like to start by adding my thanks and congratulations to the rapporteur .
I strongly support his aim of getting this regulation brought into force as quickly as possible with no third reading .
The rapporteur has been very generous in his interpretation of the Council 's inexplicable 8-month delay in responding to Parliament 's six amendments during the first reading .
If there were any evidence that the Council was deliberately holding back this regulation to give it greater leverage during the negotiations of the broader trade and development cooperation agreement , that indeed would be extremely worrying .
To come to the substance of the issue , on the budget it is completely unacceptable that the EU should be offering a budget cut in comparison to former years , particularly at this moment in our relationship with South Africa .
There is a very real risk of this triggering an even greater loss of faith by South Africa in the EU .
Let us not forget that this follows hard on the heels of the protracted and frequently bitter negotiations of the Trade and Cooperation Agreement where the EU acted very dismally indeed .
On numerous occasions , it was EU reluctance to improve access for South African agricultural goods which nearly blocked the whole deal and to follow this up with yet another dishonourable act would be extremely unfortunate .
Perhaps there is an image abroad that South Africa is an increasingly developed country and does not really need these funds .
Let us not forget that in spite of the great leaps forward that South Africa has taken , the life of many South Africans is still one of extreme poverty without work or land or a decent home .
An estimated 42 % of black South Africans are jobless as compared with just 4 % of whites .
A quarter of schools have no water within walking distance .
Half of South African households are classed as poor .
65 % of adult South Africans are illiterate and 10 million South Africans live in informal shacks or on land they neither own nor rent .
Let us not forget either that the Commission and Council turned down the idea of a separate new financial instrument to give support to neighbouring countries which need to adjust themselves to the new framework resulting from the Trade and Cooperation Agreement .
I am not as reassured on this point as the rapporteur and I would have preferred to see a separate budget line which could have been seen and monitored more easily .
It is quite clear that substantial funds are going to be needed to ease these countries ' transition .
The loss of customs duty alone is extremely high in some cases .
In Swaziland for example , this accounts for up to 40 % of all government revenue .
In spite of its own challenges , South Africa is already demonstrating its commitment to support its neighbours in the region . For example , in its agreement to a highly asymmetrical liberalisation agreement with the other SADC countries which will benefit those countries .
The European Union needs the same generosity of spirit .
It should honour its initial financial pledges to South Africa and provide significant support to the neighbouring countries during their transition period .
Mr President , it has taken a year , but we have finally reached the point where we can discuss the regulation on development cooperation with South Africa at second reading .
This is not a day too soon , because the European Programme for the Reconstruction and Development of South Africa has been without a legal basis since late 1999 .
In the light of this , the continuity of the development connection has been in the balance .
Accordingly , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the drive he has displayed in dealing with this subject matter .
I share his criticism regarding the eight months which the Council deemed necessary to formulate its position .
He is right in claiming that a distinction must be drawn between this regulation and the Trade , Development and Cooperation Agreement between Europe and South Africa .
Although development cooperation and trade are very much interrelated , they should not be played off against each other .
The deliberate delay in approving these regulations would seem to suggest that there is little real involvement with South Africa .
This is irrespective of how fair the European negotiating position is in terms of trade .
Moreover , such a stance does not fit in with the Commission ' s strategy in terms of South Africa which it has outlined in its 2000-2002 Country Strategy .
This document addresses both the fight against poverty and improvement in infrastructure .
I did wonder , however , why it only mentions the European Union ' s development instrument in passing .
Would the Commission be able to answer that ?
I would also like to know from the Commission to what extent South Africa ' s qualified Lomé membership overlaps with the European Programme for Reconstruction and Development .
I am , by the way , very grateful to the Commission for the large amount of information on South Africa which is available on the Internet and which has been laid out in a readily understood format .
This is an example to draw on when it comes to determining the strategy for other countries !
I would like to finish off with just one remark for the rapporteur . I can imagine that he is intent on keeping the EUR 910 million budget for development cooperation with South Africa .
I , however , attach less importance to this , given the limited financial resources for foreign policy and the major challenges in other parts of the world .
What counts is the quality of cooperation with South Africa , which , in my opinion , is sound at present , particularly on account of the regional projects which have been financed over the past couple of years .
This is why South Africa ' s neighbouring countries can also benefit from European development projects .
It seems that coherence and consistency are gradually gaining ground in the EU ' s development policy .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur not only for the work he has put in to produce this report but also for the rather unique way he has had to handle the situation that the Development Committee and Parliament found itself in .
It is perhaps a sad indictment on the European institutions that , five months after the expiry date of the legal base to this Council regulation , it has only now come before Parliament , thanks , as the rapporteur and almost every other speaker has said , to an 8-month delay by the Council in responding to Parliament 's first reading .
Surely we cannot continue to work in this way .
It is interesting to note that half this report is taken up by the procedural points the rapporteur has had to work his way through .
Now it has returned to us it is particularly pleasing that the Council has adopted the thrust of most of our amendments .
Most welcome is the fact that the Council has made poverty alleviation a top priority .
This should strengthen the partnership between South Africa and Europe .
I have just spent a week in South Africa and there is much appreciation for all that the EU is doing to stabilise their fragile democracy .
Only by rapidly improving living standards , particularly in health , education and employment , will stability remain .
There was much resentment against some nation states at the hold-ups there had been over the new trade agreement with particular reference to spirit names .
We are doing much for South Africa and I hope , in return , President Mbeki will work for peace in the region , with particular reference to Zimbabwe .
The implication in the rapporteur 's report that this regulation may have been delayed because it was being used as a bargaining chip is very worrying .
The Commission might like to comment on this particular point .
I would also like to hear from the Commission on how we can streamline the system .
In the last session in Strasbourg we had another regulation that had also run out last December and this should not happen .
I must strongly support the rapporteur and his suggestions that the Commission should be tackling the issues of major topics , such as the importance and the overall impact of the programme in relation to the agreed objectives rather than individual programmes .
I would also like to see delegate offices strengthened with more and better staff to be able to cope more efficiently with monitoring and evaluations .
This regulation is bound to have an impact on neighbouring states and I hope the Commission will take this into consideration .
The rapporteur has broken new ground on commitology which can only bode well for the future .
My group supports this regulation but asks for a speedy conclusion to the vacuum we are in .
We would not like to see any disagreement on budget amounts hold up ratification .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in recent years South Africa has made a historic leap forward by abolishing the apartheid system and establishing a new political order based on the rule of law , respect for human rights and democracy .
If the people of South Africa have regained their freedom , this is , of course , for the most part thanks to their persistence and courage , as well as to that of their leaders , but also , it must be said , to the political and financial support provided by European Union Member States for the reform process in South Africa .
Quite clearly , the cooperation agreement signed on 10 October 1994 was a strong message that we sent this people treated so badly by history .
I must confess that the slow progress in Council negotiations for its renewal leaves me rather puzzled .
Our duty to show this country legitimate solidarity must not and cannot be sacrificed on the altar of national trading interests .
On the trade agreement , which , need I remind you , we endorsed by a large majority in this very Chamber last October , we must avoid disagreements which obstruct the adoption of this cooperation regulation .
Such an attitude would be tantamount to appalling blackmail on the part of Europe and would not be true to the spirit behind the new development and cooperation agreements with the ACP countries , i.e. establishing contracts which respect the identity , culture and dignity of each partner .
With regard to the regional cooperation aspect of this regulation , I should like , in turn , to draw the Council and the Commission ' s attention to the risks of economic destabilisation which may be engendered by the regulation , and even more so by the trade agreement with South Africa .
We shall have to be particular attentive to the effects that these agreements may have on the ever vulnerable balance within the Southern African Customs Union .
I am also thinking of Namibia and Swaziland , and even Lesotho and Botswana , which are a long way from receiving the same amount of aid from Europe .
I feel that the European Union must , as a matter of urgency , take steps to arrive at an agreement with the authorities of these countries in order to compensate for any losses .
Finally , in conclusion , acknowledging our rapporteur for his clear-sightedness and for his talents as a negotiator , I should like to express my complete agreement with him on the need to remedy the existing legal vacuum to enable these agreements to come into force .
We must put an end , as a matter of urgency , to these long months of hesitation and delay , seen as so many negative signs by South Africa ' s fledgling democracy , which expects more from Europe than narrow calculations in order to safeguard limited interests .
Mr President , I am apparently not the only one who hangs her head in shame when it comes to South Africa .
For years , we supported the fight against apartheid and welcomed the new South Africa with excitement .
In 1995 , it became our key partner in development cooperation .
The fact that that country received most support from Europe was justified .
After all , South Africa had to be - and still is - the driving force behind development in Southern and Central Africa .
But it took too long for programmes to get underway and , when the date for the legal basis lapsed , we did not have a new regulation in place for our development cooperation .
In his eminent report , the rapporteur emphatically referred to the expiry date of 31 December 1999 .
The Council needed no fewer than eight months to determine its position .
This was , of course , not down to fundamental differences of opinion , but , as many of the delegates have already hinted at here , because the development money was used as a means of exerting pressure to secure European trade interests and to exact a trade agreement , in which our much talked of alcoholic beverages had to be protected once again .
We are deeply ashamed about such a state of affairs , which resembles a cattle market .
There is another reason to feel ashamed .
A proportion of the money which we want to spend in the European countries to reconstruct Kosovo is being taken from the development cooperation with South Africa .
Instead of increasing the funding by 1 % , in line with inflation , and reaching the amount of EUR 885.5 million , as is also suggested by our rapporteur , we will be proposing a 10 % reduction .
I think this is disgraceful .
Eventually , Commissioner Schreyer proposed EUR 850 million , or 121 million annually , 5 million less to invest in the fight against poverty which we deem so important .
Mr President , Commissioner , we will naturally assent to the amendments tabled by the Committee on Cooperation and Development .
Poverty is an injustice .
We want the reconstruction of Kosovo .
We are happy to finance it , but not with money intended to combat poverty .
This is unethical .
We also support the second amendment .
It may seem less important , but I think that the resources for the procedure should be retained .
If we oblige our committee to address the individual programme points , there will be considerably less time and energy for tackling the efficiency of the programme as a whole .
This is why we give our wholehearted support to the rapporteur .
Mr President , I want first of all to thank Mr Martínez Martínez for all the hard work he has put into this regulation .
The European Parliament cannot possibly support cutting development aid to South Africa by ten per cent .
Of course , I deeply regret the fact that the Council sat on this urgent matter for eight months so that there has been no legal basis for cooperation work since the beginning of the year .
Relations between the European Union and South Africa must not be damaged .
South Africa ought to - and must - be the European Union ' s greatest and best friend in Africa , for South Africa will play a quite decisive role in the whole continent ' s future .
In times of large-scale conflict on the African continent , for example in Congo , Angola , Eritrea , Ethiopia , Sierra Leone , Uganda , Rwanda and Algeria - not to mention the intense unrest of recent months in Zimbabwe and the hatred which President Mugabe has been stirring up there - South Africa and the country ' s remarkably strong democratic institutions constitute a constructive and stabilising factor in leading Africa towards a brighter and more peaceful future .
South Africa has a vigorous constitution with a clear commitment to human rights and freedoms . The country has a constitutional court whose judgements are respected by the president .
Free elections have been held . There is freedom of the press , and the office of president was in a peaceful and orderly state when the country ' s great reconciler and nation builder , Nelson Mandela , left it .
The Truth Commission , led by the Anglican bishop , Desmond Tutu , has demonstrated its willingness to strive for genuine reconciliation in South Africa .
Sweden ' s prime minister called the Cairo Conference , held earlier this year between the EU and Africa , " the start of something new and great " .
A democratic and reconciled South Africa is the prerequisite for this " something new and great " , in which Africa and the countries of Europe meet on a new and equal footing and look forward , instead of remaining stuck in the old colonial period .
South Africa is a necessary engine of democracy for the whole of South Africa and for Africa in its entirety .
It can show that it is freedom , together with democratic and strong ethical and moral values , through which Africa can advance furthest .
- ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament is due to state its position at second reading on the regulation that forms the legal base for the general framework of cooperation between the European Union and South Africa .
In the meantime , as you will remember , the Council of Ministers of the European Union adopted the General Agreement on Trade , Development and Cooperation last September on the basis of the Kinnock report , whose trade component was implemented in January of this year .
One of the fundamental components of the trade agreement concerns wines , and South Africa committed itself , under the terms of the agreement signed at the Berlin Summit in March 1999 , immediately to cease using certain Community designations of origin , such as , specifically , " Port " and " Sherry " , which it had been using illegally for twelve years .
Following a few incredibly intricate episodes , successive adjournments and time-wasting manoeuvres by the South African negotiators in accepting a regulatory text for this agreement , both parties finally agreed that a new draft of the regulations for this agreement on wines , which is due to enter into force by 1 September , is to be laid down by the end of June .
I have , however , received information to the effect that the South Africans are still raising problems with regard to a draft which faithfully reflects the Berlin Agreement . They are trying to have these wine-producing issues covered by the WTO TRIPS dossier , which the European Union feels does not adequately protect Community designations .
Furthermore , it appears to be a position that has been reached in conjunction with other New World wine-producing countries , given that the South Africans were negotiating bilateral agreements on wines with the European Union and then they suddenly changed their minds and wanted to postpone everything .
In view of these issues , I cannot agree with the rapporteur when he asks Parliament , as proof of good faith , to approve this framework regulation as a matter of urgency , without linking it to the trade aspect of the General Agreement on Trade , Development and Cooperation .
I do not agree because all the European Union ' s behaviour up until now has been nothing but a huge demonstration of good faith , to the extent that , contrary to what had previously been laid down , we accepted the commercial implementation of the agreement without the regulations for the agreement on wines being established .
The time has come to say enough is enough !
Cooperation requires a positive attitude of good faith and responsibility on the part of both cooperating parties .
As this has not been the case , I cannot , in all conscience , support the rapporteur ' s position .
Mr President , the Commission is appreciative of the rapporteur 's excellent work and welcomes the recommendation on the Council common position which reflects Parliament 's commitment to assist the new South Africa .
We too are worried about the delays in the adoption of the regulation and share the view that quick adoption of the regulation on the European programme for reconstruction and development is now becoming essential and critical .
It would be a signal to South Africa of our dedication to the effective entry into force of the agreement on trade development and cooperation and would prevent new tensions arising around issues still to be discussed concerning wines and spirits or fisheries .
If , however , the Community is unable to adopt the regulation in time , our development programme for this year will be jeopardised and confidence undermined .
We also totally share the rapporteur 's view that the Council common position contains useful improvements to the Commission 's proposal .
However , on commitology and the financial framework , we also consider that the common position is inadequate and cannot be followed .
Indeed , as regards Amendment No 1 , on Article 8 ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) on commitology , your proposal for a EUR 5m threshold is , to be frank , somewhat disappointing compared to the level of EUR 25m we had proposed .
We proposed such a level in order to use the committed resources in a more efficient and useful way and to deal with strategic issues rather than the details of individual projects .
But in the South Africa case , we are ready to accept the EUR 5m threshold simply in order not to delay a decision .
It appears from our programming discussions with the South African Government that we will have a limited number of major sectoral programmes which we think have to be discussed in any case with the Member States .
The EUR 5m level gives us enough room to proceed quickly with some small projects , for instance preparatory actions or pilot operations .
But we definitely need to make clear that no precedent should be created for the Council to impose low commitology thresholds .
I should like to retain the possibility of increasing this threshold for the South Africa budget line in the future , if need be .
Regarding Amendment No 2 , Article 10 ( 1 ) on the financial framework : the Commission has been aware on the one hand of the need to respect the political commitment in the trade and development cooperation agreement to maintain assistance to South Africa but , on the other hand , we have to take into account the very difficult budgetary situation caused by the new commitments made for assistance in the Balkans .
As a result , the Commission has agreed on the necessary budget adjustments to accommodate new needs .
This exercise has been very complex : it has required a very sensitive balancing of the political priorities across the EU 's regional programmes .
But we envisage stabilisation for South Africa at the average level of around EUR 122m per annum , with a global figure of some EUR 850.5m in the period 2000-2006 .
This is below your proposal of EUR 885.5m but it is significantly higher than the EUR 787.5m the Council proposed .
The South African programme is in fact one of the least affected by the proposed changes within heading IV and the adjustment will not affect the nature and scope of the programme as envisaged .
I understand your determination not to reduce the financial amounts for development aid to South Africa .
However , I find it absolutely necessary that the regulation is adopted in time to ensure uninterrupted implementation of activities in South Africa .
This situation is indeed very critical and not a normal , routine situation - but unfortunately it is what we are facing - and I feel an obligation to do my utmost to secure agreement between the Council , Parliament and the Commission on the proposed approach .
I am therefore anxious both to discuss the matter again with the Committee on Development and Cooperation in Parliament and before that to seek a response from the Member States .
Bearing that in mind , I should welcome it if Parliament would consider whether the vote on Amendment No 2 could be postponed so that these discussions can take place .
This is the safest way to reduce the risk of a much more serious and longer delay threatening the credibility of our cooperation with South Africa .
Mr President , you have heard the Commissioner ' s request that the vote be delayed , that is , that it should not take place tomorrow .
I must say that this situation disturbs me , because we are all working very quickly and the Commission seems to be saying that , since we are in a hurry , we must drive the car very slowly .
On principle , I am always willing to discuss issues again .
Firstly , I must thank the spokespeople of the different Groups for their support , although I believe that they are lending their support to a very modest position by the committee , almost a critical type of support , because the Committee on Development and Cooperation should have gone much further than it decided .
I repeat : in principle , I would not be opposed , but I do not believe that Parliament is in favour of delaying the vote .
I do not feel at the moment that Parliament wishes to delay the vote .
That would mean inviting the Commissioner to the Committee on Development next week and postponing our decision until June .
I would not be opposed to that and I do not reject that possibility .
But I must say , Mr President , that it worries me profoundly that Parliament should have to take responsibility for prolonging something which , in fact , has been prolonged by all parties .
Everyone has prolonged this process : the Council and the Commission .
Now the pressure is on Parliament because we have been told that , if we do not accept the positions of the Council and of the Commission , the development programmes will come to a standstill , which would be terrible .
I agree that it would be terrible if the cooperation programmes came to a standstill .
However , Mr President , we should take note of who is being pressurised and who really bears the responsibility for prolonging this process and taking it to a third reading .
Therefore , Mr President , I would ask you to examine whether it would be proper to consult Parliament tomorrow on whether or not to vote on our positions .
If we do vote on them tomorrow , it will fall to the Council and the Commission to ensure that the situation is not prolonged , which would create serious difficulties for South Africa and our own dignity .
We must ask ourselves whether we are here solely to accept , at any time and under any kind of pressure , what the Council or the Commission proposes .
If that is the case , then Parliament is unnecessary and all our dignity as an institution has been lost .
I am therefore not opposed to the vote being delayed for another month .
I believe that it would be very dangerous to prolong this process , but , in any event , we must not take responsibility .
The responsibility falls to those people who have dragged it out until now and who seem to want it to last even longer , perhaps because the issue of the designations of origin of wines and alcoholic drinks is being negotiated .
There has been a misunderstanding .
The Commissioner can speak for himself but the Commission was not requesting postponement of the vote .
The Commission was simply making a point on Amendment No 2 , as I understand it .
Perhaps the Commissioner would like to explain the point he was making on the amendment .
As the President said , it is perfectly correct that I am not in a position to request anything , and it would be out of line with my own feeling and understanding of the relations between the Commission and Parliament if I did so .
I said I would welcome it if a postponement of the vote were considered as a possibility .
It is totally in the hands of Parliament , as it should be .
However , I feel I have a responsibility vis-à-vis Parliament to make it totally clear that I see a real danger of this ending up in a long , difficult postponement - something that will create delays in our current activities in South Africa .
It is simply in order to minimise that risk that I am expressing my views as I have here .
The decision is , of course , totally in Parliament 's hands .
Decision on urgent procedure
Mr President , the Committee on Industry considers that this is an extremely important issue and should be dealt with as a matter of great urgency .
We all know the reasons why the situation affecting Montenegro is a complex one and we should not , for obvious reasons , delay this matter any further .
I therefore propose producing a simplified report so that we can vote on urgent procedure .
Mr Wynn , chairman of the Committee on Budgets , asked for an opinion , has the floor .
Mr President , we are in a strange situation because a decision was taken in the groups before the Committee on Budgets had decided on this issue of Montenegro .
Also , I have not had a chance to speak to my good friend Mr Westendorp .
I believe that the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy is sympathetic to the position of the Committee on Budgets , which I am about to state .
However , since I have not spoken to him directly , do not quote me on that - it is only second-hand information .
Firstly , I should like to make it clear that the Committee on Budgets supports any aid to Montenegro .
It has done so in the past and will do so in the future .
On this occasion there is no urgency for this to go through now .
The monies will not be made available until August for the first tranche and the second tranche will be paid at the end of the year .
We are of the opinion that the relevant committees need to study the details of this proposal .
Whichever the lead committee is - Foreign Affairs or Industry - we would merely give an opinion , but those committees and Parliament need to evaluate these proposals .
We should not be bounced into a decision because the Council deems it to be necessary .
As for budgets , our main concern is where the money is coming from .
It is great to make proposals but we feel this urgency should not be agreed upon until we know where the money is coming from .
We should leave it until next month .
The committees can debate it and we can vote on it at the June part-session .
Thank you Mr Wynn .
That is a very sensible opinion .
Mr Newton Dunn , vice-chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has the floor to explain his committee ' s opinion .
Mr President , we have not discussed it in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , but my personal view is that we should not accept urgency now .
Mr President , in my opinion , this proposal has been submitted under rather strange procedural circumstances .
Despite this , as speaker on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I am of the opinion that the urgency is such that we need to take it extremely seriously .
Accordingly , regardless of the mistakes in the procedure , I have to say on behalf of my group that we would like to support this request for urgent procedure after all .
I also have a feeling that other groups in this House from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy share the same view .
It might be helpful to verify this .
Mr President , I am in favour , although I take the view that it is not quite as urgent as the Council makes out .
However , it would be an insult to the people of Montenegro if we rejected this urgency today .
Montenegro is in great danger , especially from Belgrade , and I think we should send out this signal .
However , we should wait until the Commission finally tells us where it intends to find the money .
It cannot take it away from Bosnia .
It cannot take it away from Kosovo .
It needs to tell us where it intends to find the money and if we reach a decision on this today , we must carry out an evaluation half way through and say what has happened to the money and where the second tranche is to come from .
Mr President , firstly , I am against the urgency for the reasons expounded by the chairman of the Committee on Budgets .
There is , in fact , no urgency because the money would be released for August .
Secondly , if we look carefully , in the line which has been applied until now , there are still EUR 20 million which have not been used .
Therefore , there is no uncertainty and no urgency and we can study this issue again , calmly , at a later date .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
2001 Budget - Parliament ' s estimates
The next item should be the presentation by the Commission of the preliminary draft budget for 2001 .
Unfortunately , the Commissioner has not yet arrived , although she is on her way .
I therefore propose that we examine the next item on the agenda .
The next item is the report ( A5-0121 / 2000 ) by Mr Ferber , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the estimates for the European Parliament ' s income and expenditure for the financial year 2001 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it would truly have been a great honour to speak directly after the Commissioner ' s presentation of the Commission budget 2001 .
Instead , I have the honour of presenting Parliament ' s budget before the Commissioner presents the larger budget to us .
As rapporteur for Parliament ' s budget , I am in a position to submit a proposal to you which , in my view , has three main features .
First , and I set great store by this , the budget which we have prepared for you is a highly economical one .
Secondly , we have learned our lessons from the justified complaints of the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control , for which we are all to blame .
Thirdly , and this is a particular matter of concern to me , we have strengthened the European Parliament as the institution which represents the interests of the citizens of Europe .
What have we focused on in Parliament ' s Budget 2001 ?
I should like to outline this briefly with reference to five main points .
First : in the area of buildings policy , and this is an extremely important point , we must draw the right conclusions from the objections raised by the Court of Auditors .
In other words , first , we must make the remaining payments in Brussels as quickly as possible - and we are putting the conditions in place for this - so that we can reduce costs - that is particularly important to the taxpayer - and , secondly , we must solve the problem of Strasbourg , of this building here , in a way which does not give cause for complaint .
Both are provided for by figures in the draft budget .
Secondly , we must also exercise extreme restraint in the area of staff policy in the coming year .
We cannot allow Parliament ' s staff numbers to increase exorbitantly just because there is some financial room for manoeuvre .
And we must also solve the problem of promotion in the autumn in a way which is acceptable to all institutions .
Thirdly , we must prepare ourselves for the enlargement of the European Union and this applies to Parliament even more than to the other institutions .
However , this does not mean - and this is a particularly important point - that we will decide as early as next year on which new languages we can offer in our interpreting services and therefore which countries will be allowed to become members of the European Union in the first round and which will not .
That is the wrong way forward .
It is not the job of the budget to make such fundamental political decisions .
They need to be taken elsewhere ; in other words , we do , of course , need to talk to language schools in the candidate countries and we must develop and build up programmes , but we must also , of course , be clear that we cannot anticipate decisions which need to be taken at a political level first .
I am pleased to see the Commissioner is now with us .
I have taken over your role insofar as we are discussing Parliament ' s budget first and shall then move on to the Commission ' s budget .
No I do not want your job , only you can do it , the role reversal does not stretch quite that far !
Fourthly , we must take account of the increase in the responsibility of the European Parliament since the Amsterdam Treaty entered into force .
The current Members of the European Parliament have more responsibility and more work in comparison with all their predecessors than ever before and naturally that also makes itself felt when it comes to preliminary work and technical equipment .
I should like to thank everyone who supported me in this matter of concern .
My fifth point is that this increased responsibility must also find expression with regard to groups in the European Parliament .
I want to see a political parliament fighting for just causes and that means widening the basis for group work ; it also means - and I make no bones about the fact - limiting the official services of the European Parliament .
That is the only way of achieving a parliament with an enduring public profile .
I was pleased to note that the Bureau of the European Parliament is thinking along the same lines and that one of the vice-presidents from my group is preparing a report on the subject .
That is the right way forward .
I have taken note of the amendments to my report proposed by my fellow delegates with a great deal of interest .
I hope you will understand that I can support very few , because they no longer follow , in fact , they abandon the line which I presented in the Committee on Budgets and which was adopted by a majority in the committee .
We must prepare for enlargement , but we do not need to start recruiting interpreters from the candidate countries as early as next year .
Even the buildings policy must be considered with a view to enlargement , but I see no need to do so in the Budget 2001 .
We need to be a bit more realistic in our approach to the important question of enlargement .
We moved into a new building in Brussels three years ago , we moved into a new building here in Strasbourg a year ago and if we tap the taxpayer on the shoulder again so soon after and say we need more buildings , more office space , he is only likely to agree to so much .
We need to take account of that in our calculations .
A budget with EUR 987 million is not very much in comparison to the budget of over EUR 90 billion which the Commissioner will propose shortly , but this is the taxpayers ' money and we must take our decision as the trustees of that money .
The taxpayer expects us to take a prudent approach not only when we draw up the budget , but also when we implement and carry it out .
We shall have to discuss this again in September during the first reading of this budget , once all the documents from the budget discharge procedure have been submitted .
I should like today to thank the Bureau of the European Parliament , especially the vice-president responsible for budgetary questions , Gerhard Schmid , for their constructive cooperation , especially during the conciliation procedure between the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets .
My thanks also go to the corresponding departments of Parliament ' s administration for their prompt and conscientious preliminary work , without which this set of figures could never have been drawn up .
However , I should also like to extend my special thanks to my colleagues in the Committee on Budgets for their fair cooperation .
Bringing divergent opinions together to a consensus , mostly with too little time to spare , is not always easy .
So my compliments to all my comrades-in-arms and finally , of course , a heartfelt thank-you to the secretarial staff of the Committee on Budgets for having prepared everything promptly and reliably in these difficult times .
I think I can present you with a budget which has earned Parliament ' s confidence .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work that he is doing for our House in terms of getting value for money out of our budget .
It is not right that we should be expecting the Commission to do a whole range of things in putting their House and their budget in order unless we also take the same kinds of rigorous steps .
The approach which has been taken is absolutely correct , not only in making sure that we do not simply give money away if we have a little spare in the budget , but also where we have asked the Secretary-General of Parliament to come forward with a number of reports : for example , in paragraph 6 of the resolution where we have asked the Secretary-General to look at and identify job needs in the same way as the Commission so that we can match job needs to the staff which we have available in the longer term .
That quite clearly is a way of long-term planning which is very sensible at this stage of Parliament 's life .
There are three things which I would like to emphasise in particular in this Parliament Budget 2001 .
The first is a plea from an individual parliamentarian that we should make sure that we have a date firmly fixed for the second network computer in our offices .
It is a matter of frustration for many of us that our staff can access the net with their computers , of course , Parliament 's computers , but if we as parliamentarians bring in our own computers , we do not have a place to plug them in and work effectively .
It is important to have a date when this facility will be available to us .
Secondly , on a matter of communication , under paragraph 21 of this resolution , I would like to draw the House 's attention to the fact that we have on many occasions in these debates called for all Commission and Parliament offices in the Member States to work together within a European House framework by 1 January 2000 .
As we have now gone past that date and there are still one or two Member States , in particular my own , where Parliament and the Commission have different offices and where in terms of financing Parliament 's office well over 70 % of the expenditure goes on bricks and salaries , it does not leave much for communications .
The sooner we can make sure that the image of the European Union is reflected by one European House , the better it will be .
The last point refers to the question of the implications for enlargement .
I would like to support what our rapporteur has said that we cannot suddenly leap into beginning to authorise posts for preparing enlargement if a political decision has not yet been taken ; all the more so , because in Parliament 's estimates , as I have understood them , we have in front of us an assumption that we are going to have more languages as a result of enlargement .
Yet we have had no debate in this House to know how we are going to handle not a limited enlargement but an extensive enlargement following the Helsinki Summit late last year , with potentially 12 or 13 new countries , that is 27 - 28 countries with over 20 different languages .
How , Secretary-General , are we going to handle this if we do not have some thinking from the Administration as to where we are going to put them all ?
Are we going to have rooms which we are going to have to adjust for over 20 languages so that in every room where there is a discussion in this Parliament every person has the right to use their own language ?
We are aware that in the last Parliament a lot of work was done on this by Vice-President Cot .
His report was never released to Members .
We never saw it as a report on suggesting how the hub and spoke system should work - the relay system for interpretation - nor , indeed , did we really have any thinking about the freelancing possibilities with modern communications where we can dispatch a large amount of our translation material to people who are in the Member States , rather than recruiting a whole range of people to come and work in Luxembourg as fixed and permanent employees of Parliament .
Therefore , I strongly support the compromise which has been put forward by our rapporteur asking , by first reading , for the Secretary-General to come up with a strategy of how to handle the whole question of languages in Parliament and enlargement .
I suspect the Commission might wish to do that as well , because it is a problem which rightly , in this amendment , relates to interinstitutional matters .
I very much hope that the Socialist Group will change their mind , get their heads out of the sand and realise that this is the problem which we have to tackle and that it is better to do it now rather than later .
Mr President , let me also start by congratulating Mr Ferber on a comprehensive estimate of Parliament 's revenue and expenditure .
I support the thrust of this report , which is in line with the policy of budgetary rigour , because the major challenges that this Chamber needs to address are greater accountability and transparency which will involve embracing institutional reform with vigour ; secondly , the forthcoming enlargement of the Union and thirdly , a drive towards improving efficiency through effective budgetary control and better use of resources .
Our main priority has to be to explain to European citizens what we are doing , why we are doing it and how we are doing it .
We must win the confidence of the European taxpayer and we can only do this by improving accountability through simplifying - not mystifying - the work of Parliament , by reducing jargon , by improving the process of approving legislation and improving the legislative machinery and by making a clear connection between what we do here and how it benefits the individual .
We are going a long way towards achieving this transparency through the introduction of activity-based budgeting and the proposal we have in this report to put appropriations for political parties in separate budget lines will contribute significantly to achieving this .
These virtues are all the more important as we move towards the challenge facing the EU at the moment of enlargement .
We in the Socialist Group strongly believe that the European Parliament should be giving every encouragement to candidate countries in their preparation to joint the EU .
I have the impression that there are those in this House who appear to be frustrating this process of enlargement by placing unnecessary obstacles in the way and often using spurious arguments to limit the preparation for enlargement : for example , the rejection of the proposal to fill the 35 vacant posts in the language reserve between 2001 and 2002 .
The reason given , and also outlined by my colleague Mr Elles , is that we believe that this will pre-empt discussions with accession states .
Do we seriously believe that this small step will influence all the institutions as to which countries are in the first tranche and which are in the second tranche ?
Do we really believe that by committing less than half a per cent of Parliament 's language budget the political decision will be made and taken out of our control ?
I am somewhat confused and if I recall correctly , the rapporteur agreed previously and argued vigorously for setting up an interinstitutional recruitment agency in his last report .
What is the point of approving a joint operation whilst at the same time we are preventing any recruitment of people ?
I strongly favour planning properly for enlargement because experience has shown that there is a long lead-in time for the training of interpreters and translators .
It is necessary if the admission of the new Member States into the Institution is to run smoothly from a language point of view .
Of course I agree that we should not at any stage prejudice political decisions which have to be taken at a later date .
On the other hand , we should avoid giving out discouraging messages to the applicant countries that are currently making great efforts to get themselves in shape to join the EU .
I reiterate that we should not pre-empt any political decisions to be taken on enlargement .
We need to plan and to be imaginative and to be creative as to how we prepare for enlargement because nothing will be more damaging to the EU if we make a bad job of enlargement .
What we also need to do is have a vigorous implementation of reform to prepare for enlargement .
Very recently the President of the European Court of Justice warned that it would be unable to cope with enlargement of the EU .
The average time that it takes for a case to be heard has risen from 17 months in 1988 to 23 months last year .
That is a very long wait .
What we need to do is to have reforms , not just in the areas of staffing and procedures , but we also need to have a new approach in terms of buildings policy .
It is vital that the preparations are made during the coming financial year to ensure that Parliament 's buildings are able to accommodate new Member States of an enlarged EU .
It is also important for provision to be made to set up information offices in the countries which have applied to join the EU .
It is widely acknowledged that the systems that we have at the moment were set up for the EU when we only had 6 Members and they are creaking at the edges in terms of the Union of 15 Members .
How are they possibly going to be effective with 25 Members ?
It is important that we plan and prepare .
I am a relatively new Member of Parliament and while I see a lot of good work going on in the committees , I am acutely aware that as a result of the new responsibilities in the Treaty of Amsterdam there is a need not just for individual support for Members but also scientific support for committees .
Since the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force Parliament 's workload has increased very significantly and it is important that this is taken into account in this budget .
The Commission 's Work Programme now incorporates a very large number of codecision procedures and these procedures have significantly increased our workload .
If we are to convince the people of the EU of the importance of the European Parliament 's work and persuade them to take it more seriously , we need to improve our systems of working .
That is why I welcome the report 's emphasis on the common statute for Members and assistants and I hope that we can adopt this as soon as possible .
I have been disappointed by some aspects of the report 's focus .
It focuses too much on the minutiae of detail in sometimes preventing administrative changes in staffing and frustrating strategic vision .
I am concerned at the wisdom of putting 30 % of the appropriation into the reserve for security services as the rapporteur proposes .
There is a contradiction in the rapporteur 's argument .
He has always focused on outsourcing of Parliament 's services .
Here we have an example of outsourcing that is not working .
Rather than reducing the budget we should be looking at how we improve security services , and the question we should be asking is : should we have our own security services or should we be retendering it rather than just reducing the budget ?
I am also disappointed that the report ignores one of the biggest inefficiencies we have .
Members of the European Parliament are the only parliamentarians who have no say in the location of their seat .
A seat on three sites is the most incredible waste of time , money , travel and transport .
Surely , when we are looking at budgetary rigour we have the right to address this issue because until we do so the general public will be confused about what we are doing in so many places .
It also confuses the roles of the organisation .
Mr President , Mr Markus Ferber has produced an excellent report , on which I wish to congratulate him .
The Parliament Budget is essentially an administrative budget , since wage costs constitute the largest item of expenditure .
We are currently experiencing a significant period of change in administration , as we are aiming to introduce activity-based budgeting , to emphasise greater personal accountability and to improve the reallocation of resources .
This is why , last year , Parliament approved an appropriation of EUR 300 000 for this year ' s budget for the investigation of the efficiency and improvement needs of parliamentary administration .
Mr President , this is why it is somewhat surprising that already at this early stage , i.e. before the investigation has even started , important decisions are being made on administrative development .
In the Budget , appropriations for wages are being increased by an enormous 12.2 % .
This increase is so huge that no other institution could even contemplate an increase of administrative costs of this magnitude .
Already , at this early stage , the intention is to spend this increase on the creation of 33 new posts and , apparently , 12 more will be created as a result of the amendment by the Bureau .
For the sake of comparison , I would like to refer to the 1995-1999 period , during which Parliament established a total of only 11 new official posts .
It is worthy of special mention that in this proposal , a new post is even being created for the Financial Control Department , despite the intention to abandon prior inspection altogether .
In addition , the Budget contains a significant number of new staff promotions .
Such being the case , I cannot agree with those who claim that a policy of budgetary discipline has been observed in the drafting of this Budget . On the contrary , this Budget is uncommonly slack , and this will make it difficult to gain the approval of the general public .
Mr President , it is necessary in this context to address the issue of the policy of the European Parliament in its capacity as an employer .
Administrative reform , activity-based budgeting and downward delegation of accountability require consultation with the staff .
Reallocation of resources is necessary , and consequently also reform of staffing regulations .
Thus it would have been proper to save for the future such tools and opportunities for negotiation , with which these reforms are supposed to be furthered , and to refrain from granting new benefits before there has even been an opportunity to negotiate comparable administrative reforms with the staff .
Mr President , I too would like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur for his report and for facilitating open communication .
Mr Ferber ' s report does not just contain political aspects but is in fact largely composed of administrative aspects .
I will start by quoting and commenting on a number of political statements .
My group wholeheartedly agrees with the line taken in the report that the Council and Parliament should draft a statute in the short term and should do this in joint cooperation .
They should compile a statute for the Members of the European Parliament , and , independently of that , a statute for the Member ' s assistants .
We support this and hope that it can be brought to a conclusion during the course of this year .
The report also contains a political comment regarding the separate budget lines required for the parliamentary groups on the one hand and the European political parties on the other .
We must avoid hidden subsidies for European political parties at all costs .
We all know that it will be some time before a statute is drawn up for the European political parties and I welcome the fact that , in the meantime , the Secretary-General has been asked to establish transparency in the use of appropriations by the parliamentary groups and the political parties .
Quite apart from this , the report also covers many administrative aspects .
For example , we have been asked to pass judgement on the fact that the Directorate for Committees and Delegations must comprise five A posts , two B posts and one C post , and that one A post and two B posts must be added to the Directorate-General for Personnel .
It is not because I am new , I think , that I have great difficulty in passing judgement on this .
In my opinion , it is mainly up to a manager to take responsibility for the precise detail of personnel policy .
It is also very difficult for the groups if it is decided in the plenary how many additional posts are to be created within the political groups .
Surely , a great deal depends on the organisation of your group and maybe not every group wants to work in exactly the same way .
I think that we should really re-think the system .
I understand that during the reform of Parliament , consideration will also be given to allowing groups to take responsibility for their own affairs and I wholeheartedly support this .
I would also like to comment briefly on the support which has been requested for the parliamentarians .
We have agreed that a study will be carried out which will also be linked in with a study commissioned by Mr Rothley into what exactly it is that the parliamentarians need in the way of support for their work .
I struggle somewhat with the fact that we are running ahead of this study ' s conclusions because we do not give our verdict on the Bureau ' s conclusion in Mr Ferber ' s report .
The Bureau concludes that expenses for assistants should be increased by 20 % .
In failing to pass judgement on this , we are giving the impression that we have accepted it .
I am not against this increase , in principle . What I do object to , however , is running ahead of the report and I am also opposed to it because I am sure that in September , it will transpire that we will need to prioritise various issues .
For example , the rent we pay for the buildings may increase .
We will need to decide whether we want to inject more funding into other institutions in preparation for enlargement .
We will no doubt return to these points of criticism in September when we will have the precise figures in front of us .
As such , it is not really a criticism but I do object to running ahead of a decision .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing a report on the European Parliament , and I am astonished first of all not to see one of Mrs Stauner ' s letters appended to this document because , as you know , she likes to get involved in our business even though her own activities are concerned with something completely different .
Perhaps this is due to the fact that the rapporteur is a member of her own group and , for once , she is therefore confining herself to making observations rather than sending a letter .
I find this rather strange , but perhaps she has not yet said her last word .
We shall see , in time .
What I want to say is quite simply this : the situation is nonetheless rather surprising .
On the one hand , we have engaged in a policy of rigour resulting in all our budgets and discharges being obstructed by a Parliament that is rigorous to the extent of obstructing discharge to the Commission , and even obstructing discharge to the European Parliament itself , out of fear of problems , lack of endorsement or money wasting attributable to the duties of officials who are required to shuttle back and forth between Luxembourg and Brussels , costing the taxpayer a fortune .
Yet on the other hand , in the Ferber report , Members of Parliament are awarding themselves fortunes .
We are awarding ourselves a second computer , claiming that one is not enough .
We are awarding ourselves a 20 % pay rise from a zero-growth budget .
We are awarding ourselves a 20 % increase to the budget heading for funding for our assistants because we are more than anything afraid that the rules will stipulate that this contract will have to be accompanied by a statute which would specifically require welfare contributions to be paid , and so , as insurance against the worst case scenario , we are increasing this line by 20 % .
After checking up , I have not found a single budget item in the Community , whether in the field of humanitarian aid , research , or agricultural expenditure where there are plans for an increase .
Moreover , generally speaking , the objective is to reduce the budget .
But not in this case !
Within the European Parliament a second computer is being awarded , 20 % additional expenses and , as the Court of Auditors was particularly tough on the political groups , a paragraph is included , which , I quote , " Underlines emphatically the increased workload and the particular responsibilities of the political groups . "
This paragraph does Parliament no credit .
If we adopt an attitude , we cannot express any indignation at waste while at the same time putting forward a budget of this type .
On behalf of the radicals in this House , I must inform you that I shall be voting against Mr Ferber ' s report .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am sorry that my good friend , Mr Dell 'Alba , is not in agreement with the draft budget by Mr Ferber .
We are in agreement and we are very happy .
I believe that the rapporteur , in drawing up this draft budget for 2001 , has been rigorous , has made optimum use of resources and has , at the same time , been imaginative and looked to the future .
We congratulate him wholeheartedly .
Ultimately , we are talking about a European Parliament for the 21st century , when we will have to face three fundamental challenges . We will have to respond to the MEPs ' new obligations , as laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam , incorporate new technologies into our work and react immediately to the huge administrative , organisational and political obligations presented by enlargement of the European Union .
These three challenges faced by the European Parliament should be set in a context of great budgetary rigour and complete transparency in the use of public funds .
We must consider - and the rapporteur has done this - what kind of Parliament we want in the future . Do we want a more administrative and bureaucratic Parliament or do we want a more political one ?
Do we want a European Parliament that is centralised or do we want one which is compatible with a European Union which is becoming increasingly federalised but at the same time more subject to subsidiarity and decentralisation ?
I believe - and I agree with him on this - that the rapporteur wants a Parliament that treats the MEPs ' political work , both in Strasbourg and in Brussels , as well as in their individual political constituencies , as a priority .
In this case it is necessary , as he says , for there to be new information points , new IT resources and new staff - if necessary - to help MEPs carry out their bureaucratic tasks .
I hope that in September new appropriations will be provided for these lines .
I am very glad that Mr Ferber has reacted to the report of the Court of Auditors on the funding of the political groups .
An independent budget line will allow us to present a clearer and more transparent public image until we finally have a statute for the European political parties .
Let us not forget that these parties are the cornerstone of European democracy and there must be no doubts as to whether they are being funded in the correct manner .
We fully agree with the rapporteur ' s view concerning the linguistic staff necessary for enlargement .
We must initiate the preparatory administrative measures .
Six new countries - with at least five new languages - in 2004 means that we will have to make a great effort to adapt .
In order to fill these vacancies , we will need to know the exact order in which the candidate countries will join the Union , and that is something that cannot happen now or in this budget .
We therefore support all Mr Ferber ' s amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by expressly welcoming Mr Ferber ' s report in its broadest outlines .
We have enjoyed extremely positive collaboration over recent weeks and months , cooperation marked by the fact that we expressed our opinions in no uncertain terms on the points where we diverged widely , but when you can reach a common line , then that is the path you should take .
The challenge which faces us has been described .
One can in fact do no more than repeat it .
In the wake of Amsterdam - and I say this now in anticipation of what is yet to come in relation to this Parliament - we must reconcile the powers which Parliament now has with its potential , because at present they do not stand in a very balanced ratio .
We must ensure that we can achieve equality in arms with the other legislative authority , namely the Council , both in respect of the scientific service and scientific research .
We cannot allow the potential of this democratic and directly-elected Parliament to lag behind what the Council can do .
If we take our work seriously , if we take ourselves seriously , we must operate under the same conditions so that we really can stand up for ourselves .
There is no point in the President of our Parliament just putting her mark at the bottom of the page .
That is not enough ; it is the work beforehand which is crucial and it needs to be carried out seriously and it needs to be carried out well .
In this respect it is both right and important - and I expressly disagree with Mr Dell 'Alba here - that we prepare ourselves properly .
Nor can there be any question of exorbitant cost increases now .
Mr Dell 'Alba knows full well that , thanks to a clever buildings policy - let there be no mistake about that - we have been able to release considerable funds over recent years .
Having scrimped and saved this money ourselves , we then need to use it to good purpose .
To good purpose means improving the potential and capabilities of this Parliament .
We are still within the 20 % margin which we set ourselves and we are keeping to it .
At no point do we go over Parliament ' s 20 % share of administrative costs .
I think that shows that our approach is very serious here and we do not want to promise any cloud cuckoo land .
Another challenge before us - admittedly we have been pushed into action here by official discussions in various quarters - is the need to bring some transparency into this Parliament .
We shall accept this responsibility and take up this challenge .
Not because we are afraid of being forced to do so .
No , we want the public to know that we have nothing to hide here .
We are endeavouring to create a serious basis for what we do here , i.e. financing for the groups , and we want a set of rules so that the European political parties and party organisations can raise funds .
You cannot call for this sort of development at European level without financing the basis commensurately , that is quite right .
The basis must be clearly visible so that our citizens know what money is going where .
We shall do everything we can to make progress on this point and to bring more transparency into the process , so that everyone can see what money is going where and can judge if it is appropriate or unsuitable and criticism can then be levied where criticism is needed .
And it is needed .
However , we must head off criticism on procedural grounds or because we have accommodated certain sums under various budget headings .
Transparency is needed here and , as we said last year during the budget debates , we have our work cut out here .
Allow me to comment now on the question of enlargement , because that is the only point on which we disagree with Mr Ferber and , above all , with our colleagues in the PPE group .
What worries me here is that Mr Stoiber ' s visit to your group last week had a greater impact than we all feared .
My next comment is addressed to my honourable friend , Mr Pöttering : it was you who said at a European Union conference " onwards and upwards " , and that enlargement should be speeded up for political reasons , because we cannot afford to put it on the back burner .
But , when we are specifically called upon to move forwards , we should do so decisively .
I know that the issue of when and how enlargement should take place can be the stuff of first-rate political debate , a debate which could set the axe at the very roots and I call for extreme caution here .
As far as specific preparations are concerned , we need , for example , to make preparations for more buildings .
And if you do not start looking for buildings , for example in the candidate countries , until things are so far down the road , you will be faced with prices which make your hair turn grey .
So we need to get our act together and make preparations which allow for sound financial management .
As far as preparing for new languages is concerned , if you read the Cot report , called for by the honourable Member of your group , Mr Elles , you will see that we shall have an additional 460 language combinations in the future .
According to one estimate , this will mean another 500 translators and interpreters .
Do you expect us to believe that you are suddenly going to jump up like a jack in the box with a list of people who are highly specialised in Estonian , Latvian , Czech , in all these new languages which we shall have ?
No , preparations need to be made now .
And in order to avoid falling into the trap , as Mr Ferber rightly explained , of taking administrative decisions which anticipate political developments , we must , of course , ensure during the course of the year that we have a precise discussion on the distribution of these posts between the various languages .
We shall support the release of the Cot report - that is one part of Mr Elles ' motion .
We are in favour of discussing this during the course of the year , but we are expressly against saying as of now that we refuse to fill the 35 posts .
That would be frivolous and would send completely the wrong signal to the Member States and to the people who hope to become an integral part of the Union .
Mr President , allow me to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Ferber , for the good work he has done .
There is a lot in this report which has been well thought-out and which it is very easy indeed to support .
I want to talk about an issue which , in the long term , will be very important for Parliament and for the EU as a whole and which many Members have already touched upon here today , namely the language question .
Rarely perhaps is the linguistic diversity of Europe seen so incredibly clearly as in a debate in this Chamber in which eleven different languages are being interpreted between .
Naturally , this is expensive and time-consuming .
Yet it has been assumed without question , throughout the history of the EU , that whoever is present here should be able , if at all possible , to speak their own language .
A good deal in the report under discussion is based on the assumption that the EU will be enlarged by six new Member States in 2004 .
What is more , that may be an underestimate .
A few days ago , the Commission said it was its own objective to be able to welcome ten new Member States by the year 2005 .
I am among those for whom the greatest challenge for the EU is an enlargement whose ultimate goal is the reunification of a Europe which has always been divided by artificial borders .
I nonetheless believe that it is more realistic to proceed on the basis of the somewhat lower figure quoted in the report by the Committee on Budgets .
Even that figure is awfully large , bearing in mind the number of new languages involved .
Proceeding on the basis that there will be " 5 + 1 countries " in the first round of negotiations - a lot can obviously happen during the next few years , but these six countries nonetheless have a two-year head start in terms of the negotiations - this means that five new official languages will be added to the eleven we already have at present .
There is no question of these newly welcomed countries and their languages being treated any differently from the way in which the existing Member States are treated .
It must equally go without saying that Hungarian , Polish or Estonian Members of this Parliament should be able to speak their own languages , just as we existing Members are entitled to speak ours .
Nor can we put ourselves in a situation whereby a country with access to trained interpreters and translators can become a Member State of the EU , while another country which does not have professionals of these kinds cannot .
That is precisely why it is so important that the issue is highlighted right now . That is what the rapporteur is doing , and I think it is excellent .
We must not , in a few years ' time , find ourselves in a situation in which the issue has still not been resolved .
We should also be clear about the fact that things are happening very quickly right now .
We are dealing with countries which are developing very rapidly , which means that we too must act quickly in order to have settled the language question by the time these countries join the Union .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Ferber on his report .
These types of reports are never easy and he has done a good job .
My only criticism is that Amendments Nos 4 and 5 should have been tabled in someone else 's name for the PPE Group .
By saying that I am being consistent : I said the same to Mrs Müller in the Green Group when she did that .
I shall explain why shortly .
Parliament demands that the Commission and the other institutions are prudent with taxpayers ' money , and we think the same should apply to the European Parliament .
As chairman of this committee , I have discovered that your loyalties are spread very wide .
I have a loyalty to the committee , and when the committee takes a decision I feel duty-bound to defend that decision .
I have a loyalty to the rapporteur , and that is why I have made the comments before because the rapporteur should reflect the opinions of the committee .
I also have a loyalty to my political group which has given me this speaking time .
This sometimes leaves me bereft of my own loyalties to myself and what I want to say .
I was somewhat sympathetic to what Mr Dell 'Alba was saying because we have to be careful of criticising everybody else if , at the same time , we are giving the impression that we are ignoring that prudency and just doing what we want to do .
I am not saying that we have done that .
However , if that is the impression we are going to give , we have to be very careful and realise the consequences .
Having said that , the Ferber report has tried to balance the needs of Parliament coming into a new millennium - new needs , enlargement on the horizon - and to make it function effectively .
Not all the decisions will be taken when we vote this report through .
The first reading will be time when the final decisions are taken , and cognisance has been taken of that .
When they see a budget of EUR 965m , the newspapers will easily deduce that is over EUR 1.5m per Member .
The British newspapers will be full of GBP 1m per MEP - that is what they cost !
However , we are trying to reduce those costs , especially on buildings .
If people would look at what is being done with the buildings : we are trying to reduce the payments over the shortest possible time , thereby reducing the total burden on Parliament 's budget .
One only has to look at paragraphs 15 to 18 to see how serious we are about the buildings policy .
The policy of ramassage has been a great success for this Parliament .
What we have done with the Belliard building may not be ideal but at least it is a step in the right direction , and it is now off our backs .
Finally , one of the great problems in our institution is that we have no statute for Members , assistants or political parties .
What is being proposed is to try to make some headway towards resolving those factors .
- ( PT ) Mr President , the proposals put forward in the report that we are now considering interpret - or should interpret - the will of the European Parliament to prepare itself to meet the challenges facing the European Union .
It has to be this way , as we have been through a tricky time , and there are permanent tensions and glaring contradictions .
It seems that we expect everything and , at the same time , we expect nothing at all from the European Union ' s priorities , as we can see from the level of budgetary transposition - or lack thereof .
It is our ability to take advantage of something that could potentially transform tensions and to reduce the amount of contradictions which will make the difference between the stagnation and the consequent decline of the project and the dynamism that its implementation requires .
Have the competences of the European Parliament increased substantially with the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the consequent extension of the codecision procedure to further areas of policy , for example ?
If that is the case , we would have to provide Members of the House with a greater ability to carry out their mandate , more and better information and we would have to ensure that the political groups are more accountable and that the staff of the European Parliament is more efficient .
Does enlargement require subtle changes in the membership and functioning of this Parliament ?
If it does , then we need to prepare for them , anticipate the challenges and how to respond to them and not fall into a situation of ' wait and see ' , which would leave us trailing in the wake of events that we can neither prevent nor influence .
This applies to the European Union as a whole .
We are at a turning point and , now that we have reached this point , nothing will be the same as it was before and things will not remain as they are now .
Now that economic and monetary union has been achieved , the euro cannot be a point of arrival but a starting point , which , in time , will bring about and require further changes .
Now that the process of enlargement has been launched , fundamental changes are required as well as renewed ambition .
The need to make the economic sphere correspond to the political sphere is becoming increasingly clear .
We are swinging between deepening and dilution , solidarity and selfishness , decisiveness and delay , coherence and contradiction and convergence and divergence .
By increasing the influence of core principles , amongst which I would highlight subsidiarity and social and economic cohesion , we will be able to launch and see through new initiatives .
I congratulate Mr Ferber on the care he has taken over this work .
Mr President , as other colleagues have said , dealing with Amsterdam and preparing for enlargement are major challenges for this institution .
As far as I am concerned - and we should be very clear about this - new challenges require new resources .
As the rapporteur has indicated , you start by looking at existing resources and see where staff and resources which are under-utilised or no longer appropriate can be transferred .
Once that has been done , in the new situation in which the European Parliament finds itself , there is no alternative but to expand our budget .
I hear what Mr Wynn , the chairman of the committee , has said about prudence .
Prudence is in danger of becoming a false goddess : if we put too much emphasis on prudence it will be at the expense of the efficiency and the effectiveness of this Institution .
There is a delicate balance to be struck , and I know that in his report the rapporteur has striven towards it .
I broadly welcome Mr Ferber 's report .
However , there are three fronts to which Parliament needs to pay more attention between now and September .
The first , as other colleagues have mentioned , is the issue of languages .
I had the honour of sitting on Mr Cot 's working group on multilingualism .
Frankly , if this institution wishes to continue to practise multilingualism - and perhaps that is a debate we should have - there is no alternative but to start recruiting now .
If we leave it any longer , once we start enlargement we will not be in a position to continue multilingualism .
The decision will be taken for us .
We were almost in that position with Finnish at the last enlargement .
As Members will notice , the Finnish interpreters do a good job speaking English and other languages because we could not recruit Finnish-speaking English interpreters .
We shall find ourselves in that position again come the next enlargement unless we take hard decisions now .
So I want Parliament to rethink the 35 language posts .
The second area where we still have much to do as an Institution is informatics .
We have come a long way , but there are further benefits to be obtained from informatics .
In particular the President of the Bureau is looking at how to reach a position where every Member has a portable computer with access to the European Parliament 's computer system so that , no matter where they are in the world , they can get their own committee reports , agendas and so on .
That does not require a massive increase in investment but it does require new money - an increase in Parliament 's resources .
Finally , again , something I have heard you , Mr President , talk about : the issue of legal advice .
The new Amsterdam situation means that when we pass amendments and resolutions in this Chamber we have to be more aware of the legal consequences as well as the political consequences of what we are deciding .
We need to enhance the legal advice we have as a Parliament to support us through the conciliation and other procedures .
Finally , I should like to make it clear that I am not asking Parliament to spend massive amounts of new money .
However , to spend one or two per cent more in order to ensure that we remain effective is worth it , and we should look at prudence in the context of the wider demands of this Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Ferber , I should like to make a point of congratulating you on your report .
Of course it is not the Commission ' s job to evaluate individual proposals , but I would like to welcome the fact that Parliament is endeavouring to ensure that , in future , the buildings policy will reduce the burden on the budget from interest payments .
Of course , I also welcome , from the point of view of interinstitutional relations , that your proposal has remained , as it were , within category 5 of the agreement .
The agreement makes provision here for this joint estimate of personnel and administrative costs to be distributed between the institutions on the basis of a specific ratio and you have based your proposals on that distribution .
I think that again shows that many aspects of the financial perspectives facilitate work and planning , especially where firm agreements are concluded between the institutions .
Above all , however , what is important is that you have paid a great deal of attention in your report to the question of enlargement and staff policy in the translating and interpreting sector and , of course , the question of what measures are taken here is a highly political one .
More importantly , preparations do , of course , have to be made and you have pointed out - even though the question looks somewhat different from the point of view of the individual institutions - that it should be a matter of interinstitutional concern to address the subject and find a solution .
In this respect , congratulations once again on your report , especially on the fact that the report on the Budget 2001 looks beyond the Budget 2001 .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Presentation by Commission of preliminary draft budget for 2001
The next item is the presentation by the Commission of the preliminary draft budget for 2001 .
Commission . ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in February , the Commission debated the priorities for the European budget for next year and had the opportunity to discuss these priorities in detail with the European Parliament both here in plenary and , more importantly , in the Committee on Budgets and in the various trialogues between the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council which have taken place since .
The Commission has used this debate as the basis for its preliminary draft budget for 2001 , which it now has pleasure in presenting to you , as adopted by the Commission .
As it is the first preliminary draft budget which I have presented , allow me to comment on the procedure and the timing .
I think it makes a great deal of sense to debate priorities intensively first , before getting down to specific numbers . More importantly , I think it is most helpful to present the preliminary draft budget so early , thereby allowing time for intensive discussion .
Now to the budget proper : as with every national budget , most of the figures in the European budget for a given year are determined by contracts , by previous decisions in past years and by legal bases in past years .
This is particularly true of agricultural expenditure in the area of the organisation of the markets , the largest item in the budget , including in the Budget 2001 , and of the Structural Funds and multiannual programmes , be they in research , youth measures or foreign policy .
Despite the fact that figures are determined by previous years , the Budget 2001 also sets clear political priorities and , following discussions over recent months , I think I can say that the priorities in the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget tally to a large extent with Parliament ' s priorities .
Take , for example , the priority under the second pillar of agricultural policy ; the highest rate of increase in the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget is for promoting the development of rural areas and I think that this in fact highlights that the Commission considers that we need to focus on the second pillar of agricultural policy .
Secondly , economic policy prioritises the need to develop and promote Europe as a knowledge-based society , which is why the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget has set a very large plus against research and a new edition of the programme to promote small- and medium-sized enterprises and , more importantly , contains a proposal to combine them with the promotion of technology , which was also a matter of concern to the rapporteur , Mrs Haug .
Access to new technologies is not very well developed in small- and medium-sized enterprises .
Of course , with the economic structure which we would like to have and which is strongly supported by small- and medium-sized enterprises , and which we want to use to push Europe forward , it is necessary and it makes sense for Europe ' s development in information and communications technologies to combine these two aspects .
The preliminary draft budget also contains a new focus on foreign policy .
We have already had the opportunity to debate this in great detail , especially assistance in the Balkans .
Another priority which I should like to mention is the need for budgetary rigour in the European budget and the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget is in line with this objective .
So now a few figures on the overall budget .
Without agricultural expenditure , the preliminary draft budget makes provision for an increase in commitment appropriations , i.e. the financial commitments which can be entered into , of 1 % in comparison with last year .
I think that this figure clearly illustrates that the preliminary draft budget is in keeping with the overall policy of budgetary rigour , and that the rate of increase in payments as a whole , without agricultural expenditure , is 3 % .
I should point out that the average growth forecast for the budgets of the Member States is 3.1 % .
I stress this because it will certainly play an important part during the debate with the Council .
However , we have included a considerable increase in agricultural expenditure in the preliminary draft budget , namely 7.6 % or , in absolute terms , a total of EUR 3.12 billion .
This is mainly as a result of the resolutions passed by the Heads of State and Government at the Berlin Summit last year and these agreed financial perspectives form part of the interinstitutional agreement concluded last year between the Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I should point out that this figure for agricultural policy actually makes provision for the draft budget for agricultural policy to remain under the ceiling decided in Berlin because the Commission proposal includes shifting EUR 300 million from the agricultural budget to foreign policy , yet still there is such a high rate of growth for agricultural policy .
To sum up , the preliminary draft figures as a whole make provision overall for a rate of increase of 3.9 % in commitment appropriations and 5 % in payments .
The rate of growth of payments is higher because we have a large backlog of payment commitments and the Commission currently takes the view that this should not get any bigger ; on the contrary it should be reduced , which is precisely why the rate of growth for payments needs to be higher .
What does this mean for the European state quota ?
By that I mean what proportion of the total gross national product of the European Community is absorbed by the European Union budget ?
In other words , how high is the European state quota based on the strong growth in gross national product expected in the countries of the European Community next year ?
There are very positive growth prospects here .
Is the change in the ratio of gross national product to budget from 1.11 % in the year 2000 to 1.07 % in the year 2001 a step backwards ?
I highlight this - we also have extremely intensive debates in the Member States on state quotas , which are between 40 and 50 % - in order to illustrate the fact that the European budget accounts for 1.07 % of the total gross national product .
This clearly illustrates that the budget of the European Union is worth its weight in gold .
The European Union acquired a new remit following the war in Kosovo and the resolutions on the Stability Pact in the Balkans .
The Council stressed the importance of this remit once again in Lisbon .
Now we have to provide the funds and so the Commission has presented a proposal in its preliminary draft budget which reflects the importance of this remit .
EUR 815 million have been earmarked for aid to the western Balkans in 2001 , following on from EUR 540 million this year .
This is the aid which has been earmarked in order to reconstruct the civil society , i.e. it does not , for example , include expenditure by Member States for KFOR troops .
Is expenditure of EUR 815 million for the entire region too high an estimate ?
We have already discussed whether these countries are able to absorb this figure in the trialogue debate with the Council .
I think that , to an extent , this debate is somewhat cynical because requirements are , of course , extremely high . But of course the political decision as to how much aid the budgetary authority wishes to provide from the European budget rests with the budgetary authority alone .
I should point out that the proposal for Serbia for the year 2001 makes provision for a fixed sum of 40 million .
The Commission has proposed that , if the political situation changes in Serbia , additional funds will be provided from the flexibility reserve .
But I should like to stress once again that the Commission has made provision for a very large sum for Serbia in its proposed amendment to the financial plan for the period up to 2006 , and I think that we should send a signal to Serbia , to the political opposition in Serbia , that the European Union is prepared to come up with large sums of aid if and when political democracy becomes a reality .
This is the Commission ' s first budget in the form of activity-based budgeting ; in other words , all budget expenditure has been allocated to political areas .
Now we can see at a glance how much is being spent on which political areas .
I think that it is an important step in the direction of greater transparency and stronger public political debate to stop talking in categories , because apart from us here in this House and a handful of officials in the Member States and a few well-informed journalists , who knows what internal policies are , for example ?
I think that ABB , i.e. this proposal , this new structure , will really make public political debate much easier .
What is the European Union spending its money on ?
This is therefore a very important step , not a technical step , but an important political step .
I should briefly like to point out that the Commission proposal includes a proposal for a letter of amendment on the Budget 2000 .
More importantly , it also includes a whole series of technical adjustments and , in particular , the consequences of the annual accounts for 1999 for the European Union budget .
The European Union budget for 1999 closed with a large surplus of EUR 3.2 billion .
In other words , EUR 3.2 billion will be refunded to the Member States .
These refunds will be offset against the contributions for this year .
Of course , all Member States will be included and the money will be refunded in the ratio to which the Member States finance the European Union budget .
There was some confusion in relation to Great Britain in the report .
I should point out that the refund was offset but a different figure was obtained because of the rate of the euro to the pound .
Great Britain ' s contribution in euros appears to be higher than in the plan , but if the calculation is carried out in pounds , it appears to be different .
So we need to take a good look at the question of exchange rates in the European budget .
I have highlighted this balance in order to illustrate - and this very point was raised in your debate on the European Parliament budget - that the term budgetary rigour is certainly not a concept which is foreign to the European budget and it is being applied .
The next step is for the Council to examine the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget and to draw up a draft budget for the year 2001 .
Of course this will be followed by intensive debate .
I trust that the rest of the procedure will be marked by less harping on about principles and more joint endeavour to use the funds in the European budget efficiently and for the benefit and in support of the objectives of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your presentation . I should like to pick up straight away on your closing words .
I do not think that we should harp on about principles during our discussion of the Budget 2001 .
But I also think that this is a call directed at the Council rather than a call directed at us , notwithstanding what has been submitted to us parliamentarians so far from the preliminary draft budget for evaluation .
This leads me to say that , first and foremost , the Commission has taken account of the Council ' s wish that it present as economical a budget as possible .
You , yourself , said just now that the Budget 2001 is only 1 % higher than the Budget 2000 without agricultural expenditure and we all know that agricultural expenditure accounts for a huge part of our budget .
To then talk of rigorous financial management to us alone is , of course , completely misplaced , especially as we here in Parliament are in favour of economical financial management .
The debate and the budgets which we have voted in the past demonstrate this and that is the way it should stay .
Allow me to remind the House : agricultural expenditure for the organisation of the markets is to rise by 7.6 % .
Expenditure on rural development - and you stressed that we of course set great store by rural development - is to rise by 10.1 % .
On the face of it , these relative figures alone , i.e. the percentages , are highly satisfactory .
But we all know that market expenditure in the current budget is over eight times higher than expenditure on rural development and that market expenditure in the next budget will be over nine times higher than expenditure on rural development .
This may take account of the wishes of the Council and of Council ' s decisions , but it does not take quite such good account of the wishes of Parliament .
It is through Category 3 , which encompasses all our priorities - not only Category 3 , Category 4 also of course - but it is mainly through internal policies that all citizens perceive the European Union .
When you see that the budget has been set at around EUR 6.13 billion and then you compare that with market expenditure , then you see that market expenditure is six times higher than the whole of Category 3 .
Knowing that four-fifths of all expenditure is tied in with multiannual programmes , and that , of course , 80 % of all these multiannual programmes are decided under the codecision procedure , then the 1.4 % increase proposed by the Commission is purely and simply the effect of the increase in research expenditure .
Nevertheless , you want to increase this expenditure by 8 % and research expenditure accounts for over 60 % of Category 3 .
I know that the Commission is endeavouring to take account in the budget of the priorities it has accepted , namely creating a knowledge-based society and improving the quality of life of our citizens .
So far so good .
We can support that .
But what about Parliament ' s priorities ?
We discussed our priorities well in advance both among ourselves and with the Commission , and we adopted our guidelines well in advance , including for Category 3 .
You have just picked out a few points but when we see that education and youth policy are to rise by 1.2 % then we must say - looking at the entire heading - that that is because next year is the European Year of Languages and the expenditure for it will rise by 275 % .
That is perfectly normal and we have supported that .
If you look at the Culture and Audiovisual Media heading , there is a 2.7 % increase .
I would have expected it to be higher .
Information and communications have risen by 4 % .
But what about social dialogue and employment - down 4.7 % .
What about energy policy , which we have fought for tooth and nail time and again ?
You have cut it by 8.2 % and you have cut environmental policy by a hefty 28.2 % .
To my mind , the preliminary draft budget , as it now stands , takes no account of Parliament ' s priorities .
Mrs Schreyer , what I personally hold dear to my heart , namely innovation and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises - yes , you have put a figure in the budget for this , but you have cut what we still had in the last budget by nearly 70 % .
We urgently need to discuss this so that the budget also clearly sets out our priorities .
I have just this to say about Category 4 : I think it is asking for trouble to support Serbia with such a small amount in 2001 and , at the same time , to say that once Serbia has democratised we can again use our flexibility instrument .
And one last comment which cuts across both Categories 3 and 4 : what about the timetable on the legal framework for the offices for technical and administrative support or transformation promised by you and Commissioner Kinnock ?
You wrote to us last December saying that a proposal would be submitted in the middle of April .
We are all dying to see it .
It is now the middle of May and we hope that it will make an appearance shortly because it is also important for our budgetary procedure .
Thank you , Mrs Haug .
Remember that you will have many months ahead to discuss this matter and to speak at length .
Furthermore , this is simply a dream on the part of the Commission .
The serious discussion will begin in July with the Council ' s draft .
Mr President , Mrs Haug attended the Detlev Samland school of speaking to the clock and just carried straight on , as Detlev always used to .
Though we are talking about a PDB for the year 2001 , it is somewhat difficult not to link it to the revision of the Financial Perspective .
I know we should not do so , but there is that link between the two which makes me want to comment on both .
For the Commission proposals to be successful three factors will be crucial .
The first is the assessment of needs for the western Balkans .
In a couple of weeks ' time , Parliament will send an ad hoc delegation to Kosovo to try and make an assessment .
We will need to opt for the Commission proposal of EUR 5.5 billion in total or move towards the Council which is proposing a somewhat lower figure .
The second factor will be Parliament 's attitude to redeployment , especially in Category IV , not just for 2001 but for the whole of the Financial Perspective .
That is why I say they have to be linked .
I will give you an example .
One area of great interest for me - I make no secret of it - is South Africa .
The proposal to take EUR 2 million per year away from South Africa for six years may not seem much .
But EUR 12 million is a lot of money for the projects in South Africa .
I would not be happy with that and I am sure other people in other areas of interest in Category IV would adopt a similar attitude .
Then we have Parliament 's attitude towards redeployment in Category I. Similarly , we have to consider our approach to the use of the flexibility instrument if it was invoked for Serbia , as you suggest .
We have to bear in mind what the Interinstitutional Agreement says about a rule not being used for the same things in consecutive years .
Once again that would be a challenge for Parliament .
The third factor , and probably the most important one , is the attitude of the Council .
If they reject what you are proposing , especially as far as the revision goes , the question remains : what will you do next ?
I know we have a trialogue and a conciliation before their first reading but it is a problem we have to resolve before the Council 's first reading .
What happens if the Council is adamant and rejects the Commission 's proposals ?
Mrs Schreyer , you are something of a juggler and an illusionist at the same time , with the proposals that have been made .
You have to keep several balls in the air and , at the same time , because of what is proposed after 2003 , you have to make more appear .
One of the great mysteries in your proposals on the revision is where the money will come from after 2003 .
But that is not for next year .
That is for the future .
In the meantime we await developments on those three factors .
Hopefully , at the end of this process , we will get a satisfactory outcome .
Protecting the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud
The next item is the report ( A5-0116 / 2000 ) by Mr Bösch , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the 1998 annual report by the European Commission on protecting the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud .
Mr Dell 'Alba has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , I should like to ask a preliminary question , pursuant to Rule 143 .
The fact is , I think that tolerance can only be taken so far , and that it is no longer acceptable for a parliamentary committee to set itself up as a public welfare committee , going into anything and everything with every report , setting forth considerations which are far removed from the subject under consideration .
Some 80 % of this report entitled " report on the 1998 annual report by the European Commission on protecting the Communities ' financial interests " , on the legal basis of Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure , refers to OLAF , the White Paper , the reform , all sort of subjects covered by other reports , and even other committees , but has nothing to do with what Mr Bösch was supposed to be dealing with .
According to my rights under the Rules of Procedure , I should like my preliminary question , which is a question of principle , to be put to the vote .
The Committee on Budgetary Control must stop meddling wholesale , as has been the case recently , with the subject areas of other committees .
We have seen rapporteurs , particularly Mrs Theato , obstructing documents outside their own area of competence for weeks at a time .
Some of us are starting to become annoyed .
In this specific instance , I move that this report be deemed inadmissible and that we move on to the report which is the next item on the agenda .
I request that this be put to the vote .
Thank you , Mr Dell 'Alba .
Allow me to remind the honourable Members by quickly reading Rule 143 ( 1 ) out loud : " At the beginning of the debate on a specific item on the agenda , its inadmissibility may be moved .
Such a motion shall be put to the vote immediately . "
According to the Rules of Procedure , one person may speak for and one person against the motion , after which it is put to the vote immediately without further debate .
Mrs Theato , are you speaking against Mr Dell 'Alba ' s motion ?
Mr President , I am somewhat surprised because this report was duly and unanimously adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I would have expected such matters to be clarified in committee , rather than here in plenary .
The report has been available for some time and I therefore see no reason why we cannot debate and vote on it .
Secondly , I would be obliged if Mr Dell 'Alba could tell me what he means by saying that I have blocked documents for weeks .
I fail to understand Mr Dell 'Alba ' s choice of words and assertion and I would welcome an explanation .

As no one wishes to speak for the motion , the vote shall now take place .
( Parliament rejected the motion . )
Mr President , allow me to start with a few comments on the judgement of the Court of First Instance of 2 May on the rights and duties of the members of this House vis-à-vis OLAF .
I welcome this judgement .
It clarifies that , as elected representatives of the people , we may rightly claim a special status and that , in the event of doubt , protecting our independence takes precedence .
That was my position from the outset , incidentally .
That was why , during negotiations with the Commission and the Council , we made all the sensitive passages in the OLAF regulation subject to the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities .
That was why we suggested last autumn in the Committee on Budgetary Control that the provisions for members should be kept separate from the provisions for officials .
Unfortunately , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs did not subscribe to this view .
I said from the outset that members ' offices were off limits for OLAF .
Obviously , the Commission ' s legal service took a different view .
Now it has been taught a lesson by the Court .
However , the court judgement has put us in a position of inequality , because only the plaintiff can cite this judgement .
This state of affairs may last for a ridiculous amount of time , perhaps until a judgement is returned on the main issue , which may not be for two years .
I have therefore taken recourse to Rule 181 of the Rules of Procedure and proposed an amendment to the Rules of Procedure .
The text which I have proposed is in line with the original proposal of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
It keeps to the letter of the interinstitutional agreement with the Commission and the Council and takes full account of the stipulations of the Court of First Instance .
I urge you to support this initiative to amend the Rules of Procedure .
It would allow the matter to be clarified as quickly as possible and , I think , would even allow the members who took recourse to the Court to withdraw their action .
If the proposed amendment to the Rules of Procedure is implemented , their action would , as a matter of course , be pointless anyway .
This too is perfectly clear from the Court ' s judgement . Parliament ' s internal decision was out of order , but the Parliament and Council regulation of 25 May 1999 on the work of OLAF is here to stay and is not open to question .
This is why I fail to comprehend why a number of proposed amendments to my report claim that the Court ' s judgement has strengthened the position of the European Investment Bank and the European Central Bank in their opposition to the regulation .
It is true that both banks maintain that the Parliament and Council regulation cannot under any circumstances be applied to them because this would encroach upon their independence .
I totally fail to understand that ; we have no intention of interfering in the banks ' work .
What we do want is to guarantee that they have a minimum degree of protection against fraud , or do they want us to end up using private detectives to carry out this work ?
The European Court of Justice and the Court of Auditors have duly implemented the provisions of the OLAF regulation in corresponding internal decisions .
They certainly would not have done so if they had felt that their independence was being jeopardised .
Neither bank has a plausible explanation as to why they do not accept what the independent judges of the European Court of Justice have accepted .
Three points on the content of my report .
Point number 1 concerns OLAF as an investigation unit which identifies and investigates suspicious cases quickly and efficiently .
The legal basis for this is in place .
Together with the Council , we have done everything within our power .
The development of OLAF is well under way .
Point number 2 concerns the European financial public prosecutor who , in the initial stage , has the right to support the national courts in prosecuting criminal offences committed by officials or employees of the Union .
Point number 3 concerns really effective disciplinary procedures .
The Staff Regulations and Financial Regulation have long made provision for the competent decision-makers to pay for damage for which they are responsible out of their own pocket in cases of gross negligence or intent .
This provision has never been applied .
The Commission is planning even now to delete it from the Financial Regulation .
That would be precisely the wrong signal .
We urge the Commission to reconsider such a move .
What is wrong with the present disciplinary procedures is that , of necessity , they lead to huge conflicts of interest .
In the case of senior officials , the College of Commissioners decides whether or not disciplinary proceedings should be instituted and it is the Commission which passes the final judgement , at the proposal of a disciplinary board on which senior officials have to advise on the fate of senior officials , i.e. colleagues sit in judgement on colleagues .
That cannot work and it does not work .
As long as this system is maintained , the accusation will be made time and again , rightly or wrongly , that proceedings are open to manipulation .
Nor will this change once the disciplinary board becomes an interinstitutional board , i.e. a board of officials from various institutions .
It will only change if the Commission takes up the proposal of real externalisation , as agreed by the House in the vote on the Hulten report on 19 January , in which Parliament called for disciplinary proceedings in the case of infringements of the Financial Regulation to be referred to an external chamber of the Court of Justice or the Court of Auditors so that proceedings are objective and fair beyond doubt .
We even stipulated in this report that the Chamber should form part of the Court of Auditors , with the Court of Justice sitting in appeal .
The report also includes a number of points from the White Paper on the reform of the Commission in connection with OLAF .
And yet I have just heard from some quarters that we should postpone a decision on these points and not take a stand on them just yet .
Except that the Commission wants to implement all the points addressed here before the summer recess .
If we do not take a stand on them now , then we can spare ourselves the trouble altogether .
One last word to Mrs Schreyer : I know from conversations last week with the members of the OLAF Supervisory Committee that the recruitment and appointment procedures for OLAF are proceeding too slowly .
Clearly one reason for this is that the Commission is obviously proving to be too inflexible , despite the fact that , on paper , it has transferred full powers to the director of OLAF in a decision in due and proper form .
I can only urge you to stand by your own decisions and not create difficulties where none exists .
( Applause )
Mr President , I speak on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market . I am standing in for the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee , my colleague Mr MacCormick , who is unable to be here today .
In our Community , there is hardly anything worse than fraud to undermine public confidence in the activities of the Union , and so the views of the rapporteur deserve our full support .
Fraud , of course , affects only a small fraction - i.e. just over 1 % - of the EU ' s total budget , but it is a very serious problem which seems to extend to almost all political sectors .
The EU budget , however , is largely administered within the Member States , and this is where huge potential for fraud exists .
We must also remember that applicant countries , i.e. the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , should be involved in this fraud prevention process for the very reason that such a large share of the Community budget is administered within the Member States .
So far , fewer than half of the Member States have ratified the protocol on protecting the Union ' s financial interests . This process should therefore be speeded up considerably .
Furthermore , some Member States are particularly unwilling to undertake the mutual exchange of information concerning fraud . Therefore it is important for Member States to have a direct obligation to report cases of VAT fraud , for example , to the Commission .
It is quite appropriate to examine the possibilities of creating the post of public prosecutor , expressly from the point of view of the fight against fraud , and this should be done , but even that will be to no avail , if the Member States lack the political will to protect the Communities ' financial interests .
As far as OLAF ' s position is concerned , it is important to protect its independence and equally important for the European Parliament to come to an agreement with OLAF with regard to the conditions on which Parliament can obtain information about its operations .
. Mr President , in the time available , I wish on behalf of the Economic Committee to stress three issues that we considered to be of cardinal importance when we examined the annual report on the Community 's financial interests and the fight against fraud .
First was the issue of definition .
It is the case that the Commission have come under a significant amount of attention in recent years from Parliament and from the European public at large who want the Commission to deal with allegations of fraud , but it is also important that we should know what we are talking about when we define fraud .
The annual report itself indicates that for the first time there has been an attempt made to try to assess what amounts to fraud and what is general irregularity , and I am of the view that it does not help the reputation of our European institutions if we are lax with definition .
It is important that the work being undertaken by the Commission should be expanded because , in a situation in which 20 % of irregularity amounts to fraud , the fact of the matter is that by referring to it as fraud and irregularity , European citizens can often be left with an impression that all of the claims are fraudulent ones .
The second point that I want to make is about the commitment of Member States to deal with fraud .
The fact of the matter is that Member States have a high responsibility here .
They are responsible for administering some 80 % of the EU 's budget and they must recognise that they are , at the very least , partners if not prime movers in attempting to address this important issue , and the report indicates that the performance of Member States has been mixed to say the least .
My final point concerns the accession countries .
We must demand that the accession countries also endeavour to work in conjunction with the European Union and to the highest standards .
Mr President , Commissioner , when deciding here in Parliament whether or not to grant discharge to the Commission , we check that there is no irregularity in expenditure by the administration .
In the past - as we are now all aware - there have been irregularities within the Commission .
Each report by the Court of Auditors also highlights the decisive role of the Member States in distributing Community funds .
A number of errors for which the Member States are to blame occur during the distribution of funds , which makes us apprehensive , especially as a considerable percentage is the result of fraud .
Consequently , it is not just within the Commission that we need to wield an instrument to fight fraud , which we call OLAF .
OLAF is the outcome of the modus operandi of the Member States and the Commission and should take on an objective role precisely so as to get to the bottom of these errors and prevent them from arising .
The EU must use European measures such as the introduction of the euro to prove its European competence to the outside world , because the accompanying counterfeiting industry , to name but one example , is an external matter .
Nevertheless , deeper causes for error rates clearly lie in the different handling systems in the Member States .
Right from the outset , legislative texts are often worded differently and allow perfectly legal but differing definitions of fraud .
This opens the door to fraud .
Just think of the example of the collection of value added tax .
Under no circumstances should OLAF become nothing more than a help desk .
OLAF is not one of your broadcasts for DIY enthusiasts , along the lines of " How can we build a model railway ? "
The issue should not be taken lightly .
Protecting the financial interests of the Union and fighting fraud are a necessity , pure and simple , which call for a uniform instrument which can act independently , preventively , efficiently and as a deterrent , and which depend upon transparent regulations both internally and externally , so that everyone knows where they stand .
I would like this financial instrument to have an additional name such as prosecutor , a broad-shouldered European financial prosecutor .
This prosecutor must be accepted by the Member States , take on an active role and , at the same time , be integrated into the national jurisdiction of the Member States .
I would remind you at this point that Parliament called for an external chamber for budgetary discipline in its resolution of 19 January .
In my view this is a good idea and is not only worth considering , it is indispensable if we are to create a comprehensive area of justice and law .
A neutral , objective judgement will serve the cause and the individual concerned , condemnation of colleagues by colleagues will not .
OLAF is no Big Brother à la Orson Welles , but is limited in its remit by the rule of law .
The immunity of members , for example , will of course continue to be protected .
I call on the Intergovernmental Conference to take our concerns on board .
We are fighting here for technical measures which , hopefully , will not turn into a long-running saga .
We must concentrate once again on European values so that , for example , our money is not misappropriated for the drawing up of military measures .
I know it is difficult to impart ideals and virtue to another person .
But that is where our efforts should be concentrated .
Because worthlessness soon turns into helplessness .
- ( PT ) Mr President , the current year is the first in which OLAF is fully operational .
It needs to be pointed out here that this is a decisive step in protecting the financial interests of the Union , the impetus for which came from this House and , in particular , from the Committee on Budgetary Control and from the present rapporteur , our colleague , Herbert Bösch .
With an increase in staff , with a new structure and independence , all the conditions are now in place for OLAF to concentrate on fighting fraud in an area where the objective and verifiable figures point to a more serious situation .
Fraud and other irregularities in the traditional own resources reported by Member States reached a total of EUR 538 million in 1998 , an amount unparalleled in any other area of Community expenditure , either in absolute or relative terms .
Special report No 9 of the Court of Auditors on the protection of the European Union ' s financial interests in the area of VAT on intra-Community trade points to an even more serious situation .
According to the Court of Auditors , the gap between actual receipts and their theoretical amount is EUR 70 thousand million .
Unlike the main areas of expenditure , which the Commission monitors and on which it imposes a system of sanctions , there is nothing comparable in these two vital areas of the Community ' s own resources .
The Commission , specifically in its recent reports on administrative cooperation and on procedures for collection and taxation , describes a situation which is characterised by the maintenance of a system for VAT collection , which was only intended to be used on a temporary basis but is being used permanently . This system is also characterised by the increasing complexity of the system and by the widespread shortage of human resources and monitoring materials compared to the volume of transactions .
Despite the fact that there is widespread agreement on the need to overcome the problems of fighting fraud which result from restrictions imposed by national legislation , or to the lack of a legal basis in Community legislation , the Commission ' s proposals have not , until today , met with any response and the anti-fraud sub-committee in the area of indirect taxation has found it impossible , in the words of the Commission " to achieve meaningful progress and cannot take the necessary decisions to improve the fight against fraud " .
What is more serious than this is the fact that the Commission ' s reports on VAT collection have been scandalously disregarded by the other institutions and have not been followed up to any degree by the Member States .
Compliance with Article 280 of the Treaty , specifically where it requires the effective and equivalent protection of the Community ' s financial interests will be dead letter unless we overcome the situation of there being a loophole in the law in the area of traditional own resources and VAT .
The protection of the Community ' s financial interests , and particularly those of the taxpayers , who comply , cannot continue to be disregarded when it comes to indirect taxation .
Mr President , I too would like to start by congratulating Mr Bösch on his relentless efforts to turn OLAF into a success .
There are many points in the present resolution which the Liberal Group can endorse .
Firstly - and this cannot be repeated enough - we think that at the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference , a decision should be made in favour of setting up a European Public Prosecutor , which in its capacity as an independent body , will work to safeguard the financial interests of the European Union .
We would call on the Commission to submit proposals to this effect as soon as possible .
Also , the date mentioned in the report is important , in our opinion .
We also endorse the proposal for an external chamber to enforce budget discipline , which will mainly be concerned with examining the financial liability of officials .
In our opinion , it is important that this task is taken from the Commission , so as to take away any semblance of nepotism and such like .
OLAF starts its first full working year this year .
We will all have to wait and see what the outcome of that will be .
Expectations are naturally very high .
One aspect , however , could be improved on , namely the Supervisory Committee , as Mr Bösch calls it in his report .
Everyone has a right to a defence , including those who need to be investigated by OLAF .
We must see to it that these investigations are carried out as independently and fairly as possible .
I would call on the Commission to submit proposals to this effect too .
There has been a lot of publicity lately surrounding the issue as to whether or not OLAF should be able to investigate the European Investment Bank regarding the use of European funding , as well as the European Central Bank .
The Liberal Group is of the opinion that this should clearly be the case as these are European institutions too .
They cannot remain outside OLAF ' s general scope of investigation .
We support the Commission so as to make this possible .
Finally , over the past few years , the European Court of Auditors has become increasingly aware that fraud and irregularities in structural funds are on the increase , whilst those in agricultural funds are still excessive but are dropping .
This is diametrically opposed to the opinion held by the Commission , which believes that fraud and irregularities occur far less in structural funds than they do in agricultural funds .
This anomaly must be resolved without delay .
The structural funds are gaining in importance all the time and form a large area of investigation for OLAF and the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I too would first of all like to congratulate Mr Bösch on his sound report and , unlike Mr Dell 'Alba , I think that Mr Bösch has indeed drawn the right lessons from OLAF ' s annual report which was published late last year .

We might as well admit it , there are a great many money-grubbers active within the European Union , and organised crime no longer concentrates solely on drug smuggling , the arms trade , trafficking in humans , meat fraud , alcohol and cigarette smuggling , VAT merry-go-round fraud and oil fraud , and has not done so for a long time .
They are all forms of crime which cause serious harm to the EU ' s budget , both on the revenue side and the expenditure side .
We may have had a single market since 1993 which accommodates the free movement of goods , services , people , capital , as well as organised criminals , but this single market does not exist - and this is so unfortunate - for police services and magistrates alike .
On my own behalf , I will therefore stick my neck out and endorse all paragraphs of the Bösch report which call for the setting up of a European Public Prosecutor ' s office .
I know it is a controversial issue , even within my own group .
Despite this , I believe that such a European Public Prosecutor ' s office should be set up .
I would therefore ask the European Commission , as a matter of extreme urgency , to meet the request of the Bösch report to add an extra clause to the present OLAF regulation before 30 June , providing for a kind of trial project in which a European Public Prosecutor is appointed from within OLAF who can only act on behalf of members and staff of the European institutions .
I entreat Commissioner Schreyer to give very specific answers to this request and would ask her whether she would be prepared to take any initiative in this matter before 30 June .
Mr President , Mr Bösch 's report deals clearly and relevantly with the problems bound up with protecting the EU ' s financial interests and combating fraud .
Fraud is a scourge as far as the EU is concerned .
I do not know how large a percentage of the Member States ' budgets disappears due to fraud and irregularities .
In my own country , it is close on zero per cent , and I think that what we have noted in recent years in the EU ' s accounts reflects the fact that common funds are not handled so carefully and meticulously as money which the States regard as their own .
Mr Bösch 's report goes a very long way towards representing the positions adopted by my group , most especially in its observations concerning the European Investment Bank and the European Central Bank .
We have a problem in relation to appointing a European Public Prosecutor , whose office we would regard as an integral part of the federal EU we do not wish to see .
We think that the problems highlighted can be solved at national level .
We are quite clear about the fact that these provisions are aimed especially at the new Member States whose legal arrangements differ from those of the EU countries . We think , however , that this ought to be an incentive to engage in negotiations designed to promote cooperation between the legal systems .
However , it is not , of course , by means of the present report that we are to decide this matter and , against that background , I should like to inform you that my group is voting in favour of Mr Bösch 's report because we think that there are clear demands which Parliament is making here and with which the Commission must comply .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to emphasise the point I raised to the effect that , out of the 19 recitals and the 30 paragraphs of the Bösch report , there were only 11 recitals and 6 paragraphs to do with the subjects that Mr Bösch was supposed to be discussing .
The other paragraphs are about something completely different .
Important matters , I do not deny , but matters which have already been dealt with in the van Hulten report and the Theato report , or matters which will be dealt with when we come to discuss the White Paper , the reform and OLAF , with the judgement and the ruling of the Court of First Instance .
I am astounded that Mr Bösch is pleased with this because he was one of the people who thought that Parliament ' s text was fine and that OLAF was entitled to poke its nose in everywhere , though this is not the case .
The European Central Bank was thus quite justified in saying that it was not very sure what authority OLAF actually had in this area .
My criticism of the Bösch report , then , is the very simple reason that we have other instruments .
A situation whereby the Committee on Budgetary Control ' s many reports keep bringing up the same subject is not normal .
Let us take the proposal for an independent Prosecutor .
Mrs Theato attempted to have this adopted as a legislative initiative .
She did not succeed .
The Committee on Budgetary Control tried to do so , and Parliament rejected it .
This is not a proposal for a legislative initiative .
What , then , is the point of harping on all the time about something which is , obviously , a problem area ?
Even though the fraud problem primarily affects the Member States , you wish to set up a special court , ad hoc courts .
You know , Mr Bösch , in the past , in Italy and other countries , they had special courts .
Probably in your own country too , and these were not exactly models of democracy .
So I would adopt a more cautious approach .
I think this report is a waste of a lot of paper .
Mrs Stauner might well write another letter asking why so much money has been spent in order to repeat things that have been said already , Mr Bösch , but which it was not worth repeating .
What is more , many of the amendments seek to remove paragraphs .
We shall readily vote in favour of these because we must confine ourselves to the points included in the reports and it is high time that this practice , which is common to all the committees , were adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control too .
Mr President , Mr Bösch has prepared a good report on protection against fraud .
We agree with the way in which the problems are described , but I do not believe that crime and theft are combated by establishing a common public prosecution service and common penalties and by appointing more inspectors within the EU .
I believe that it is through transparency that irregularities can most effectively be cleared up : complete openness about the budget procedure , complete openness as to who has been involved in deciding upon an appropriation , complete openness about who the recipient of the appropriation is and complete access to all documents for the ombudsman and for the European Parliament ' s and the national parliaments ' auditors and supervisory committees .
If it can always be seen who has obtained what , fraud will be revealed by journalists and a critical public - perfectly free of charge and with far greater preventative effect .
I would therefore ask the Commissioners to promise us that , in future , Parliament , the Court of Auditors and the ombudsman will be allowed to see any document .
What are we not allowed to see ?
What is the ombudsman not allowed to see ?
When will we be given a complete overview of all the committees and working parties , together with their members ?
Will our rapporteurs be allowed to check on any payment from the funds ?
Lack of transparency is the fraudsters ' best friend and makes it more difficult to clarify matters .
It is due to a lack of transparency that the new Commission too will , unfortunately , be concealing fraud instead of bringing every instance of it into the light of day and so deterring anyone else who might have the same idea .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are dealing with the first report sent to us by OLAF and I would like to thank Mr Bösch for the excellent work he has presented to us .
The most interesting parts of his work are surely those which refer to the subject of the report , that is to say 1998 , and OLAF , the body which is presenting its first piece of work .
I agree that this report perhaps prejudges certain aspects which should be subject to further debates in the Committee on Budgetary Control and in this House , but I would like to highlight the positive aspects of its contribution .
With reference to 1998 , I believe that we should recognise that , after having intensified the task of control , which should be initiated by Parliament and which OLAF carries out , the number of cases of fraud and irregularities has stabilised .
Without relaxing our efforts to control expenditure - of which we have shown signs in the past - we can see that this stabilisation has been the result of an increase in control .
We should therefore be pleased about this and hope that this work continues , so that cases of fraud can be reduced rather than merely stabilised .
It is clear that , in fundamental fraud , there are discrepancies between what the Court of Auditors says and what OLAF says .
In OLAF ' s judgement , it appears that it is not in the Structural Funds that fraud and bad management prevail .
It is other expenditure that we should be concerned about .
In any event , returning to OLAF , by means of this report , we should , in my view , ask for OLAF to be provided as soon as possible with the officials which have been allocated to it .
However , I think it is very important that , in this first stage - precisely because we are interested in control - we do not increase OLAF ' s scope of activity so soon after it has begun its work .
I understand that there are and there will be - although we hope that this is not the case - great problems with the counterfeiting of currency , trademarks or VAT .
It is essential that we allow OLAF to continue to pursue its scope of activity little by little and that we expand its role at a later date .
Finally , we should not duplicate responsibilities .
In order to use resources correctly , one body should be responsible for each issue and we should not have a situation where everybody is responsible for everything .
I therefore believe that we should clearly separate objectives and not allow confusion to reign .
At the end of the day " he that too much embraceth , holds little " , as we say in Spain , so if we want to manage control , we cannot all have the same objective .
Mr President , I would like to join the many speakers who have congratulated Mr Bösch on his report .
As usual - and as has already been mentioned - the annual report shows that in 1998 too , an excessive proportion of the European resources was not spent according to the rules .
As usual , most irregularities pertain to expenditure in the Member States and vary in nature .
The irregularities are partly caused by deliberate abuse of the regulations , partly due to errors in the implementation of European legislation or simply down to bad policy .
I would like to distance myself somewhat from what Mr Mulder said on this score .
The fact that so much fraud is being committed using agricultural funds is a sign that something is wrong with the way in which we organise our support for agriculture and this needs to change .
The steps required to fight fraud have been mentioned on countless occasions , including today .
I would like to highlight two .
Firstly , there are still Member States that have not signed the Convention on the Protection of the Financial Interests of the EU .
My own country is one of them and I hereby call on the Dutch Parliament to ratify the act which ratifies the Convention and which has been with the Chamber since October .
In addition , it is also important that steps are being taken within the Intergovernmental Conference to appoint a European Public Prosecutor .
To my amazement , I noticed that in one of the amendments to this report tabled by the PPE-DE Group , an attempt was made to limit the mandate of this public prosecutor , whilst I was under the impression that the PPE-DE was actually in favour of it .
The PPE-DE Group would like to limit the European Public Prosecutor ' s mandate to the European institutions only , while we have just seen that most fraud takes place within the Member States .
The PPE-DE Group had better have a good explanation for this .
We have made a new start with the independent OLAF .
In my opinion , it is rather important for the functioning of OLAF that its work be open to public scrutiny , and for there to be set rules governing investigations , which are available for perusal by Parliament too . This will prevent us from running behind the facts in future , as is now the case with the 1998 discharge procedure .
Mr President , my last point concerns the European Parliament itself .
As you know , the Court recently decided in an initial ruling that OLAF only has limited access to the European Parliament .
I regret that the Court has reached this decision and hope that it will arrive at a different decision in the final ruling .
Meanwhile , however , I would like to make it clear that immunity for parliamentarians does not mean that we are above the law .
If the Court ' s final ruling stipulates that OLAF has no access to Parliament because the rules will not permit this , we must adapt our rules rather than overrule the decision , so as to grant OLAF access to Parliament , including parliamentarians , because , I repeat , we are not above the law .
Ladies and gentlemen , this report is an excellent illustration of what should be done and what should not be done .
As far as we are concerned , combating fraud is more than a priority , it is a commitment we have to the people who elected us .
This principle has been emphasised all the more by the revelation of inefficiencies within the Community institutions .
In this respect , our determination to implement sound management procedures beforehand that are capable , subsequently , of being monitored must be absolutely foolproof .
In order to do so , we must focus on the effectiveness of the procedures set in place , particularly under OLAF .
So , I beg you , please , do not try , for ideological reasons , to come and complicate matters , adding yet more structures and procedures .
This is the reason why we are not in favour of creating a European Public Prosecutor ' s Office .
We must be able to have confidence in relying on the national structures .
In fact , the proposal to create a European Public Prosecutor ' s Department is unacceptable since this requires us to be effective immediately .
In the same spirit , we shall support Amendment No 13 from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , which will prevent us creating a budgetary discipline body just for show .
These declarations of intent are more than anything motivated , I fear , by the determination to establish a European sovereignty on the pretext of protecting the Community budget , which , I must remind you , is made up of contributions from our Member States .
From the point of view of the effectiveness of the fight against fraud , these creations are no more than fresh grounds for sterile conflicts .
In conclusion , I feel that the Commission ' s watchwords must be rigour , discipline and proper collaboration .
I sincerely believe that the rest can be achieved by adhering to OLAF ' s prerogatives , combined with proper cooperation between national and European audit authorities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a few days ago , the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung published a survey which showed that an overwhelming majority of my fellow countrymen were in favour of a more common approach to judicial matters .
No other area attracted nearly as much support for new initiatives at European level .
Other surveys in the past have always confirmed that this applies both to Germans and to the citizens in most other Member States of the Union .
We are therefore responding to the expectations of the people in tabling proposals on how to strengthen effectively the protection of the European Union against fraud .
There are without doubt more pleasant topics of conversation than fraud and corruption , I grant you , but discussing them demonstrates clearly that we are not sweeping this tricky question under the carpet ; on the contrary , we are setting ourselves this challenge , in precisely those cases which affect the institutions of the Union itself .
This is why the Bösch report deserves particular attention and support .
It was not adopted unanimously by the Committee on Budgetary Control for nothing , as I have already explained .
Allow me to congratulate you on this report .
It clearly illustrates that creating the European Anti-Fraud Office OLAF is an important step , but is only a step on the path towards the European prosecutor which I have called for time and again both in a personal capacity and as rapporteur .
A public prosecutor ' s office to protect the interests of the Union against fraud would be the only really effective instrument to counteract the threat from organised crime .
Organised crime has identified the institutions of the European Union as a particularly easy target .
I am delighted that both the Commission and Parliament have included this question in the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has gone one step further in this report .
We want an even more proactive approach and are therefore waiting for the Commission to present proposals for the first stage of a European public prosecutor ' s office on the basis of the current Article 280 and I really do hope , Commissioner Schreyer , that you will revise your unfortunately somewhat wait-and-see attitude and accommodate us here .
Mr President , allow me to refer to what was indeed said earlier but could not be answered .
My question is to Mr Dell 'Alba ; could the honourable Member explain what I , as chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , allegedly blocked for weeks .
I require an answer and I should like it recorded in the minutes .
Mrs Theato , you know perfectly well what I am talking about .
The matter was discussed at length in the Conference of Presidents .
In your capacity as chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control , not in a personal capacity , you were assigned to assist the Conference of Presidents and the President , Mrs Fontaine , in drawing up the Parliament ' s position on the code of conduct for relations with the Commission .
I contend , together with the group chairmen , who have , moreover , disclaimed you , that on the 13 April you informed the Conference of Presidents that on the whole you were in agreement with the spirit of Annex III on the exchange of information with the Commission .
I contend that twenty days later , to the outrage of your partner , Mr Napolitano , you sent a letter in which you said you could no longer agree to this annex .
You mentioned points in German which no one had checked , causing uproar among the group chairmen who thanked you , saying that they would take the dossier back because in effect the situation was no longer tenable .
One group chairman even left the room on an occasion when the matter came up on the agenda one day .
Do not pretend that you know nothing , you know perfectly well what happened .
There are perhaps some of my fellow Members of Parliament who do not know , but I am stating this for the benefit of the House , so that it can be entered in the Minutes : for several weeks Mrs Theato obstructed an agreement with the Commission , thereby putting the President of Parliament and the chairmen of the political groups in an awkward position .
That is the truth of the matter .
I do not wish to interfere in the debate but the issue of OLAF and Napolitano was of course a highly controversial one in the entire House and we are all aware of the problems associated with it .
That has now been cleared up .
Mr President , today we are debating a report which goes much further than the figures on alleged fraud or errors in the Community accounts . It demands that the Members of this Parliament act responsibly .
We must address the lack of moral responsibility on the part of bureaucracies , which was condemned in such a masterly way by Kafka .
This lack of moral responsibility is perversely able to involve people in a labyrinthine quest for their exact legal position and subject them to phantom judgements regarding unknown crimes . These situations have happily been overcome in Europe .
The creation of an effective and transparent office to fight fraud is a task with which all Members of this Parliament agree , and I hope that all the institutions agree .
The creation of an omnipotent mechanism , designed to pursue officials on the basis of secret denunciations , accusations and lists of suspects , riding roughshod over the individual guarantees , statutes and regulations which provide basic legal security for people working in the institutions , is a form of irresponsibility which this Parliament or any Community institution should have nothing to do with , because such a climate of suspicion would only benefit the eurosceptics .
The Socialist Group , which is interested in combating fraud as well as protecting the rights of citizens , including officials , and the construction of a Europe based on the principles of fair play , democracy , proximity to the citizens , transparency , efficiency and solidarity , has presented an amendment to paragraph 29 of this report , which lays down the principle that combating fraud should not take precedence over the basic rights of officials .
To demand lists of suspects , as suggested in the report , would be a form of McCarthyism which is beneath the dignity of this House and , furthermore , it may possibly be illegal .
I would like to remind you that claims have been made that no action has been taken against this type of action and that OLAF ' s monitoring committee , in relation to these appeals , is aware that certain aspects are not functioning properly within this body .
While accepting that , with the dynamic of European construction , the increase in the budget and the growth of the administration , there may be more fraud and errors , we must not fall into a kind of policing paranoia , or at least this Parliament must not .
The immunity which we enjoy as MEPs must not be confused with impunity .
It is important that this report does not simply create a Kafkaesque type of system , but that it also provides a guarantee for officials .
Mr President , I have to depart a little bit from what I intended to say .
I have some sympathy with the last speaker : sometimes the Committee on Budgetary Control gets so involved with the important work they are doing , that they are unable to see the wood for the trees .
I also welcome the presentation on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee and the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee which took a balanced approach to the major and indeed legitimate concerns of the Committee on Budgetary Control about fraud .
I heard Mr van Hulten 's reference to the fact that OLAF should have the right to investigate Members of Parliament .
He has a point and a minority of people in this Parliament agree with that .
But before we embark on such a radical decision , we should look at the history , particularly in the United States , of the relationship between security authorities and public figures and recognise that we could overstep the mark by giving such powers to OLAF .
In the end , OLAF might have the political leverage and power to demand as much money and staff as it wanted .
We should not throw staff , money or powers at an organisation just because problems exist .
Those problems exist and we have dealt with the solution to the problem .
Mr Bösch has rightly dealt with the problem of identifying and prosecuting fraud when it occurs .
I do not agree with all of his report .
There are a number of paragraphs I have doubts about - 14 , 15 and 16 for example , regarding the legal basis and whether it is necessary to involve both national and European responsibility to resolve problems of fraud that affect national states more than they do the European Union .
I have run out of time without saying what I wanted to say but I wanted to respond to some of the points already made .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on a very good report . The very fact that my Italian colleague is opposed to it means that it really is a report of very high quality .
Even though there was a slight decline in fraud and irregularities between 1997 and 1998 , there is nonetheless still a need for more effective supervisory mechanisms .
Reform of the Commission is now under way .
Mr Kinnock has submitted a timetable , and it is now up to us to applaud it .
I am very impressed with the reform plan .
In general , it is both visionary and realistic .
There are nonetheless a number of sticking points , and these are what we ought to draw attention to and criticise .
Parliament has already proposed , in the Van Hulten report , that an external court should be established under the aegis of the Court of Auditors . This would deal with disciplinary matters and help recover money which has been paid out unlawfully .
This idea is one we should stick to , I think .
If such a body were to be established , this would mean that disciplinary matters would be taken away from the Commission .
We have had a lot of bad experience with internal disciplinary councils .
At present , officials who have had actions brought against them by the disciplinary council have colleagues of theirs sitting in judgement over them .
That is indefensible .
Both the ECHO and MED cases are all too well-known examples of this state of affairs .
I also agree with the rapporteur when he criticises setting up an advisory panel to deal with irregularities .
We have , of course , established OLAF to deal with suspicions of fraud and irregularities .
Another panel would serve only to undermine OLAF ' s powers .
I cannot , however , vote in favour of setting up a European Public Prosecutor ' s office .
I can well understand people ' s being tired of all the fraud and therefore demanding that we have a common public prosecutor ' s office .
It would , however , be a colossal enterprise to set up when the problems are , in reality , elsewhere .
In actual fact , there is a need for a fundamental staffing reform .
It is , for all that , only the most serious cases which will have penal consequences .
Ninety per cent of cases will be disciplinary matters concerning negligence or incompetence .
Instead , there is a need for public , internal supervision and for more leeway when it comes to sacking people .
We need changes to staff regulations and to the disciplinary procedure , as also proposed in the report .
I would also point out that I had three minutes in which to speak .
I spoke for only two , but I am very disciplined .
I am happy to let someone else use my time . You should also , of course , be allowed to make mistakes from time to time .
Mr Blak , allow me to apologise officially .
You are quite right , you had three minutes .
I was not wearing my glasses .
Do you wish to add anything else ?
No ?
Well that puts the friendship between Denmark and Bavaria back on terra firma .
Thank you Mr Blak for overlooking my error .
Mr President , this is just the sort of issue which gives rise to lofty declarations .
But I should like to go into a few points which , as far as I am concerned , are relatively unclear .
Problem number one : every year the media present the refusal to issue a declaration of assurance as an indication of the alleged or actual state of corruption in EU finances .
At the same time , however , both the Court of Auditors and the Council of Ministers grant this refusal to issue a declaration of assurance the status of a mere water-level report , while we here in Parliament and the media see it as an indication of the poor state of the Union ' s finances .
I think we need to amend and clarify the basis of the matters about which we are talking .
Otherwise we shall find ourselves in a situation in which every year we regularly and hence permanently , as it were , negligently cast an air of general suspicion over the state of EU finances , if this state of affairs is allowed to continue .
Problem number two : of course further investigation may show that some financial irregularities are in fact cases of fraud .
Nonetheless , these two points need to be kept apart both in terms of how they are defined and how they are measured , because otherwise they will both be lumped together and this will give the impression of a huge level of fraud which is not justified to that extent .
Problem number three : clearly - and I am grateful to Mr Bösch for pointing this out - the findings of the Court of Auditors differ from those of the Commission as to the extent of financial irregularity which has occurred in relations between the agricultural budget and the Structural Funds .
Clearly there are measuring problems , statistical problems which we must solve so that we know what we are talking about when we start investigations or conduct further investigations .
Mr President , I also congratulate Mr Bösch on his report .
He is the acknowledged expert within the European Parliament and , to a large extent , was the architect of the new OLAF .
One thing that is certain to create a stir in terms of the EU is big stories about fraud .
They always get big coverage .
That is quite right too because any fraud is unacceptable .
The figure that is being attached to it is about 5 % of the EU budget .
But there are two important points to remember , which have been touched upon several times here today - and Mr Cunha has just raised them again .
The Court of Auditors does not distinguish between fraud and administrative and financial irregularities ; that is , administrative mistakes and people who set out to cheat the EU of money .
To give you an example , a farmer may fill out a form incorrectly .
That is not to say that he means to defraud .
It may be that he measured his land incorrectly .
And then there are the big fraudsters : the people who , for example , import cigarettes illegally , avoiding tax .
There is a huge difference between these two things .
We need to have them distinguished much more clearly .
Let us not forget that 80 % of the fraud takes place within Member States .
Yesterday the Commission made a commitment to us that they want to cut irregularities by 2 % .
We want to know whether the Member States will follow that lead .
It is clear that a lot of the problems lie there , in particular with the Structural Funds .
To take up Mr Dell 'Alba 's point , the Socialists will be voting against a number of paragraphs in this report , not necessarily because we do not agree with them , but because it is not the right context in which to discuss these points which relate to the White Paper .
Finally , I want to read out a list of shame - Member States which have not yet ratified the Convention on the Protection of the Financial Interests of the EU : Belgium , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Italy , Spain , Portugal , Greece , Ireland and France .
It is about time they signed up .
They have had five years to do it .
Let us see them ratify it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fight against fraud and protecting the financial interests of the Community are among the top priorities of the new Commission .
The fight against fraud includes activities such as preventing , uncovering and prosecuting customs and subsidy fraud or tax evasion , as well , of course , as uncovering and prosecuting irregularities within the institutions of the European Union .
But I am most pleased that numerous contributions to the debate have stated that we need to make a distinction between financial irregularity and fraud .
When we talk of the Court of Auditors ' report , this covers the whole spectrum of financial irregularities .
We are talking here of the UCLAF or OLAF report on fraud , i.e. deliberate damage to the financial interests of the European Union .
The report before you , which is the subject of Mr Bösch ' s report , is the last report drawn up by UCLAF on the fight against fraud in 1998 .
Although UCLAF only had 120 employees at the time , this annual report illustrates the considerable success of their work , in my view .
There were 5,318 cases of suspicion of irregularity or fraud investigated by UCLAF in 1998 , in cooperation with the Member States , and around 20 % of these cases were classed as fraud following the investigation .
I should also point out in connection with the question as to why the findings in the Court of Auditors ' report are different , that it has been ascertained that the number of irregularities is falling in the area of agricultural policy , while it is clearly highlighted here that regulations as to which cases of fraud or suspicion must be reported to the Commission differ from one Member State to another , and this explains the difference between the two reports .
Mr Blak stated in his speech that the citizens of the European Union are sick and tired of fraud .
Unfortunately , I must point out that duty- or tax-free cigarettes still sell like hot cakes and tax evasion is often regarded as a national pastime .
In this respect , we face a situation in which we must acknowledge that we cannot completely eradicate fraud which damages the European Union 's financial interests .
We must of course do everything within our power to fight customs offences and offences in connection with subsidies and taxation which damage the Community ' s financial interests .
I should like briefly to go into the individual proposals in the Bösch report which now come within a wider context ; this applies , for example , to the proposal on disciplinary procedures or the chamber at the European Court of Auditors .
The Commission explained in its statements on Parliament ' s demands in connection with the 1998 discharge procedure that it did not think that the right way forward was to call in a chamber of the Court of Auditors or the Court of Justice to issue orders in disciplinary proceedings against employees on the grounds of irregularities in connection with the budget , because the European Treaties had granted each of these bodies its own specific remit .
It is precisely the European Court of Justice to which employees can take recourse if they wish to appeal against a judgement in disciplinary proceedings .
As a result , such a move cannot be reconciled with the present Treaties .
The Commission therefore decided to take up the proposals contained in last year ' s independent experts ' report , which are extremely comprehensive and relate to overall financial management , fraud prevention and disciplinary procedures .
The Commission explained that it also shared Parliament ' s view that confidence in the objectivity of disciplinary proceedings would be enhanced by involving an outside agency .
It explained this in its White Paper tabled on 1 March and will also make detailed proposals on reforming disciplinary law in the paper on the overall future disciplinary procedure to be published by the Commission in October .
Naturally we shall include Parliament ' s considerations in the overall procedure and in our proposals during discussions .
It was rightly pointed out in numerous debates and in the report that good cooperation and the involvement of the Member States are essential if the fight against fraud to the detriment of the financial interests of the European Community is to be efficient .
Article 280 of the Amsterdam Treaty also makes this clear .
The complaint was also rightly voiced that the corresponding agreement between the Member States has only been ratified by a few Member States .
I should like to thank all the speakers who wrote home calling for the necessary steps to be taken at long last .
OLAF , the European Anti-Fraud Office , is itself working intensively with the Member States and , in certain areas , with other countries , in order to conclude cooperation agreements .
Since the UCLAF report was filed , the European Anti-Fraud Office OLAF has succeeded , for example , in concluding an agreement with the Anti-Mafia in Italy , the aim being to achieve good cooperation at all levels and with all organisations dedicated to fighting fraud .
A conference on this subject is to be held in Ancona at the end of the week .
The Commission welcomes the fact that some enlargement countries are already taking steps to set up and activate structures similar to those set up by the European Anti-Fraud Office .
In Poland , for example , it has been decided to set up a Polish OLAF .
I should like briefly to go into the subject of " What happens next in the legislative area ? " and point out that the Commission has proposed for the Intergovernmental Conference , which is responsible for revising the Treaties , that the present system for protecting the financial interests be supplemented by a legal basis creating a European Public Prosecutor and allowing provisions on the criminal prosecution of cross-border fraud to be adopted .
The Member States have indicated that they will not amend the Treaty in this area .
However , the Commission does not intend to give up on this and we are continuing to refine this proposal and will ensure that it is on the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference .
I should like to comment briefly on the complaints filed by the Commission against the European Central Bank and the European Investment Bank .
The aim is to implement precisely what was introduced into the OLAF regulation by the European Parliament , namely that OLAF is responsible for fighting fraud in all the institutions of the European Community .
Unfortunately , neither bank has made a move over recent weeks .
They too have probably been waiting for the outcome of the litigation pending as the result of the proceedings instituted by a number of members against the amendment of the European Parliament ' s Rules of Procedure .
I think that the summary procedures of the Court of First Instance have in fact made it clear that what is at issue is not the legal bases for OLAF - in this respect neither bank can withdraw or hide behind this - the issue is , of course , the need to safeguard the independence of the institutions .
Not that this was ever disputed for the European Central Bank .
Of course , the other issue is that it needs to be made clear that the immunity of members is a democratic achievement and cannot be interfered with under any circumstances .
I should like to thank you for calling for account to be taken of the principles of the rule of law in all procedures , including the work of OLAF .
I think that the new director of OLAF defends this view very vigorously , including in a personal capacity .
We shall have the opportunity of debating other reports on the subject of fighting fraud this year .
The OLAF Supervisory Committee , which monitors the independence of OLAF , will soon submit its report , which we shall also have the opportunity to debate .
I should point out that the Commission is currently working on a fundamental strategy paper on the fight against fraud .
This too will certainly lead to further intensive and fruitful debate .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bösch , for his report and , above all , I should also like to thank the House for supporting the introduction and the work of OLAF so unwaveringly .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 p.m. )

Vote
Madam President , in order not to delay a decision on this regulation , the Commission is ready to accept Amendment No 1 on commitology .
However , I regret to have to inform you that the Commission cannot agree to Amendment No 2 .
The Commission proposes an amount of EUR 850.5m as part of a comprehensive package for the programming of heading IV to take account of the commitments made for the Balkans .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Report ( A5-0115 / 2000 ) by Mrs Jeggle , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Commission proposals on the prices for agricultural products ( COM ( 2000 ) 77 - C5-0121 / 2000 à C5-0126 / 2000 - 2000 / 0045 ( CNS ) à 2000 / 0050 ( CNS ) )
( In successive votes , Parliament adopted the six legislative resolutions )
Report ( A5-0124 / 2000 ) by Mrs Schierhuber , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1251 / 1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops to include flax and hemp grown for fibre ( COM ( 1999 ) 576 - C5 ­ 0280 / 1999 - 1999 / 0236 ( CNS ) ) and on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in flax and hemp grown for fibre ( COM ( 1999 ) 576 - C5 ­ 0281 / 1999 - 1999 / 0237 ( CNS ) )
Madam President , the following problem has arisen in connection with the report by Mrs Schierhuber now being put to the vote : the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European United Left filed a motion for a split vote on a number of points .
However , for some technical reason , the services did not receive it .
Now we have the following problem : either you now allow an oral motion for a split vote on the article in question during the voting procedure and we vote today or , if that is not possible , then I move that we postpone the vote until tomorrow .
The services have , however , said that we have a tightly-packed voting programme tomorrow , so that it would perhaps make sense to vote today .
We would be happy to vote .
The vote is not the problem , the problem is that you did not receive the motion for a split vote in time .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , indeed , I checked the situation : it was only this morning that we received the request for split voting , which was therefore not within the time limits set by our own rules .
In Parliament we have certain rules that are applicable to everyone .
They must be observed , and I cannot make any exceptions .
I must be frank and tell you that , even though I appreciate the problem .
We shall then proceed to the vote , unless you are going to propose postponing the vote , which is a proposal I would , of course , put to the vote .
Madam President , in that case - I understand your position - I should like to move that we postpone the vote until tomorrow or Thursday .
I would like to hear the opinion of our rapporteur , Mrs Schierhuber .
Madam President , I am sorry that the Socialists ' voting list was not received by the services in time .
I should like to state unequivocally that I personally , as rapporteur , have no problem in accepting this split vote , even during today ' s vote , and it would be good if we could vote today because , as you know , the Council of Agricultural Ministers is meeting today and tomorrow and it would be good if the agricultural ministers knew what we had decided here .
Unfortunately , if we vote tomorrow , it will be too late .
Mrs Schierhuber , let us be clear on this .
Personally speaking I would not have any objection to split voting either , but , once again , there are rules , and I cannot make exceptions .
This would establish a perfectly dreadful precedent and then there would no longer be any rules to govern the tabling of split voting requests .
You have just expressed your view to the effect that you prefer to have the vote today .
I shall give Mr Goepel the floor and then we shall proceed to vote on Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf ' s proposal to postpone the vote until tomorrow morning or Thursday morning .
Madam President , I should like to explain on behalf of my group that we too have nothing against this oral amendment and I should like to support Mrs Schierhuber again here .
The Council of Agricultural Ministers is waiting for our decision and a postponement would not be a good idea .
( Parliament rejected the proposal to postpone the vote )
Following the vote on legislative proposal No 1 and adoption of the Commission proposal as amended
Madam President , I should like to ask the Commission if it has changed its opinion in the last twelve hours on the proposed amendments adopted by a large majority in the Committee on Agriculture .
Mrs Schreyer , can you give our rapporteur an answer in the affirmative ?
Mrs Schierhuber , the Commission has not changed its opinion .
The Commission presented this proposal as the outcome of experience in past years .
We discussed a report on the fight against fraud on a previous occasion and that has a direct bearing on this .
I can only repeat that , if the question of the division of land is again discussed in the Council - and this was an important issue in the Committee on Agriculture - then the Commission is of course open to suggestions .
However , as the Commissioner for the budget , I am bound to say that a solution must be found which does not affect the budget .
Madam President , the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are also very keen to put a stop to fraud in all areas in the Union .
We still do not have any right of codetermination in agriculture , which is why our only option is to refer this report back to committee and I urge the House to vote in favour of my motion .

Our rapporteur , Mrs Schierhuber , proposes referral to committee .
Is there anyone who wishes to speak in favour of referral to committee ?
Madam President , exactly the same applies to this second decision as what you said for the first decision .
Two proposed amendments in this second file are of fundamental importance to the Committee on Agriculture , namely Amendments Nos 28 and 29 .
I therefore again ask the Commission if it has perhaps revised its opinion here .
Madam President , my colleague Mr Fischler made a statement on this yesterday .
The Commission has not changed its position .
Madam President , in that case may I again ask the House to vote to refer the report back to committee .
( Parliament decided to refer the second part of the report to committee )
Report ( A5-0116 / 2000 ) by Mr Bösch , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the 1998 annual report by the European Commission on protecting the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud ( COM ( 1999 ) 590 - C5-0058 / 2000 - 2000 / 2032 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) EXPLANATIONS OF VOTES
Rothley report ( A5-0130 / 2000 )
Madam President , I voted for this European Parliament directive regulating insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles which may injure citizens who come from States other than the State in which they are insured , but I would have liked the report to have been more audacious .
Many pensioners , with whom I often discuss matters in Italy , say to me " Mr Fatuzzo , I have had a serious car accident .
I was the victim of a road accident .
The insurance company asked me my age , and when I replied that I was 80 years old , they said ' You are worthless , you count for nothing , and so we are not going to give you any compensation . ' "
Now , it does not seem right to me for a person who is 70 or 80 years old to be considered worthless , and I therefore call for care to be taken that morally acceptable payments are made when the victims of road accidents are elderly .
- The proposal for this directive deals with situations in which a traffic accident occurs in the country of residence of the person causing the accident or in a third country .
The objective of this directive is to ensure that the injured party has a right of action against the insurer of the person who caused the accident .
We must remember that we live in the European Union where the free movement of goods , persons , services and capital is in operation .
This directive which streamlines the issue of civil liability in respect of accidents involving motor vehicles is a logical extension to directives which have been put in place over the last 13 years to complete the European Single Market .
It is only right and proper where there is a system of wholesale freedom of movement of persons and cross-border traffic that a streamlined and structured procedure is in operation so that recourse is available to injured parties in the case of accidents .
To that end every insurance undertaking operating within the European Union must now appoint a representative within each Member State to be responsible for settling claims on its behalf if an accident occurs involving an EU national .
This proposal would also involve information centres being set up so as to enable victims to identify appropriate claim representatives .
A compromise has been reached between the institutions at a recent Conciliation Committee meeting which was held last March .
The most complex problem concerns the directive 's territorial application .
This matter is now resolved .
The directive will apply to accidents involving nationals of a Member State of the Union on Union territory or in any third country operating the Green Card system .
The Conciliation Committee has also agreed to enable Member States to retain and implement more favourable arrangements in respect of the victim than the provisions required so as to ensure compliance with this directive .
I fully support this proposal and would like to commend Mr Rothley for his work in bringing these proposals to this stage .
The European Union , as a result of the Treaty of Amsterdam , has greater powers to bring forward legislation in the field of consumer rights .
This legislation governing the issue of civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles and accidents in Europe will ensure that the rights of the 370 million consumers in Europe will be enhanced in the case of accidents taking place within any of the territories of the European Union .
- I welcome my Socialist colleague , Willi Rothley 's recommendation on protecting motorists abroad .
We are sadly all too familiar with the high figures of road accidents across Europe .
As many as 500 000 drivers in the European Union are victims of road accidents abroad every year .
This is 500 000 too many .
We must put safety first and ensure that as much as possible is done to protect our citizens whilst travelling abroad .
The proposal extends current EU directives on the handling of motor insurance claims to cover cases where a person visiting another Member State is the victim of an accident caused by a resident of that country .
Every insurance company will , therefore , need to appoint a representative in each Member State .
The European Parliament has gone even further , calling for cover for accidents which take place in non-EU countries , provided that the vehicles involved are registered in the EU .
Under the compromise , the directive will apply to such accidents in a certain number of countries outside the European Union .
Thousands of British holidaymakers travel by car or hire cars every year in France , Spain , Portugal and many other countries in Europe .
Surely we owe all of our citizens the right to ensure that things are made as easy as possible for those involved in car accidents abroad and for their families .
This is not about high-and-mighty insurance companies hindering claims , it is about the European Parliament driving forward a lifeline for our citizens .
For my own constituents and for all of Europe 's citizens , I give the green light to this proposal .
Martínez Martínez report ( A5-0114 / 2000 )
Madam President , I also voted for the measure tabled by Mr Martínez Martínez confirming aid for development cooperation with South Africa , but , also in this case , with some reserves .
Why do we not make one of our inspectors responsible , one of our Commissioners , whenever - every year - we give financial aid to South Africa ?
Why do we not monitor , firstly , the use to which this financial aid is put , and , secondly , the human rights situation in South Africa ?
The situation is not , of course , as bad as it was - there have been improvements - but even I have received news of all sorts of appalling acts of delinquency perpetrated in South Africa as well as elsewhere .
We should take this into account whenever we provide aid to any third countries , including South Africa .
Madam President , the situation in South Africa is difficult - and it is by no means an easy country to run .
Yet South Africa presents itself as a beacon of hope in an otherwise turbulent continent .
We should therefore be doing everything possible to assist the economic , social and democratic development of that country .
That is why I regret that the Council proposes only EUR 787.5 million for South Africa , which is effectively a 10 % cut on the amounts we agreed five years ago .
Parliament , in its Amendment No 2 , proposes that we give EUR 885.5 million to South Africa , EUR 98 million more than the Council .
EUR 98 million is not an insignificant sum of money in South African terms .
In terms of the European budget it is not something we would struggle to find .
I would urge that we be generous to South Africa , that the Council finds this EUR 98 million , does not go to conciliation but accepts Parliament 's amendments and gets on with implementing this new regulation with South Africa .
Thank you , Mr Martin .
In future , I shall ensure that the Commission remains in attendance during explanations of votes .
They may then hear some interesting information .
The most scandalous aspect of what they are daring to call an agreement on " development cooperation with South Africa " is that this cooperation is subject to the trade agreement with South Africa and that the Council is using it as a means of blackmail in order to foist its own terms on Pretoria .
Such cynicism borders on candour : the European Union grants aid to South Africa on condition that it is able thereby to make a commercial profit .
Although Parliament ' s proposals are , financially , better than those of the Council , we have not voted in favour of the amendments , as we do not wish to sanction this farce .
The only reason why we are not voting against the amendments , however , is to affirm our conviction that cooperation between Europe and the whole of Africa is essential .
While , however , it is designed and implemented to profit merchants , bankers and industrialists , it is of benefit only to them and , incidentally , to a select class of privileged Africans .
In these circumstances , " combating poverty " and " achieving development objectives " as mentioned by the Council is nothing but gross untruth that could not be counteracted by any vote here .
Thank you , Mrs Cauquil .
I am given to understand that Mrs Laguiller and Mrs Bordes are also involved in the explanation of vote that you have just given .
Jeggle report ( A5-0115 / 2000 )
Madam President , I voted for the measure tabled by Mr Jeggle on the Commission proposals on the prices for agricultural products .
This measure deals , once again , with the European Union ' s common agricultural policy .
I welcome our action to support farmers , but I feel that we need to change direction , in some cases completely and in others only in part .
For example , this measure does not contain any initiatives to support the small-scale , family-based elderly mountain farmers who operate , particularly , in the furthermost parts of Europe .
This land is increasingly being abandoned and the European Union ' s vast expenditure does not go far enough towards meeting the needs of the farmers .
In future , we must pay more attention to the needs of elderly family-based farmers .
My vote is intended to support the rapporteur ' s efforts but prevent the proposed reduction in the monthly increments for cereals .
The European Council stated clearly in its resolutions following the Berlin summit that the monthly increments should be maintained at the current 1 euro per tonne and frozen at this level for the entire period , i.e. from 2000 to 2006 .
The planned reduction in the monthly increments would therefore clearly be breaking our promise to the farmers .
Given the worrying economic situation of the rural population , further erosion of their income is unjustifiable .
The income of people working in farming has fallen by a total of nearly 10 % in real terms since 1996 .
A reduction in the monthly increments would further exacerbate the economic situation of farmers .
- ( SV ) A transformation of agricultural policy is a prerequisite for enlargement of the European Union .
We Swedish Social Democrats ( Pierre Schori , Anneli Hulthén , Jan Andersson , Maj Britt Theorin , Göran Färm and Eva Hedkvist-Petersen ) therefore believe that the EU ' s agricultural subsidies should be considerably reduced and we welcome the Commission ' s proposal for a progressive reduction in the monthly increases in the intervention price of cereal .
Because the report opposes a reduction in the intervention price of cereal , we are voting against the Committee ' s proposal .

With regard to the proposal for a Council regulation fixing certain sugar prices and the standard quality of beet for the 2000 / 01 marketing year , we would make the following point . The reconstruction of Kosovo is an important issue for the EU and something we wholeheartedly support .
The extra resources required for Kosovo should be obtained from general reductions in subsidies for the whole of the common agricultural policy and not only through reductions within the sugar sector .
- ( DA ) Agricultural aid is a heavy burden for the European Union .
It is indispensable to undertake a radical review of this aid , especially when enlargement to include the Eastern European countries is to become a reality .
I am very pleased that the first step to be taken towards such a review entails a long-term plan for a certain reduction in agricultural aid .
It is problematic , however , that there is not the courage to engage in a full and candid discussion of how our agricultural sector is , in the longer term , to cope under quite different conditions and with a quite different aid scheme than that which is in place at present .
We are forced to reduce aid to the absolute minimum , and we should have the discussion now .
On the other hand , the reduction in agricultural aid should be gradual and carried out at such a pace that there is no risk of EU aid being replaced by national schemes designed to compensate for its disappearance .
It would also be problematic if the Commission were to withdraw aid from agriculture with a view to using the resources for another purpose .
Aid should not be reduced for the wrong reasons .
Schierhuber report ( A5-0124 / 2000 )
Madam President , I voted against this measure on the European policy on flax and hemp .
This is because I feel that we should change the way we support and provide aid to agricultural products in the European Union .
We should start to let go of the policy of giving a sum of money to the producers of a particular agricultural product which we want to support , and endeavour , instead , to reduce the burdens of production costs , burdens which are mainly the result of national State policies and which push up the cost of labour , tying the hands of those who wish to work , produce and increase the number of jobs in their sector .
Basically , we must start to change the way we provide aid to agriculture in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mrs Schierhuber ' s report .
I consider proposed Amendments Nos 28 and 29 to be particularly important .
She rightly points out that any limitation on maximum quantities must correlate with actual processing capacities .
Introducing national maximum quantities as proposed by the Commission would create a system which fails to take account of national processing capacities .
The 50 tonne per annum limitation would exclude many Member States from cultivation in advance .
The aim must be to develop a flexible system which also takes account of regional sales potential , thereby allowing all Member States to cultivate on an equal footing .
. ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats ( Pierre Schori , Anneli Hulthén , Jan Andersson , Maj Britt Theorin , Göran Färm and Ewa Hedkvist Petersen ) believe that the EU ' s agricultural aid ought to be considerably reduced and we are therefore also opposed to aid for hemp production .
Furthermore , the mechanisms for supervising the cultivation of hemp are problematic because it is not possible , with the naked eye , to distinguish hemp grown for fibre from hemp grown for the production of drugs .
It is , therefore , difficult to guarantee that there is no cultivation of hemp for the purpose of manufacturing drugs .
We therefore believe that hemp production ought not to be promoted through increased aid , and we are abstaining from voting on Mrs Schierhuber ' s report .
.
( SV ) Regarding the proposal for a Council regulation ( EC ) No 1251 / 1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops to include flax and hemp grown for fibre , we would state the following . As liberals , we believe that agricultural policy should be adjusted to the market and de-bureaucratised .
If Parliament is serious about eastward enlargement , there must be a drive extensively to cut back on the costs of agriculture .
All direct forms of support for agricultural production ought gradually to be abolished .
Bösch report ( A5-0116 / 2000 )
Mr President , I have taken the floor for the last time to declare , once again , that it was with no reservations that I voted against the Bösch report on the 1998 report on the fight against fraud .
This is not because I do not approve of fighting all types of fraud - of course I do !
Naturally I support this fight . However , I feel that in order to genuinely fight fraud in the European Union we need to change Europe ' s expenditure system .
The same report states that these EUR 1 019 million which have disappeared as a result of fraud are only the tip of the iceberg .
Now , we know that 10 % of an iceberg is visible but the other 90 % is underwater and therefore hidden .
Therefore , the European Union is being defrauded of something in the region of EUR 10 000 million .
It is absolutely essential that we change the way we spend our money .
Madam President , you have just congratulated the rapporteur on his work .
I do not see what reason there is to congratulate him as many of his original paragraphs have been dropped , particularly because of his own Group which , in its wisdom , decided to table a great many amendments to delete sections , and these were adopted .
These particularly concerned all the sections to do with the White Paper .
Consequently , many amendments which went beyond the report and the content of the report that Mr Bösch was supposed to be drawing up have been dropped .
I therefore ask the following question : why did we waste money making Mr Bösch draw up texts that have nothing to do with his work and which Parliament has , quite rightly , rejected .
You can discuss the matter with Mrs Stauner , who is very interested in other people ' s reports , and whom you should really meet , and ask her if she is not interested in knowing why the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control are undertaking work which has nothing to do with their assigned tasks .
All honour and tribute , then , to the wisdom of this Parliament for restoring order .
- ( DA ) We have voted today in favour of Mr Bösch ' s report on the more effective combating of fraud and irregularities involving EU resources .
Even though there was a slight decline in fraud and irregularities between 1997 and 1998 , there is still a great need for more effective supervisory mechanisms .
Mr Kinnock ' s reform plan is , on the whole , both visionary and realistic .
There are , however , a few sticking points .
Parliament has already proposed , in the Van Hulten report , that an external court should be established under the aegis of the Court of Auditors , part of whose task would be to deal with disciplinary matters and which would help recover money which had been paid out wrongly .
If such a body were to be established , this would mean that disciplinary procedures would be taken away from the Commission .
We have had a lot of bad experiences with the internal disciplinary council .
At present , officials who have had actions brought against them by the disciplinary council have colleagues of theirs sitting in judgement over them .
That is indefensible .
Both the ECHO and MED cases are all too well-known examples of this state of affairs .
We ought likewise to criticise the proposal in the white paper to the effect that an advisory panel should be set up to deal with irregularities .
We have established OLAF to deal with suspicions of fraud and irregularities .
Another panel would serve only to undermine OLAF ' s powers .
We have voted against establishing a European public prosecutor ' s office .
It would be a colossal enterprise to set up when the problem , in reality , lies elsewhere .
In actual fact , there is more need for a fundamental staffing reform .
It is , for all that , only the most serious cases which will have penal consequences .
Ninety per cent of cases will be disciplinary matters concerning negligence or incompetence .
Instead , there is a need for public , internal supervision and for more leeway when it comes to sacking people .
We need changes to staff regulations and to the disciplinary procedure , as also proposed in the report .
- The British Conservatives abstained on the Bösch report overall because we are unhappy with the concept of a European Public Prosecutor , believing that this could well lead to corpus juris .
We were also unhappy with the references to VAT made within the report .
- ( FR ) I abstained from the vote on the resolution on protecting the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud .
I did not wish to vote against the resolution since I fully share the rapporteur ' s objectives of intensifying the combating of fraud against the financial interests of the Community .
I did not vote , however , because of the establishment of a new control body .
The Community is not going to achieve the desired goal by creating a tangled multiplicity of such bodies .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
The next item is the report ( A5-0117 / 2000 ) by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down rules for the prevention and control of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( COM ( 1998 ) 623 - C4-0025 / 1999 - 1998 / 0323 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , our discussion today on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies , transmissible diseases which include BSE or scrapie , is one of the many follow-up reports or one of the follow-up discussions to the final BSE report and I think that it is also of great interest to the visitors in the gallery .
We have a report here before us which the Commission promised together with its final report on the 1997 BSE report at Parliament ' s request .
It has now presented it .
We have drafted a report on it , although not as quickly as we would otherwise have done , due to the break last year .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and Mr Böge have drafted opinions on it .
In other words , we have been able to keep the BSE team going well .
I should like to tell you briefly how I , as rapporteur for the committee responsible , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , assess the proposal .
The Commission ' s proposal is a good one ; like so much of what the Commission has presented on BSE and follow-up problems and has satisfied us in previous years , we are also satisfied with this proposal but , like most things , it still has room for improvement , Mr Byrne .
I said that your proposal on BSE testing had room for improvement and I say so again here today .
The involvement of the European Parliament certainly needs to be improved .
We must ensure that the European Parliament can act in the codecision procedure as the real guarantor of consumer and health protection in the European Union .
Only then will we have a high standard and only then will you be able to work in proper collaboration with us , because the Council of Ministers , the individual Agricultural Ministers have not exactly been at the vanguard of the movement over recent years , as we here in the House are only too aware .
It is also important , and here too another proposal needs improvement , for us to hold further discussions on the rapid BSE tests .
You tabled a proposal after this TSE proposal which you then needed to adjust , but the proposal is still inadequate .
If we are to be able to make a real appraisal of the BSE situation in the Member States , we must make it clear that fallen stock are also to be tested for human health safety in a screening process .
So far you have presented no proposal on this .
What we also need , and we have tried to achieve this in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , is to strengthen the Member States ' obligation to inform the Commission and to give the Commission information and data on incidents in their countries , on BSE problems or on suspicious circumstances .
Here too we need to take the Member States to task more .
Here , too , I repeat : mistrust is always shown of the Member States , including my own , and rightly so .
Mr Böge rightly pointed out - as I am sure he will again in his presentation - that we need a Community definition of geographical areas .
The definition here is clearly inadequate and the Commission must explain - and I call on you to do so Mr Byrne - how it intends to deal with derogations for cosmetics , pharmaceuticals and other medicinal products .
I am convinced of the need for the Commission to make proposals in order to close any loopholes in current legislation .
Allow me to make a few comments on the proposed amendments and then , thanks to the speaking time for my group , I shall still have time for a comment at the end of the debate .
I agree with nearly all the proposed amendments , but there are some and here I would ask how you evaluate them , Mr Byrne .
This applies in particular to proposed Amendment No 50 , which includes cat food in the proposal tabled by Mr Böge , who I know takes a very careful approach to everything .
But you have said that you have a problem with cat food .
Please say something about the risk of infection from cats .
Mrs Attwooll and others have proposed a number of amendments , specifically Amendments Nos 53 , 54 and 55 .
These proposed amendments limit the present proposal and do not represent any improvement , not even for the situation in the United Kingdom , which I would have understood .
For example , no distinction is made between breeding and fattening ; that is a completely inadequate proposal .
I sympathise with the suggestion in the second part of proposed Amendment No 56 that certain materials should be removed if a Member State has a specific and efficient system , but I must also say unequivocally that , at the present stage of the discussion on special risk materials , it is a dangerous signal to Member States such as my own , which are very reticent .
Allow me to repeat quite clearly : the repercussions on the Member States have obviously been overestimated by some members in the House .
In countries which have a good , operational system and a high level of protection , this regulation will not cause any deterioration .
But in countries which do not , it would at long last force them to buckle down and give priority to safety and health protection .
That is why I fail to understand much of the mistrust of many members , but perhaps we can clear that up in the debate .
Mr President , I shall have another three minutes at the end of the debate , which I shall use to comment on some of the interventions by the honourable Members .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also welcomes in principle the Commission proposal , which is in line with the promise made by the Commission to Parliament .
I should also like expressly to praise the excellent collaboration between the committees and the rapporteurs .
We pointed out on a previous occasion that it is strange that there are still no common provisions for fighting scrapie , despite the fact that scrapie and BSE have somehow been linked since the beginning .
We think it is important to seek a differentiated approach to preventive consumer protection by achieving an understanding of the facts and without panicking .
In addition to what the rapporteur has said , we felt it was important that the Commission had incorporated the principle of regionalising the fight against TSE in order to reconcile strict measures and a sense of proportion .
I should also like to point out that we feel it is important , in the case of the livestock affected , to have a proper discussion on how data on age can be adapted for the purpose of measures to fight TSE .
I would also add that , when we talk of the possibility of introducing tests , for example in the event of dispute between the Commission and Member States or in the event of dispute between the Commission and third countries , carrying out tests can also help to decide if a country belongs in risk category I , II or III if , for example , certain statistics cannot be organised differently .
However , I will not conceal the fact , Commissioner , that the problem of third countries in general will continue to remain an issue for us , as will the question of including pharmaceuticals and cosmetics .
We also expect the Commission to quickly submit legal provisions on animal waste , on meat meal , so that we can define safety keys , thereby ensuring that there is a future for a responsible recycling system and guaranteeing preventive consumer protection .
One issue will continue to remain on the agenda and that is the difference between some Member States and the majority of Member States in their approach to the question of what is more important : to define risk materials or to remove entire stocks from the food chain in the event of one case of BSE .
Even scientists have so far avoided committing themselves on this point .
Mr President , if the BSE crisis taught us anything , it is that health takes top priority over all other policies .
This is essentially the basis on which this proposal for a regulation has been drawn up and we really must use this opportunity to make a concerted effort to prevent , control and eradicate transmissible spongiform encephalopathies .
We have been well aware of this problem for many years now . Unfortunately , however , we have still not managed to eradicate the disease , nor have we managed to identify all the causes for it , hence all the concerns , restrictions and irregularities in the production and marketing of products of animal origin .
It is therefore essential that action be taken throughout the Community so that firstly : we can effectively guarantee public health protection and , secondly , we can restore consumer confidence which , in turn , will help the internal market to develop and operate properly .
One of the important measures recommended in the regulation is the establishment of rapid diagnosis tests , because rapid detection is one of the keys to combating this disease .
Consequently , these tests , which produce results within a relatively short period of time , will most certainly help us to take immediate and appropriate action .
Three tests have already been proposed , although we predict that we shall see future improvements in this area , together with rapid diagnosis tests on live animals , so that we can monitor better how the whole epidemiological picture of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies is developing in the European Union .
A second key measure is to establish an ongoing epidemiological study based partly on laboratory tests using an established protocol .
The introduction of uniform procedures and truly comparable results from analyses by national and Community reference laboratories will help us to monitor the situation closely and to create reliable scientific data and methods of diagnosis which include rapid diagnostic tests .
It would be a good idea if , at the same time , we monitored scientific progress on the new variant disease , Creutzfeldt-Jakob , which , as we all know , attacks humans and is caused by food from animals contaminated with BSE .
Finally , the slightest suspicion of any form of spongiform encephalopathy in any animal must be notified to the competent authorities so that we can take appropriate action .
I should like to stress at this point , that in my view , we will in fact only eradicate the disease effectively if we destroy the whole herd , regardless of how much this would cost both in economic and sentimental terms .
That is why the compensation paid by the Commission to beneficiaries must be quite substantial .
Of course , it is hard when just one animal out of a whole herd is sick , as it is very difficult to discern if there are animals which appear healthy but which may fall ill later on . That is precisely why we are proposing this measure .
" Prevention is better than cure " , as Hippocrates said all those years ago , thereby paving the way for preventive medicine . This is particularly true today , given that there is no cure either for BSE or for the equivalent human disease , the new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob .
In closing , I should like to commend and thank both Mr Böge , the rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and Mrs Roth-Behrendt , the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment .
Thanks to their cooperation and with the help of all their other colleagues , I feel this is truly a much better regulation , and is a vast improvement on what the Commission originally presented to Parliament .
Mr President , I also wish to endorse and praise the work of Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Böge on this issue and the initial proposals from the Commission .
Safety must be a priority and we all understand that if we are to have equal precautions throughout the Member States , we need a variety of measures in place which have not so far been instituted .
Commissioner Byrne is to be congratulated on moving that closer .
These proposals take us a good deal further down the line in the field of diagnostic testing , in a more sceptical attitude to animals which ought to have been under suspicion but in some Member States were not , and in terms of the general prospect of fallen stock being tested for the possibility of BSE .
I want to say something , however , coming from the Member State which first suffered the full rigours of BSE and which has also , as a result of that , been in the vanguard of cleaning up this problem .
We have now had for a considerable period of time in the United Kingdom an over-30-month cull of all animals which have been taken out of the food chain .
We have been able to tackle the problem of the possibility of maternal transmission by also taking out those animals that might be at risk because of their ancestry .
From our position , given the measures we take , we do not see any reason at all why we would need to introduce , additionally , whole-herd slaughter of the kind done in some other countries .
We are being asked not just for a belt-and-braces policy but also to buy a new pair of trousers just in case .
This would cost a great deal of money .
It would not remove a single additional suspect case of BSE .
I would remind those present that , with our additional safety measures , we in the UK are only exporting to the Community de-boned carcasses which have gone through maximum checks and security .
In the circumstances , therefore , there are a number of amendments tabled by a variety of Members in the United Kingdom which I would commend in this debate .
I should be very glad to hear whether the Commissioner feels he can accept that in some circumstances - particularly in view of the over-30-month cull in the United Kingdom - for those countries which are admittedly very high risk but also with a very high level of precaution now in place a certain number of derogations are necessary and would be satisfactory to him .
I sincerely hope so .
Mr President , I would first of all address the Commissioner and say that I naturally welcome the present proposal .
Secondly , I want to congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt on a very good piece of work .
I also want to thank Mr Böge .
I wish to support in principle all the amendments from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Nowadays , we know a very great deal indeed about the living world .
Life is not , however , complete , as it were , but is evolving all the time .
It is evolving not only in a positive way , but also in a negative way .
As time goes on , we are faced with new viruses and new problems .
The BSE crisis is an example of such a phenomenon .
There are , however , also many more examples .
There are therefore two things which must be done .
The first is the matter with which we are occupied at present , namely trying to ensure that we get the better both of BSE and of TSE , which is , of course , a broader concept .
We must make sure that the situation does not occur again .
However , we must also find ways of overcoming similar tragedies in the future .
Such tragedies will clearly not occur in precisely this area but will crop up elsewhere .
This illustrates what the present debate teaches us : that we must have comprehensive regulations for the whole of the common market constituted by the EU .
We must have the same rules , monitored in the same way .
Everyone must be treated the same .
Understandable differences in attitudes have emerged in the course of the debates which we have conducted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and in the party groups and which are also being conducted here and now in this Chamber .
I am thinking of the last intervention .
The United Kingdom has been affected badly .
I can well understand why people there have points of view as to how it might perhaps be possible to make savings .
Allow me , however , to say something which is extremely important . We must never suffer for having looked to short-term economic gains at the risk of long-term security .
There is a danger of the short-term economy ' s taking over at the expense of reason and caution .
To my party colleague , Mrs Attwooll , I have to say that I understand the current amendments very well but that I cannot support them .
That would mean our becoming unclear and sending out false signals .
I believe it is extremely important that when , in this context , we decide about this report , we send out a crystal clear signal about the firmness of our judgement on the issue of food safety .
This is important prior to the forthcoming debate on the whole project entailed in the white paper which has been announced .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , according to a Flemish saying , prevention is better than cure , and I assume that this pearl of wisdom is used in each of our Member States and regions .
I would like to expressly congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt on her report .
My group has not tabled any amendments and is in full agreement with you .
We give you our full support and have every confidence in you .
After all , the proposal follows on from a pledge which was made previously regarding the follow-up committee . This is therefore to be welcomed .
I would like to home in on the following issues .
Firstly , it makes sense to include regionalisation and regional differentiation in the goal-oriented fight against TSE .
If you are in any doubt about this , just ask my Scottish and Welsh colleagues .
Secondly , there are tests for a rapid diagnosis and to identify TSE in cattle .
We , as Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection want to make these methods available so as to improve our monitoring procedures , and rightly so .
As it happens , we all know that these tests are not yet scientifically accurate and that when these tests are applied , we do not know precisely whether infection actually occurs at each stage of the disease .
I believe that these tests are at least heading in the right direction and that we should support the scientific research carried out in this field .
Thirdly , I welcome the requirement to destroy or remove the entire herd on farms where the disease has broken out .
Fourthly , there is indeed a need for additional legislation for products such as cosmetics , medicines and pharmaceutical preparations which are excluded from the present proposal .
Finally , I would like to draw your attention to a number of amendments which actually provide for a number of points to be lifted from the appendix and included in the body of the text .
I think that it is important to bring about more democracy , to get away from comitology , and to increase parliamentary control .
These are cardinal amendments , to my mind .
Mr President , the proposal for a regulation under discussion does not aim to address the problems , as the Commission hypocritically claims , but to cover up the problems which have arisen in certain countries , thereby generalising them and making them everybody ' s problem .
This is why this proposal needs to be changed , particularly where it specifies classifying countries into categories .
If the Commission really wanted to protect public health from spongiform encephalopathies , it would have proposed rules to prevent such risks a long time ago , but it did not .
It would have made provision for the necessary procedures and penalties .
But the interests of multinational food corporations , which have subjugated everything to the rationale of excessive profit , precluded any such action .
So , this Commission initiative only made its appearance once the situation had got out of control - with dioxin for example - and is now endeavouring to show that it has some control over the situation .
The conclusion which we draw from this draft regulation is that it is probably an attempt to cover up the situation .
That is the direction in which things are heading with the classification of countries , which , rather than taking into account the most basic factor , which is the existence or non-existence of cases of encephalopathy in their raised cattle , takes account of other factors when allocating countries to a particular category .
The worst thing about this is that , theoretically , if a member state in which cases of encephalopathy have been reported can prove that it has established systems for monitoring production , it could be placed in the same category as a country in which no cases have ever been reported .
This same spirit , this " lowest common denominator " approach , pervades the rest of the proposed measures , such as the mandatory removal of various organs ( spleen , brain , spinal cord , etc . ) .
Such measures will blacken the reputation of meat-producing countries in which there have been no cases of encephalopathy and will also discredit sheepmeat and goatmeat , since there is no substantial scientific evidence as to whether this meat is sensitive to spongiform encephalopathy pathogens .
At the same time , the proposal to remove the aforementioned organs and tissues is a recipe for disaster for sheep- and goatmeat , which will be impossible to market ; in other words , this measure will indirectly oust sheep and goat meat from the market , demand will be met by other types of meat from larger animals and traditional recipes using offal such as intestines and spleen will be banned .
We therefore oppose the Commission proposal .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity of making a brief contribution to this debate and I congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work .
Parliament has certainly devoted considerable time on behalf of its citizens to addressing the important agenda of food safety , while at the same time ensuring that our farmers can operate within a production framework of traceability which is the only way to fully restore consumer confidence in the wide range of quality food products produced by European farmers .
For this reason , the creation of a uniform legal basis for controlling and preventing the spread of BSE and scrapie is paramount and there is still , as other speakers have suggested , a lack of consistency in relation to the application of the regulations within individual Member States .
I would urge Commissioner Byrne to prioritise introduction of that level of consistency which is the only way that we can convince our consumers that we have a common policy in relation to ensuring public health .
As I have said in previous debates , farmers are the victims of circumstances beyond their control and those responsible for the manufacture of animal feed which puts public health , our entire livestock sector and indeed farm incomes at risk , have much to answer for .
This House must be vigilant in ensuring that it can never again be repeated .
I welcome the availability of rapid diagnostic testing for improved detection of TSEs in cattle and believe , Commissioner , that further consideration should be given to its use as a means of establishing the health status of animals in Member States .
For my country , Ireland , food exports and in particular beef are of paramount importance to our economy and the income of farmers .
I can say that we have left no stone unturned in tackling this problem , including the removal of entire herds where an infected animal has in fact been diagnosed .
May I say in conclusion that farmers have always responded in a positive way to the introduction of regulations governing public health and the health status of animals raised for food production .
Their task as guarantors of food security and quality is , as everyone in this House knows , becoming increasingly difficult .
Far too often their contribution to society has been taken for granted and certainly not always adequately rewarded with a reasonable income .
Mr President , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mr Böge , Commissioner , we have before us a proposal for a regulation on the prevention of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies , which is to say degeneration of the brain in bovine animals , sheep , primates , antelope , cats and even humans , since there have been 53 cases of atypical Creutzfeldt-Jakob in Great Britain , all fatal .
So now we are going to adopt regulations to prevent an epidemic that we have known about since 1986 , i.e. for fourteen years .
It is rather late in the day to react , but even so over the last fourteen years we have done a great deal .
Last month , for example , we decided to stick labels on meat to warn consumers .

The Commission told us that it was impossible to enforce such labelling before 2002 , sixteen years after the outbreak of the disease , but we have done something all the same .

We have had discussions with Mr Delors , with Mr Santer , with Mr Prodi , with Mr McSharry , the Commissioner responsible for agriculture , then Mr Steichen , and Mr Fischler .

We have set up a committee of inquiry chaired by our fellow Member , Mr Böge , a temporary monitoring committee ; we have even tabled a motion of censure , against Mr Böge ' s wishes .
We have heard expert opinions from Mr Dirringer , the German virologist , Mr Picoud , Mr Dormont , Scottish specialists , our Portuguese fellow Member , Garcia , was a specialist .
We have had debates , topical and urgent questions on the embargo , etc .
After fourteen years of discussion , there are few survivors of this war of nigh on twenty years - Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , Mr Cunha , Mr Böge , and myself .
Mr Happart left us and Mr Pagel died .
So I think it would be useful for the more recent Members , in the end , if I gave a sort of debriefing on the subject , quite apart from the problems with the legal basis under Article 100 A or BSE monitoring problems .
The starting point for this business was the 1984 milk quotas .
To improve their milk reference , our British friends drove their cows like some sort of engines , overfeeding them , and , in order to save on the cost of fodder , they fed their cows on meal made from carcasses .
Then , again , to save fuel oil when manufacturing meal , they reduced the cooking temperature , thereby enabling the pathogen to survive .
BSE is the tragic product of the race for profits and the British farm model .
The disease has been identified since 1986 , but nothing much was done until 1996 .
Why not ?
The public could not be thrown into a panic because the Maastricht Treaty had to be sold to them .
So the press , the Commission and the European Parliament all knew about it , but did not say a word .
So when , in March 1996 , the British , via the British Ministers for Agriculture and Health , admitted that the disease could be transmitted to human beings , the necessary measures were not taken .
Why ?
Because this time the reason the public could not be thrown into a panic was no longer to sell the Maastricht Treaty but the Treaty of Amsterdam .
So , met first with silence and then with lies , the epidemic spread and we all know what the outcome of that was .
In the first place , BSE has not been eradicated in Great Britain , and will not be eradicated .
Secondly , the belated ban on meal did not serve to eradicate contamination .
Thirdly , either contamination crossed over to the meal fed to poultry , or there is a third transmission route .
In addition to maternal contamination , there may be transmission via the fields , the grazing land , the grass , and there may be badlands , as in the case of ovine scrapie , where the prion would be encysted and would return as soon as bovine animals were put to pasture there .
Fourthly , Great Britain and the industrialists causing the contamination have not , as polluters , paid .
It is innocent farmers , grain farmers , who are paying the price , in the same way that the farmers are paying for Kosovo .
All in all , then , the directive and the regulation are all well and good , but they are somewhat hypocritical .
We all agree that we need regulations on prevention , we are all agreed on adopting the amendments from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to whom the matter should have been referred .
We all agree that scientific measures are needed , methods to be used in abattoirs to remove the ilia , the ganglia , the duodena , the inguinal , medial , lateral , renal , prefemoral and cervical lymph nodes , but this is not the key issue .
In the BSE crisis , at the moment of truth , when protective action had to be taken , it was taken by the national states .
That is the main lesson to be learnt from the TSE business .
Firstly , protection is always led by the states .
Secondly , the precautionary principle means safeguarding nations .
This is no obstacle to the construction of Europe but , like children making tree houses , it is just a game .
That is what we are doing here , Mr President , all playing out together .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the rationale of maximising profits leads to all sorts of aberrations , including feeding herbivores on meat-based meal .
It is not just the cows that went mad , and as a result , ovine scrapie spread to bovine animals in the form of BSE .
Consumer welfare demands that we use every means possible to prevent and vigorously combat these diseases and their vectors . The action taken in 1997 is now proving even more inadequate as scientists are today talking about a third transmission route .
We must therefore provide ourselves with effective means to eradicate transmissible spongiform encephalopathies once and for all , if at all possible .
This means coordinating and dealing with the sector as soon as waste is used in animal fodder , destroying at-risk materials if there is suspicion , banning the inclusion of animal protein in cattle fodder , demanding traceability by labelling the animal ' s site of birth and rearing , and , at Member State level , setting up the local monitoring systems which are the only ways to guarantee that the campaign will be effective and that monitoring will be transparent , setting in place a fast , systematic screening procedure and also in-depth checks , if necessary .
Finally , the whole herd must be slaughtered if one beast is found to be infected .
This is the price of food safety , but it must not be used as an excuse to cast doubt on the transportation of live animals .
Mr President , in stressing the excellent quality of the work carried out by Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Böge , I would like to dwell on one aspect and take advantage of the presence of Commissioner Byrne .
Clearly , our goal has to be total elimination , but we feel that this would be extremely difficult as the costs of incinerating the large numbers of animals which die on farms are objectively huge .
Consequently , the economic burdens and the amount of technical organisation involved could be extensive , and so could the environmental impact of such large-scale incineration carried out at extremely high temperatures .
In this sense , we ought to ask the Commission - and insist on a reply - whether realistic estimates of the quantities of material to be incinerated are already available to us , whether they have already been made or whether this still remains to be done , according to the various classification procedures of the States , together with an evaluation of the resulting organisational economic burdens , with subsequent referral to Parliament .
It is therefore essential to prevent the adoption of different , uncoordinated paths by individual Member States from causing substantial distortion of competition and disproportion in the treatment reserved for producers .
It is necessary to provide for the adoption of harmonised financial support measures , lay down common organisational guidelines and use applied research measures to develop new disposal technologies with less environmental impact which allow the use of forms of materials recycling which respect consumer safety requirements .
The development of common guidelines should allow firmer , more balanced and , therefore , more effective responses .
For example , we consider that setting up mandatory disposal consortia according to the model already laid down by the legislation of some Member States could be a practical response to the need to limit the economic impact of disposal operations on breeders and , at the same time , thanks to the increase in the degree of social control over the proper use of the service , to the need to consolidate consumer and environmental guarantees .
We conclude that the adoption of the excellent regulation in question will require the development of a combination of initiatives , research and analysis , but also regulation and standardisation , and we hope that Parliament will associate itself with these measures .
Mr President , we have before us a very important directive , aimed at creating a uniform legal basis for the prevention and control of TSEs .
The objective is to gather into one dossier all regulations relating to TSEs to date .
If we are to restore consumer confidence , it is essential that we do all we possibly can at all levels .
I should particularly like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , for the vigour she has shown in her approach to this matter - many of her proposals deserve agreement .
Mr Böge , for his part , has ensured that these views will gain wide support in this Chamber .
I agree that the Commission for its part has done a good job , a job that Parliament can endorse , whereas Member States must eventually be made to understand that this matter is important and that we must gain consumer confidence .
I should , however , like to draw your attention to one more issue : those countries and farms , which have escaped the animal diseases , must also be able to ensure that they will not have these problems in future .
It is therefore essential that the withdrawal period relating to the transfer of animals from one farm to another be increased from two years to six years .
On the whole , we must firmly hold to the notion that within the internal market , too , human health is the most important thing , and that principles of free competition only take second place .
It is imperative that we bear this in mind , particularly when dealing with these food matters , which are all-important to consumers .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to offer my congratulations to Mrs Roth-Behrendt on her report and to thank her for her openness to discussion on the issues involved .
She will appreciate even better than I how far scientific opinion on TSEs has developed .
For example , the Scientific Steering Committee has recently established that it is necessary to regard the vertebral column and dorsal root ganglion as specified risk material in the UK only for bovines over 30 months and in Portugal only for those over 6 months .
That is why some of us seek an Amendment No 56 to allow adjustments in this area on the advice of the Scientific Steering Committee rather than requiring fresh legislation to implement them .
Similarly , certain measures in combating TSEs have already proved effective .
I refer to the exclusion of animals over 30 months from the food chain , the slaughter and disposal of suspects and offspring of BSE cases , a fully effective feed ban and the removal of a wide range of specified risk materials .
Where such measures are in place , in seems unnecessary to impose the more technical requirement of the date-based export scheme and the certified animal scheme to the domestic market ; hence , Amendment No 53 .
In addition , given that there is no evidence of horizontal transmission of TSEs , there would seem to be no scientific requirement for whole-herd slaughter .
While accepting that some Member States may wish to engage in the practice , I would submit that it should not be compulsory .
Indeed , we take TSE and BSE very seriously in the United Kingdom .
We are committed to the safety of the public and to animal welfare .
We only ask that given that we have taken these measures which we believe to be effective , you do not ask to us to take additional measures which have no scientific justification for them .
Mr President , Mrs Roth-Behrendt ' s report seeks to strengthen consumer protection measures but also to extend Parliament ' s scope of action , by ensuring that all issues crucial to the prevention of TSEs are included in the regulatory instrument , not just in the annexes which are not covered by the codecision procedure .
This twofold concern seems to be particularly justified today , as French experience shows .
The fact is that considering the range of measures already undertaken , such as the ban on animal-protein meal for bovine animals , the incidence of mad cow disease in France should have started to decline , but this is not the case , and in fact the number of cases is on the increase .
It is this tendency which presents a problem right now , much more than the scale of the epidemic in quantitative terms .
The truth is , at the present time , there is quite simply no adequate explanation for it , hence the debate which has been initiated on the possible existence of alternative disease transmission routes of which we are , as yet , unaware .
Medical and scientific uncertainty still prevails .
In these circumstances , the precautionary principle must be adopted to the full .
All possible resources must be used in order to assess the BSE situation in the various countries , particularly including the development and systematic use of fast screening tests .
The development of BSE in France raises issues that are not purely medical in the narrowest sense .
This is nothing new .
From the very beginning , it has not been possible to give any explanation for the emergence of this disease and its transmission to human beings , and its spread internationally , without taking the key socio-economic factors into account : contemporary trends in the agro-industry , the subordination of producers and consumers to the dominating rationale of capitalistic profit .
Still today , the way in which the agro-industry is organised , and the fact that it is infiltrated by international mafia-like networks , make the fight to eradicate BSE and TSEs even more difficult .
No public health policy should ignore these factors .
They are , however , discussed only on rare occasions and in little detail by the European institutions , including Parliament .
Basically , BSE is one of those medical matters which , in practical and terribly human terms , bears witness to the acute nature of the choices that society makes , and that is yet another reason why preventing TSEs is a political matter to which Parliament ' s responsibility is truly committed .
Mr President , as an MEP representing a farming area , I have first-hand experience of how devastating the BSE crisis has been to British agriculture .
I can also vouch for the necessity of maintaining effective controls .
You might therefore expect me to be enthusiastic about these new controls on BSE , but I am not .
We already have enough and I believe they are adequate and effective .
This proposal simply adds more red tape and costs to an already overburdened industry .
Of course , I have no objections to other countries adopting measures which match ours .
In fact , it would be helpful if measures already in place in the UK were implemented throughout the EU and elsewhere .
Thus it is not new laws we need - we need more compliance .
Until all Member States are able to assure us that there is full compliance , this proposal , if passed , will simply add to the list of laws which have not been implemented .
In any case , if more controls were needed , we should not be looking to the Commission for guidance .
The British BSE inquiry which was commissioned by the UK Government at a cost of £ 20 million is due to report in November .
We should wait to see what this inquiry says .
Mr President , first of all I should like to add my voice to the congratulations addressed to our rapporteurs , particularly Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
Her approach and hence her report is one we can wholeheartedly support .
This regulation is not a major revolution , but it does attempt nonetheless to afford a higher level of protection , based , moreover , on the most stringent practices adopted in specific European Union countries , such as in France .
I should , however , like to draw your attention to a number of specific points and , firstly , the existence of a third transmission route which is now practically certain .
I think it essential in this case to define suspect animals quite apart from the age criterion .
The age criterion ceases to be justified as soon as we are practically assured that this third transmission route does in fact exist .
The important thing , then , is to have systematic recourse to testing whenever an animal dies of unknown causes .
Systematic testing precludes fraud and makes it possible to offer better guarantees .
The issue of slaughtering herds has been discussed at length .
In both France and Germany the whole herd is slaughtered if a single animal is found to be diseased .
We know that this is not the practice in Great Britain , and that this is a solution which is vigorously opposed by our fellow Members from the United Kingdom .
But is it possible to put the argument of the costs of destroying a herd when a public health issue is involved ?
I think this is not a tenable position .
It is important for the regulations of the various countries of the European Union to be harmonised .
I should , finally , like to talk about at-risk materials , these notorious substances which may present risks .
Once again , in France , a number of measures have been implemented , which have been more or less understood , but I am convinced that it is essential to be extremely vigilant and to apply the precautionary principle .
So this regulation is a good one .
It represents some progress , but it is capable of being perfected rather than perfect as it stands .
It does not raise any questions concerning the incineration of animal-based meal .
In some of our countries , we have stockpiles of such meal which we do not yet know how best to destroy , or which has not been destroyed sufficiently , and also animal-based meal used for swine and poultry .
I think , Commissioner , that these are questions we also have to ask .
Mr President , I asked to be allowed to speak again at the end of the debate - we are not quite at the end .
Allow me to say a few words on the debate .
I would like to thank the honourable Members who have spoken so far , and Mrs Doyle , Mr Goodwill and Mr Nicholson , who have yet to speak , for what they have to say and for the fair treatment we are giving each other .
Those who sat in Parliament during the last parliamentary term know that it is Parliament which has cause to be proud of having got a grip on the BSE disaster in the individual committees and in the House as a whole , in a way which cut across the political divide .
I tried at all times , as chair of the committee , to be fair to all the Member States , strict but fair , as my teachers always used to say to me , and I am trying to do the same now .
Allow me therefore to say a few words on some of the points raised .
Yes , Mr Trakatellis and others are right , Mr Staes .
We still have no tests for live animals .
We still have no tests for very early infection , which is why the Commission is being called upon to keep on working on this , and I know that it is doing so .
Of course we need that .
Mr Whitehead said quite clearly that safety must be a priority , but he would , of course , like the precautionary principle to be applied in equal measure in other Member States and that is the main point here .
To some members who have spoken or who have perhaps yet to speak I should like to state one thing quite clearly : we are legislating here for the whole of the European Union , for the 15 Member States with widely varying safety levels .
We are not legislating just for Great Britain .
We know that the data-based export scheme , that the OTS over-30-month scheme , that all these things are important and are working .
I am the first to recognise what Great Britain has achieved and at what price to farmers .
I have spoken to countless officials and farmers ' representatives in Great Britain over recent years and I know that .
Nonetheless , I must ensure that this level of safety also applies to Italy , Germany and all the other countries in the European Union .
Which is why I believe that this regulation is a good regulation .
When Mrs Attwooll and others ask if we can have derogations for countries which are already that good and if they must still remove the spinal column , then I call on you , Mr Byrne , to table a proper list of derogations to the Council saying countries A , B , C and D comply and are exempt from certain measures .
I will be the first to support it .
But I do not want this to be rushed , as is the case with certain proposed amendments .
This is why I stand by the position which I described earlier .
I think that we really should stick with what we discussed in committee and with what Mrs Doyle and I have re-tabled .
This particularly applies to proposed Amendment No 56 , to which Mrs Attwooll referred .
I will be the first to support this at second reading , if the Council makes the proposal , but we need to list clearly and to substantiate clearly where derogations are possible and under what conditions and for which Member State .
What must the Member State do to qualify ?
And of course I support Mrs Grossetête : naturally , tests must be carried out on animals which have died from unknown causes but that is already included in the Commission ' s proposal on the tests .
Mr President , at the outset I would like to add my thanks to Mrs Roth-Berendt and indeed Mr Böge for their commitment to this important issue .
For some time Parliament , the Commission and Member States have sought the introduction of common EU-wide rules to deal with the problems of TSEs such as BSE in cattle and scrapie in sheep .
The basis of this proposal is that the discovery of any TSE or the first incidence of BSE in a Member State would be covered by common rules which would take effect automatically .
To date , many of the actions taken to deal with BSE have been carried out on a unilateral basis by Members using national measures .
The TSE proposal being put forward includes , among other things , a requirement for educational programmes for farmers , vets and officials ; the removal of a list of specified risk material , an active surveillance programme using rapid post-mortem tests ; and the strengthening of the ban on the feeding of mammalian protein to ruminant animals .
The proposal also allows for the culling of animals and the compensation to farmers for loss of culled animals .
The principle of this approach cannot be faulted .
Common rules will enhance the protection of animal health and more importantly will ensure protection of the consumer by ensuring that the highest standards of disease prevention and eradication are put in place in every Member State and can be activated when appropriate .
These rules will form a blueprint that can be followed in the event of any new scientific information being made available or if more radical action is required .
However , I am aware , Commissioner , that the vast majority of Member States are of the opinion that the classification of countries for SRM removal purposes should be based on an internationally recognised code set out and agreed by the EU and the many - over 150 third countries - under the auspices of the OIE , the World Organisation of Animal Health , which is based in Paris .
Most Member States are uneasy about the approach being taken by the scientific sub-groups and would prefer a more open and transparent system of classification as set out in the OIE code which is recognised and accepted by countries worldwide .
This view was made plain in Council working groups and was reflected in the final draft Presidency Proposal , a draft that is supported by the vast majority of Member States .
For the purpose of agreement and the speedy implementation of this regulation and hopefully to avoid a lengthy conciliation process , the use of common OIE criteria would be appropriate .
Having discussed this with Mrs Roth-Berendt , we have tabled Amendment No 51 to Article 5 as a compromise to this effect .
I welcome the principle of laying down common rules for the prevention and control of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies .
However , this proposal may have negative consequences for countries trading in sheep and this is an important point as it currently stands .
There is a view that there should be separate rules for scrapie rather than the current mix of rules where the treatment of SRM in sheep depends on the BSE incidence in that particular country .
I would reiterate in conclusion my support for the use of OIE provisions to have an internationally recognised basis for classification , a basis supported by 150 countries in resolving world trade disputes and recognised by the WTO .
I make no case for leniency of treatment at all .
The UK would be in class 4 , Ireland would be in class 3 under either classification system , the SSC or the OIE .
The OIE meets next week in Paris to consider amendments to their classification system and consequently I hope to bring further amendments to this regulation for second reading .
Mr President , legislation which seeks to protect the public from a terrible brain disease such as new variant CJD should be drafted to complement measures already in place in Member States , to recognise the stage of the epidemic that we are at and have due regard to the body of scientific knowledge we have built up .
The United Kingdom already has comprehensive and effective measures in place to protect human health and eradicate BSE in our herd .
This is working .
Cases of BSE are declining rapidly .
But most importantly , so far , we have not had a case in an animal born since the complete feed ban was introduced .
That should be happening around about now , if it was going to .
No older animals over 30 months of age enter the food chain .
It is likely that cases may occur due to maternal transmission but these will be isolated and not feed-related , and there is no justification for a return to cohort culling .
Incidentally - and Mrs Grossetête referred to this - there has been recent press speculation about a third possible infection route through grass contaminated by faecal material .
This only applies - as I understand - to animals excreting pathogens ingested with contaminated feed , not , as some newspapers inferred , from animals incubating or suffering from this disease .
I am concerned about the practicality and cost of having to post-mortem all animals for which the cause of death is unknown .
Very large numbers of animals die of natural causes or common ailments .
BSE is a degenerative disease which does not cause sudden death anyway .
Amendment No 26 seeks universally to impose the whole-herd slaughter policy which some Member States with low levels of incidence have introduced in an attempt to reassure the public .
This could well result in the under-reporting of cases , as we have seen in Switzerland recently .
BSE is not an infectious disease that is transmitted horizontally .
Whole-herd slaughter has no scientific justification .
The majority of herds that have experienced BSE in the UK have had only one or two isolated cases .
Most herds in Britain are not closed herds and therefore animals come in from all over the place .
If one of those animals gets a disease , why kill the whole herd ?
Whole-herd slaughter is not an effective way of reducing cases of BSE .
It would cost a small fortune for no tangible benefit .
I hope Parliament , in amending this directive , will do so in the light of sound scientific advice , not as a knee-jerk reaction to tabloid newspaper scare stories .
It is my pleasure to give the floor to a Member of Parliament who received the title of Great Chief of Rangatira , when he led our delegation to New Zealand .
Mr President , I will omit replying to that particular remark .
Can I first of all thank you very much for giving me the floor and can I pay tribute to the rapporteur and indeed to Mr Böge .
As someone who was in the last Parliament I know how much thankless time and effort they have put in since BSE first began in a very difficult area to try and find a resolution and a way forward to help everyone in a very sensible way .
I think both of them not only take credit for themselves but indeed bring credit to this Parliament for the way in which they have carried out that duty .
BSE has unfortunately been with us for some considerable time and I suspect that we have to recognise that it will probably be with us for some years ahead .
We have to try to find ways by which we can control the disease of BSE and TSE and at the same time create the consumer confidence that is needed because consumer confidence has been lost .
With respect to Mr Martinez I will only say one word to him - sludge .
I will say no more as far as that is concerned .
Everybody has problems in the European Union of one type or the other and no-one should try to make or take advantage of the other 's problem .
However , whatever we do , we should not overburden the producer because he has already been considerably overburdened .
As to the argument whether you slaughter the whole of the herd , there is no scientific evidence to say you should .
There are many instances in my area where maybe BSE occurred five , six or seven years ago in one animal and there has never been another case since .
Once we get to the stage where we have a vaccine or some way of identifying or testing if an animal has BSE , then there is an argument for testing the rest of the herd and if there is a trigger level whereby it goes beyond that , then the whole herd should be taken out .
But it would be wilful carnage to simply go in and slaughter good animals in the thought or the notion that BSE may possibly be in the whole herd .
That would be a drastic approach .
One other point : where I come from , in recent years there has been a continuing downward trend .
Indeed , in Northern Ireland last year , we only had , I think , three identifiable cases of BSE and the projection for this year is one or at worst maybe two .
I was listening to what the rapporteur said that if there are clear reasons then she would agree for areas that have low instances of BSE to have certain controls and mechanisms .
That is an important thing to recognise because in my area farmers feel very secure because of the very low instances we have of BSE and because of the strict controls that we have monitored and made sure worked over recent years .
That is perhaps why our situation is much better than the rest of the United Kingdom .
This is an area which has to be looked at in the months ahead - we must create the confidence within ourselves that we can begin to move forward as we begin , hopefully , to see the back of the TSE / BSE problem .
Mr President , I would like to join in the congratulations to the rapporteur on her excellent report .
The report that we now have before us is an example of the kind of issue which requires of us the ability to demonstrate that the European Parliament places public health before internal market considerations .
The EC Treaty - for instance , Article 30 and points 4 and 8 of Article 95 of that Treaty - presents us with both the opportunity and the duty to do so .
The priority is to protect consumer health , particularly against diseases like TSE , the mode of infection of which is not adequately known and the testing of which so far is only possible after the symptoms have developed .
Secondarily - and this is justified by the notion of the internal market - we must be able to restore consumer confidence in the foods on the market in order to enable the market to function with a minimum of disruption .
Both issues are important , but we must be able to show clearly the priority of values ; public health comes first .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has adopted a position that allows both of these objectives to be met .
One important aspect of this view is the whole-herd slaughter on a farm where disease has been discovered .
Even without knowledge of whether any of the other animals have become infected , this action is nevertheless justifiable , precisely in order for the above objectives to be met .
At the same time , we must , of course , ensure that the breeder receives proper compensation for his livestock .
In addition , the internal market must be able to operate in such a way that the spread of the disease is checked , and so that Member States , where no disease has yet occurred , can rely on the Community to protect the animal population of those States .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I prepared a proposal for an amendment on this matter myself , stating as reasons for the issue specifically the above-mentioned prioritisation of values , where public health is the first .
This objective has now been met in the Committee report - in a slightly different , but nevertheless satisfactory manner .
Extending the period referred to in the Annex to the Regulation ( the scrapie-free period ) from two years to six , may be an adequate means of ensuring that the imported animals and processed material are risk-free , and of preventing the spread of the disease to countries where it does not yet exist .
Contrary to the Commission ' s proposal , the report refers to instant tests , which are being used to detect TSE , by name .
This in itself is acceptable , but we must bear in mind that we are dealing with a technology which is continually being developed .
Hopefully , better tests than the current ones will soon be available , and when the time comes , it will be important that the currently approved regulations are kept up to date with the advances in technology .
Mr President , I am pleased to outline our position on your amendments to our proposed regulation on the prevention and control of TSEs .
I wish to begin by thanking you for the excellent cooperation between your assistants and my services .
Due to this thorough preparation I am in a position today to agree in full or in part to almost three-quarters of your proposed amendments .
Furthermore , most of the amendments , which I am not in a position to accept , relate to two issues : the so-called " whereas " clauses - that is the recitals - and whether or not changes to certain provisions of the regulation should be by commitology or codecision .
That is an issue which I have referred to before .
I know it is a controversial issue and I look forward to discussing this particular issue in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development which is scheduled for July .
In substance , therefore , the Commission and Parliament are equally committed to a strong regulation which puts in place a comprehensive framework to tackle TSEs .
I should like especially to thank Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Böge for their huge contribution to this proposal .
I can think of no other individuals who have made such a positive contribution to tackling BSE .
They have both rendered an enormous service to the health protection of Europe 's citizens .
I might also add that this piece of legislation is an excellent example of the good work and cooperation which has taken place between our two institutions and could provide a precedent for the future .
I turn now to the specific amendments and formal Commission position .
Firstly , on commitology , we accept Amendments Nos 6 , 11 , 12 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 and 36 .
With regard to the recitals , I also accept Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 .
However , I cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 and 2 because it is inappropriate to introduce recitals in a piece of legislation which are not matched by substantive provisions in the text .
However , I shall be raising your concerns on pharmaceuticals and cosmetics , which a number of you mentioned , with my colleague Mr Liikanen and I will ask him to address those concerns .
With regard to the articles themselves , firstly , the scope : I accept Amendments Nos 7 and 8 .
With regard to definitions : I can partly accept Amendments No 9 to Article 13 on the definition of TSE suspected animals .
But the inclusion of " fallen cattle , sheep and goats " in the definition cannot be accepted .
It is not practicable to collect , incinerate and carry out a full epidemiological investigation on each fallen animal .
The Commission will , however , be monitoring the situation closely both through the recently agreed measures on random testing for BSE and in the forthcoming proposal on animal waste .
However , I accept Amendment No 52 .
I also accept Amendments Nos 10 and 49 to Article 3 , with a slight reformulation to create the possibility of delegating the evaluation , not the approval , of tests to an external body .
With regard to classification , BSE status : I accept Amendments Nos 13 , 14 , 51 and 58 .
With regard to epidemiological surveillance : I accept Amendment No 15 to Article 7 , introducing the mandatory use of the rapid diagnostic tests in the annual monitoring programme .
Let me add , however , in passing , that we will keep under constant review the scope for increased testing of animals for BSE .
On specified risk material : unfortunately I cannot accept Amendments Nos 16 , 17 , 18 , 40 and 41 to Article 8 , bringing under codecision the approval and conditions for use of rapid diagnostic tests .
I happen to believe that it is essential to maintain the flexibility of the commitology procedure .
Nor can I accept that tests should be capable of detecting infectivity in all products and at all stages of the disease .
That is the advice I have been given .
I partly accept Amendment No 19 to Article 8 , requesting a review of the age limits for SRM removal under a commitology procedure .
I cannot , however , accept the restraint of annual reviews and , in particular , the proposed deadline for the first review which is foreseen for 1 January next , which is too soon .
I also accept Amendment No 20 to Article 8 , which brings under codecision the principle of granting derogations from the provisions on SRM removal in high-risk areas or for taking account of an effective feed ban .
I also welcome Amendments Nos 38 , 39 and 56 to Annex IV .
They mainly propose no longer requiring the designation of long bones of cattle as SRM and suggest a reformulation of the proposed derogation for the removal of a vertebral column under a commitology procedure .
On feed ban , I accept Amendments Nos 22 and 42 .
I can partly accept Amendments Nos 21 and 57 on condition that the possibility of extending the feed ban is allowed , irrespective of risk status .
I also partly accept Amendment No 54 to Annex V , laying down the detailed rules on the extended feed ban .
I cannot accept the derogation for dicalcium phosphate , as this is against our scientific advice .
I also cannot accept the limitation of extending the feed ban to any species , mainly pet animals , only if a risk of cross-contamination of livestock feed exists , as we believe that ruminant protein should be banned for all susceptible species .
I identify cats here in particular .
That is the advice I have been given in relation to cats .
I can partly accept Amendment No 50 to Annex V where it exempts gelatine from hides from the ban .
However , I cannot accept the exemption for feeding cats with ruminant protein from the ban .
I also cannot accept Amendment No 23 to Article 9 , ensuring immediate application of the feed prohibitions , as this amendment does not fully make sense legally .
On disease eradication : I accept Amendments Nos 25 and 28 .
I also welcome Amendment No 24 to Article 11 , but propose to reformulate , providing for " regular " rather than " immediate " notification .
I can also partly accept Amendment No 26 to Article 13 and Amendment No 43 to Annex VII , introducing whole-herd slaughter for BSE in cattle , sheep and goats and , secondly , excluding research animals from these provisions .
Whole-herd slaughter for BSE only , not for scrapie , is acceptable to me on condition of approval of equivalent measures by commitology .
I cannot accept the second part of this amendment as it is in fact superfluous .
I can partly accept Amendment No 44 on condition that the equivalent measures are approved on a case-by-case basis under commitology .
I do not accept Amendment No 27 to Article 13 , requiring a complete standstill on a holding with a confirmed TSE case , as I consider the extremely strict conditions of our proposals are already sufficient , as they require measures to be taken under strict , official veterinary supervision , duly certified .
I also cannot accept Amendment No 37 to Annex II , as the proposed definition is not used elsewhere in the text and is , in addition , inadequate for TSE control purposes .
I should add that ADNS regions are too small and too difficult to control .
Bigger regions which are legally defined may be possible , for instance the Azores , and I refer to what Mr Nicholson said earlier about Northern Ireland .
On the conditions for marketing animals : we welcome the intention of Amendment No 53 to Article 16 .
However , I propose to reformulate the text to ensure approval of the equivalent schemes by commitology .
I also welcome the intention of Amendment No 45 to Annex VIII , but would ask for flexibility to determine the exact duration of the scrapie-free period .
I cannot accept Amendment No 55 to Annex VIII , reducing the protection measures against scrapie .
Furthermore , I cannot accept Amendment No 46 to Annex VIII , extending the ban on placing on the market offspring of TSE cases , for lack of scientific support .
Finally , on laboratory techniques , I accept Amendments Nos 47 and 48 .
Thank you again for your cooperation .
I sincerely hope that this will continue to be a hugely important proposal and that we shall continue our cooperation on it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

Organisation of working time
The next item is the report ( A5-0129 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council directive 93 / 104 / EC concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time to cover sectors and activities excluded from that directive [ C5-0183 / / 2000 - 1998 / 0318 ( COD ) ] .
As President for today ' s sitting , it is my honour to inaugurate a new procedure .
Before giving the floor to our rapporteur , Mrs Smet , we are going to hear from Mr Provan in his capacity as chairman of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee .
Mr President , as you say , this is a new procedure and I hope that it helps to establish in Parliament the importance of the conciliation procedure in achieving legislation to which Parliament has aspired .
I want to say today how much I enjoyed the support and the great help of the rapporteur and the Chairman of the Employment and Social Affairs Committee .
Mrs Smet , our rapporteur , was President of the Council of Ministers when the original Working Time Directive was enacted .
Mr Rocard is a former very well-known French minister and indeed Prime Minister .
We had an exceedingly strong team which Parliament was able to deploy in the negotiations with the Council and I am extremely grateful to both of them . Parliament should be extremely grateful to both of them - especially the rapporteur for all the work that she put into this negotiation .
The delegation also had a great responsibility in this negotiation because we had many difficult decisions to take .
We did not achieve everything that we wanted to achieve as a Parliament , but I think we went a long way towards helping all those people who are now going to be included within the Working Time Directive to see some progress so that they can eventually get to the goal that we were all trying to achieve .
If we take , for instance , the junior doctors , we discover that Parliament originally wanted a six-year period in which to achieve the 48 hours .
That was never likely to be negotiated with the Council , but we were able to make substantial progress from the Council 's original proposal of 13 years .
Indeed , we finished up with a nine-year period .
Only in extreme circumstances will governments be able to go through a procedure to justify an extension of that period of nine years .
The interesting thing in this aspect is that we are making real progress on reducing the time of work for junior doctors .
As many people will be aware , today , many junior doctors are working 72 hours in some countries .
The progress that we are making is that in the first three years , the junior doctors ' hours will be reduced to 58 and over the following two years to 56 hours and 52 hours respectively .
We see that the junior doctors are , in fact , going to get a great benefit from this extension to the directive .
We also were able to clarify the position regarding the classification of mobile workers .
The case was argued that , for instance , somebody driving a lorry for a large retail store should be included in retail-type legislation for working time , and only genuine transport workers are now going to fall exclusively within the transport sector .
That , I think , was another major achievement for Parliament in this negotiation .
We move on to the fishermen who were greatly concerned by the application of this directive to their working life because they felt they would not be able to operate properly within that system .
In all honour to everybody concerned in the negotiation , the Council and all Members of the delegation , they have made real progress and I recommend the outcome of the conciliation process to the House and hope they support it .
Thank you , Mr Provan .
I think we can in fact thank all the Members of Parliament that were involved in this conciliation procedure .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the President , Mr Provan , for his kind words , but particularly for the way in which he , together with Mr Rocard , has presided over and guided the entire process .

I would also like to thank all the delegates , as it would indeed be impossible to find a compromise on a number of difficult and sensitive issues , if it was not for the fact that everyone moderated their demands , and this is what eventually happened . My thanks go to all of you .
The vote in the European Parliament tomorrow and in the Council the day after will provisionally end a decade of European legislation concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time .
I am adding " provisionally " , because although a number of sectors and activities are already covered by conclusive horizontal legislation , the vertical rules are still pending .
The best way to establish these vertical rules is via collective labour agreements , but if these collective labour agreements are not forthcoming , then the Commission will need to take the initiative and propose draft directives .
This has already happened in the case of road transport .
The European Parliament has made its position clear but it appears that the Council is unable to adopt the common position .
This is intolerable , really intolerable , because road transport is one of the key sectors , there are many difficulties within that sector and because so many accidents happen within the Member States due to a lack of legislation and control .
I would call on the Council and both sides of industry finally to resolve this matter .
Since no draft directive has been proposed for inland shipping yet , I would ask the Commission to work on that .
Fortunately , agreements have now been concluded within aviation , navigation at sea and also rail transport , which have been translated into directives . Like rail transport , the sea-fishing and off-shore sectors , as well as the activities of junior doctors , fall within the scope of the directive which we are discussing today .
For the sea-fishing sector , the European Parliament managed to secure a maximum working week of 48 hours , over a twelve-month reference period .
Exemptions are only possible under a collective labour agreement or following consultation involving both sides of industry .
It is indeed necessary to provide for these exemptions , because not only do sea fishermen stay at sea for extended periods of time , in certain countries even 3 000 hours on average annually , they also carry out heavy work at what is by far the most mobile of workplaces .
Regarding junior doctors , I would refer to what Mr Provan said , because he explained quite clearly what we eventually achieved .
The main thing is that those countries that want a transitional period in excess of nine years will need to follow a very demanding procedure in order to achieve this .
The reason why they want to have an extended transitional period and the decision which is eventually taken have to be published in the EU ' s Official Journal .
I hope that this procedure will create a disincentive for those countries because we do not intend to carry on applying the number of working hours prescribed for longer than nine years .
In 1993 , when I , in the capacity of President of the Council , signed the directive concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time , I was aware that the Commission ' s proposal of 1990 did not exclude any sectors or activities .
But at the time , it appeared impossible for the Council to draw up a directive which covered all employees in all sectors and activities .
Hence the Commission proposed to take a separate and additional initiative for the benefit of those sectors and activities which were excluded from the Council ' s directive .
That culminated in the 1997 White Paper and the 1998 consultation paper and communication .
The present directive is the first to be born out of negotiations in a Conciliation Committee within the framework of the European social policy , with the European Parliament acting as co-legislator .
The power of codecision proved to be decisive .
I think we owe our success , the fact that we eventually reached a sound compromise , to Parliament , among other things , which in its wisdom , only tabled a few amendments .
Indeed , had we found ourselves in a conciliation procedure faced with 30 or 40 amendments tabled by Parliament , it would have been extremely difficult ever to reach a compromise .
In this case , we managed to keep the procedure within bounds .
As such , the European Parliament gave evidence of a legislative maturity , which the Council and the Intergovernmental Conference , in particular , would do well not to lose sight of .
Mr President , as British Conservatives , we have always opposed the Working Time Directive .
The idea that politicians in Brussels or Strasbourg should determine how many hours different people work across Europe is , we believe , fundamentally daft .
To extend it to groups such as offshore oil workers and sea fishermen is particularly so .
However , because of the special issue of over-worked junior doctors in the UK , as Conservative MEPs we voted last November to extend the directive to them .
We very much hoped that this would pressure national governments - especially our own - to produce a better deal .
Certainly Parliament as a whole was of similar mind , hence the Conciliation Committee on which I was privileged to serve .
I extend congratulations to you , Mr President , in your former capacity as president of that conciliation group - plus Mrs Smet and Mr Rocard .
I believe in the circumstances we could not have done any better , but those three played a major role in that .
I should briefly like to mention a point made by some of my colleagues from that delegation .
I hope other nationals will forgive me if I mention only other British colleagues , for a reason that will become apparent .
The first speaker in the main meeting was Mr Hughes .
I am not known for agreeing with him regularly but I congratulate him on the intensity of what he said which set the meeting off to a very good start .
He was followed by Mrs Lynne - also due to speak today - who reinforced what was said with great vigour .
I mention that because , when it came to my turn to speak , it enabled me , as a British delegate from a third party , to speak in support , despite the fact that all three parties have many different policies on different issues .
The fact that I could say that on this issue we were speaking as one and it was a cross-party alliance hopefully helped to reinforce the overall message and the will of Parliament .
One of my colleagues afterwards said that point was a powerful intervention .
Certainly it was meant to be .
Imagine my disappointment after the meeting when an official came up to me and said that while I was making those points on behalf of Parliament another Member also from the UK was busy shaking his head negatively the whole time that I was speaking .
That will not have strengthened our case .
It may or may not have made any difference but certainly it will not have done the Parliamentary delegation any good service .
A few weeks later , we did the best that we could .
It will be presented - as you , President , have already presented it - as " nine years " .
But it is , as you know , nine years , plus two years , plus one year .
The UK Government will add that up to twelve years as against the 13 years which the UK Government was asking for initially .
Having only got what we consider minor concessions , we can confirm that , as British Conservatives , we neither support the Working Time Directive nor its extension to any other grouping .
We still support a better deal for junior doctors ; we will still continue to pressure our own government to provide it , but a directive from the European Parliament is clearly not the right way to secure it .
I would like to begin by echoing previous speakers and adding my words of thanks to the rapporteur and to our chairman and to you for the magnificent work you did in that conciliation .
The progress we achieved is in large part thanks to the formidable effort and attention to detail the rapporteur put in to this .
There are three main issues which I would like to concentrate on in the brief time available to me .
In the original working time directive we had agreed way back in 1993 that it would be possible to introduce annualisation of working time for categories of workers , but only where collective agreements allowed that to happen .
The first two points I would like to make relate to categories of workers where we have managed to achieve that progress in the conciliation .
As far as offshore workers and mobile workers in the transport sector are concerned - there was an attempt in the common position to allow annualisation of working time for those workers without collective agreement .
Thanks to conciliation , collective agreement will now need to be the route for an extension to annualisation .
That was an important point of progress .
The second point concerns sea-fishing .
There we have now built in to the directive the principle that a 48-hour average working week over a period of one year will be the rule .
That can be subject to derogation but again only after attempts to broker collective agreements to involve the social partners .
That should be the rule wherever there is an attempt to introduce annualisation and that principle has been safeguarded as a result of the conciliation .
The third area I want to concentrate on - and it is what other speakers have mentioned - relates to junior doctors .
Looking at this part of the agreement without detailed knowledge of the negotiations that went into it , it must seem like a very strange animal .
A four-year transposition period - five years transition and then the possibility of extra time beyond that .
But of course that was to take account of the special difficulties facing one or two Member States .
I would repeat what other speakers have said : for us the period in question is nine years .
That will be the normal period within which Member States will be expected to comply with the requirements of this directive in relation to junior doctors .
That is why the procedure to go beyond that into what we might term extra time is so open - in a way humiliating for any government that attempts to take that step .
I think that in fact we will see all Member States complying with that section of the directive relating to junior doctors within that nine-year time frame .
I am confident , speaking today , that will be the case .
A further important point might have been missed .
The provisions relating to nine years for junior doctors only relate to the average working week .
The other provisions of the directive relating to daily and weekly rest breaks , annual leave and nightwork will , of course , apply to junior doctors after a three-year transposition period just as they do for all other workers .
Those parts of the directive can , of course , be subject to derogation but only by collective agreement so those elements will apply to junior doctors .
The sections dealing with annual leave cannot be negotiated away and it is important to bear that in mind : i.e. the nine years for junior doctors applies only to working time - average weekly working time - and the other provisions of the directive apply after three years .
The final point I would like to make relates to the transport dossier .
It is very important that we get movement in that area in the Transport Council .
Maybe the Commissioner has some news for us today .
There was an agreement in the rail sector that the provisions of the working time directive would apply in that sector so long as there was parallel progress in other transport sectors , particularly the road sector .
Unless we get progress in that sector , I am quite certain we are going to see a problem for the rail sector .
The agreement will not be implemented in the near future at national level .
Mr President , I would also like to add my thanks to Mrs Smet in particular for doing an excellent job of work on the working time directive and also , of course , to Mr Rocard and to you , yourself .
I would agree with Philip Bushill-Matthews as well .
I think the strength of having all-party support throughout the UK on our delegation was very , very useful .
I would like to talk specifically about junior doctors .
I am very pleased that they are going to be brought in line with the working time directive .
There are 270 000 junior doctors across the EU who will be affected by this .
50.1 % in my constituency work over 72 hours a week as do 10 000 in the UK as a whole .
You can see from those figures that it is extremely important that all Member States actually meet those objectives and I mean the nine-year objective .
The present situation is not good for patients or doctors alike - they have our life in their hands .
We would not want to be treated by a drunken doctor and I do not believe that we should be treated by an over-tired doctor .
Evidence proves that somebody who is impaired by tiredness is impaired in the same way as drunkenness .
The British Medical Association was saying that 15 % of junior doctors were leaving the profession citing stress , overwork and length of hours .
A lot of those were going to Australia and New Zealand where the working practices were better .
We have to stop that drain .
The nine-year timetable , of course , is an improvement on what the Council of Ministers wanted .
It is made up of four years ' implementation and five years to bring down the working time from 58 to 48 hours .
It is far better than what the Council wanted which was the 13-year period .
I , of course , would have preferred a shorter time .
As I have said before , our life is in their hands and it is important that we get this right .
The UK Government , of course , was part of the problem .
They maintain that they cannot achieve the reduction in this timescale .
I believe that they are wrong and that is why we have the extension for two years and also the extension after that for one year .
But as everyone else has said , it has to be in exceptional circumstances .
There must be rigorous notification and justification procedures and I hope that the British Government , and other Member State governments who feel that they can delay further by seeking two years and then another will feel so embarrassed that they will not seek to do so and meet the goal in nine years .
It is not twelve years - it is nine years and we must state that very , very clearly .
It is long enough - I would have liked it to have been shorter , but let us hope the governments , and the British Government in particular , adhere to that .
Mr President , I must apologise for this appearing to be a British show at this moment .
I assure you that it does change with the next speaker .
I also would like to thank Mrs Smet , our rapporteur , for the excellent work that she has done throughout this entire process .
With the support that she has received from Mr Rocard and from yourself , she has managed to make progress in face of the tensions between the high expectations of those whose lives will be affected by these decisions , some six million workers , and the difficulties and some intransigence presented by certain Member States .
I speak as my group 's representative on that parliamentary delegation and I know what I have seen .
This is a health and safety issue , as has been said , for both the workers concerned and for the public .
While I recognise , like others , that junior doctors are not the only group affected , this issue has proved the most difficult .
I have been deeply concerned at some of the arguments put forward by certain governments which have said that other aspects of health provision could be threatened if the reduction of working time for this group was brought in more quickly .
I cannot understand why it is less important for these workers to have reasonable working conditions and hours than any other group of health workers .
I want to know whether junior doctors in some countries are some sort of superhuman who can do without adequate rest and who will not harm their own health or that of their patients in the process .
The mother of one such trainee doctor said to me recently that she had been writing to the British Prime Minister and his wife , Tony and Cherie , to ask if they would be happy if their new baby were to be delivered by a tired , stressed-out doctor in a semi-drunken condition as that described by Mrs Lynne .
I consider that would be a real health and safety issue requiring rapid action .
As we have all said , we must be clear that nine years has to be seen as an absolute limit , that anything more is an aberration .
Any country not managing that should not be surprised if they find their staff moving elsewhere , to countries which have managed to implement more modern working conditions .
The stepped approach which has been brought in must not be used to simply give a redefinition of working time such as removing meal breaks or time spent on call but not actually treating patients .
That would simply be following the bad practices recently tried out by certain burger chains .
However , at least some of those chains pay their part-time 17-year-old staff more per hour than some junior doctors get in overtime payment .
I would like to congratulate in advance those Member States that will meet their obligations under this directive for all sectors .
The progress of others will be monitored very carefully .
I acknowledge the Commission 's role in this and hope that the Commissioner at that time will show the same commitment as that shown by Mrs Diamantopoulou .
Regretfully I am not sure that my group will be able to fully support the proposals overall despite the improvements that Mrs Smet and the Parliament team have been able to obtain in this very difficult situation .
Mr President , I too want to thank and congratulate Mrs Smet on an excellent piece of work in the Conciliation Committee and also on her report .
I also want to thank other key people such as Mr Provan and Mr Rocard .
They have played an important role .
The Parliamentary delegation was basically very much in agreement , even though we differed in our willingness to compromise when it came to the crunch .
It was , of course , important to solve problems .
The idea was that seven million people should be brought within the scope of the directive .
When I learned that the whole thing was to go off without a hitch , that is to say that there was to be an agreement , I nonetheless took the liberty of voting against .
I wanted to make the point that , in spite of everything , I was not satisfied with everything in this compromise .
I was especially critical of the agreement when it came to the issue of young doctors .
If the decision is interpreted as it already has been by some people in this debate , namely as saying that the transposition and transitional periods for doctors should add up to nine years and that there should , above and beyond that , be the possibility of an additional three years ' extra time , then we arrive at a total period of twelve years .
This is really little different from the Council ' s position , involving thirteen years .
There was , therefore , not so much of a compromise on that particular point .
I think this is a serious matter , because it is about patients having to suffer and about doctors being placed in impossible situations , from both moral and personal points of view .
Young doctors do not choose these working conditions and working hours but are forced to accept them .
I thought it was appropriate for at least someone in this Parliament to use his voting right for the purpose of indicating this dissatisfaction .
I now hope to see the three extra years become a facility which cannot be counted upon but which is only granted in really exceptional cases .
The intention expressed by this Chamber has , of course , been that , where junior doctors are concerned , the period for implementing the present directive should be nine years and that the three extra years should only apply in extreme and exceptional cases .
Naturally , we hope that , in reality , the process will be still more rapid .
We also want , in the future , to see the working time directive apply to those groups which have still not been brought within its scope .
In common with Mr Hughes , I should like to ask the Commission a question regarding these groups . How far has the work progressed when it comes to the transport sector and lorry drivers ?
I want to conclude by saying that , on more than one occasion , the European Parliament has shown itself to be a significant force where working time legislation in Europe is concerned .
I hope that this will continue .
It is not just a question of establishing longest permitted working times but of a good deal else besides .
There are ever more differences in the way in which working time is distributed in our society .
For young families , the difficulty of reconciling full-time work with family and children is becoming ever greater .
Working time puts the squeeze on women and children , in particular .
It is also an issue relating to age and to where one is in one ' s life .
Young and old have different needs and different abilities .
We need a whole series of changes to working time policy , and it is my hope that it will be possible for the European Parliament to come back with more initiatives in this area .
Mr President , I join in the congratulations to all involved with this matter .
Rather than reiterate what other colleagues have said , I think the core issue is the junior doctors in training .
Obviously , whilst nine years is not the perfect solution which Parliament originally sought , it is the best possible compromise .
It is incumbent on us to send out a clear message that we would expect every government in the European Union to comply fully with the nine years .
Even though I know there are rigorous tests and standards as to whether or not an extension would be granted , it should only be granted in the most exceptional circumstances and not for any willy-nilly ideology .
In addition , as Mr Hughes pointed out , the other parts of the entitlements come into force immediately .
Even though the overall reduction in working hours may be postponed for some time , the actual rest-period times and so on come into force immediately .
I shall just deal very briefly with two other points concerning the whole working time directive .
Firstly , concerning fishermen , there is some attempt to compromise within the proposals before us .
However , it is a notoriously difficult area to enforce because of outside conditions , such as bad weather , that will affect the way fishermen operate .
Perhaps we should review this at some stage in the near future and look at it anew to try to come up with a better solution .
Secondly , transport workers : when we already have tachograph legislation in place , why do we need to bring in a separate and new directive on transport workers , in particular lorry drivers and so on ?
Perhaps now is the time to look at this afresh .
New technology - in particular digital tachographs and individual smart cards for individual drivers on the tachograph - could be the best way to regulate the hours during which drivers are on the road and at work .
It will also ensure that they can have equal benefits with every other worker in the Union .
Finally , I wish to pay my compliments once again to Mrs Smet .
I have one small , further request to the Commissioner .
Perhaps now is the time , after we have agreed this conciliation and brought this new piece of legislation into being , to carry out an impact assessment on how the existing legislation is working , whether it is of benefit to the workers - increasing their health and safety - and whether it is increasing employment , which is one of the original arguments behind it .
Mr President , I too would like to convey my heartfelt thanks to everyone who took part in the negotiations on our side , especially the rapporteur but also you yourself and Mr Rocard , as well as other members of the negotiation delegation .
I would like also to extend warm thanks to the Commission , particularly for their declaration on working on Sundays .
This was a major obstacle for us , mainly because the Commission had skirted this thorny issue a little too easily in the past .
The declaration was therefore a great help to us .
I would like to say one thing to the representatives of the GUE / NGL Group and the Greens .
If you vote against this compromise - and I would understand if you did , because I myself find nine years for junior doctors far too long - you will then be against everything , in effect .
If this line were to be taken across the board , and if Parliament were to say " no " , then we would not have a solution in nine years , or ninety years .
If it were up to the British Government - we heard this quite clearly in the negotiations - it could well be 50 years and maybe longer before they resolve this issue .
The first problem was that they appeared unable to train a sufficient number of doctors .
If , therefore , you do not train sufficient doctors , you need to obtain them from other countries .
If this plan fails too , then the whole procedure could take a very long time .
If this is not something you want , then you need to approve this directive now , obviously with the reservation that it is an empty exercise - I am still convinced of this - and junior doctors should not need to be in this exemption position at all .
That is the problem .
I have one question for the Commission .
It concerns the other matters at issue , specifically that of transport .
I would like to know how the Commission intends to deal with this .
It is now up to the Commission .
The working time directive will not be complete until these issues have been resolved .
The ball is now quite clearly in the Commission ' s court .
The Transport Council is behaving badly .
Transport conjures up images of action and movement , but the Transport Council must be the most inactive of all councils and does absolutely nothing .
I wonder if the Commission can think of a way to resolve this .
Failing this , Mr President , we should seriously consider taking legal action against the Transport Council , as was done very successfully a couple of years ago before the Court .
More of this later .
Finally , Mr President , one of the first people to propose working time legislation was Winston Churchill .
That was a key moment in history , not only in the history of Great Britain , but also in the history of Europe as a whole , because in the Netherlands too , we adopted this legislation without questioning it .
That makes it all the easier to bring this directive about .
We thus have the feeling that we are in a way completing Winston Churchill ' s work with this directive , especially if we bear in mind that he did at least manage to bring a terrible war to a successful end in five years , while the present British Government would not even be capable of resolving the problem of junior doctors in 50 years .
He - more than anyone - should be in our thoughts when dealing with this subject matter .
Mr President , for me it has been a real privilege - and a surprise - to attend this conciliation procedure and to witness first hand the resistance and difficulties we have had to face in order to make progress .
This is demonstrated by the excellent work of Mrs Smet , and also Mr Provan and Mr Rocard .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner , Mrs Diamantopoulou , her department and so many people - also the Portuguese Presidency - who have allowed Parliament , like Churchill , to set a milestone in the construction of a social and more humanitarian Europe .
I am convinced that there is another reason for recommending that Parliament vote in favour of this report : the difficulties we have faced in making progress with regard to certain governments .
I will be truly happy to see these sectors , which were excluded from the 1993 directive , provided with a recognised European regulation on working time , even if it does involve long and protracted timescales .
However , we should not be dazzled by the light .
There is no doubt that public opinion - and I too am concerned about this public opinion - does not understand why these procedures are so slow and why , with regard to the problem of young doctors or fishermen , we have not been able to make any progress .
It is not acceptable - since we all agree that we cannot continue to ask these young doctors to work these exhausting hours and that we cannot continue to put our patients at risk - that we have not been able to make speedier progress .
I hope that , in fact , the timescale will be nine years and not thirteen years , although it pains me to say that , as a Spaniard , I feel restricted by the fact that it has been my government which has insisted most on having this additional period .
They may have requested this additional period , but we should take great care to ensure that they do not use it .
Lastly , I would like to ask the Commissioner and the Commission , to monitor closely the application of the directive , so that in nine years time they do not ask for three more .
Mr President , in previous debates here last November and in April of this year I supported the general principles behind the idea of directives on working time and I still do so .
Clearly there are significant health and safety issues which can be addressed - not only for the protection of workers but also for the protection of their customers and the general public - and issues of customer health and safety of course are particularly relevant in relation to doctors in training .
Like my colleague , Mrs Lambert , I am concerned that this compromise has not gone quite far enough in relation to doctors ' hours .
There would remain though some workers in some working places where practical issues do not readily lend themselves to the implementation of this type of directive .
Coming from Scotland , with one of the largest EU fishing fleets , I would like once again to focus on the problem of fisheries and the defining of working time .
I note the compromise concerning sea-fishermen - a maximum of 48 hours of weekly work in a reference period of 12 months and the possibility of derogation after consultation and by agreement .
This may be an improvement but I still have some questions to put to the Commission .
We have to recognise that there were good reasons for the initial exclusion of the fisheries sector .
As regards fishing there is a deep-seated suspicion of Brussels in many respects and a lot of opposition to the whole idea of fishermen being told when to sleep or when to go to sea , given that their working time is governed by uncontrollable factors such as climatic conditions and the movement of shoals of fish .
The directive says that work at sea comprises sea fishing and other offshore work .
Many fishermen , particularly in Scotland , are organised on a family basis - they are share-fishermen paid only a proportion of their vessel 's catch .
They are clearly not employees in the sense of the word that we would understand .
Is this directive going to affect them or is it not ?
I have asked the Commission this question previously in committee and in plenary and have not yet received absolute clarification of this point .
The Conciliation Committee concluded in the case of those share fishermen who are employees - a statement which seems to me to be contradictory - that it is for Member States to determine the conditions for entitlement to annual leave and payments etc , but there is no explanation as to whether or when a share fisherman is employed .
I know for sure that the fishermen that I see around the coast of Scotland can only be defined as self-employed and I stress the need for clarification of this .
There are huge differences between a large-scale long-distance fleet where fishermen are employed by companies and sent off for months on end and the smaller- and medium-sized boats , which operate on a family or a cooperative basis .
This is an issue about the definition of self-employment or owner operation and I know that the compromise deletes own-account transport operators , clearly and quite properly identifying an exception in that area .
I call for a similar exception for share-fishermen .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is crucial that all employees are assured a decent working environment in order to guarantee that their health and safety is protected , which requires an organisation of working time that allows daily and weekly rest breaks , annual leave , holidays and other aspects .
This is why an appropriate solution must be found to the problem of all workers in activities that were excluded from the scope of Directive 93 , specifically in the area of transport , fishing and the activities of junior doctors .
The truth is that , despite a positive proposal by Parliament , which sought to respond to these issues , the Council has insisted on an unacceptable position . This substantially reduces the initial proposals of the European Parliament , specifically the increase of the period for transposing the directive to all sectors from two to three years .
The only exception made concerns junior doctors , for whom the period is extended from four to nine and possibly to twelve years . Apart from anything else , this also threatens the safety of the patients themselves who are examined by doctors who work excessively long hours .
That is why we have voted against this agreement , since what we want , of course , is a better agreement .
It was never going to be easy to satisfy all of the interested parties who have lobbied and worked closely with the Union institutions to bring about amendments to the 1993 directive .
This is the new directive , of course , and I am pleased that it has been extended to offshore workers , fishermen and doctors in training .
The most contentious part of the directive was bound to relate to doctors in training who would benefit from this piece of legislation .
One should recall that the Council had originally proposed an exemption for a period of some 13 years before doctors in training would secure the benefits of the directive .
Naturally , Parliament put forward its own proposals to support the right of doctors in training to be covered by this directive after a period of 4 years .
Hence the conciliation procedure which you , Mr President , were involved in .
But whatever honeyed words are attached to the conclusions of the procedure , the bottom line is that junior doctors will not secure benefits for a period of nine years at least .
According to the conclusions of the Conciliation Committee , junior doctors will secure benefits after a transitional period of five years and a four-year transposition period .
I fully support the right of junior doctors and doctors in training to secure the benefits of this directive , but the Conciliation Committee conclusions will have reluctantly to be accepted .
I would like in conclusion to refer to one small but very important matter , namely that under exceptional circumstances there may be a further extension of two years and indeed up to three years if governments argue that the reduction would cause real administrative difficulties .
I do hope that this directive can be implemented sooner rather than later .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , working time policy - as we can see once again - is not economic policy , it is health and safety at work policy .
When used preventively , it saves the state and the economy a great deal of money .
I have completely failed to understand in this debate why a reasonable set of rules was not adopted back in 1993 , especially as the Commission and Parliament did not want any derogations even then .
Seven million workers were affected and specific sectors , such as the mobile worker sector , have been subject to ruinous competition over recent years , especially in Germany .
It is therefore also a social problem and it is not enough , Mr Crowley , to use tachographs or other technical aids .
One does not exclude the other .
We also need a framework directive , because the employees who are affected have been working in a grey zone for a long time now .
They had no rules , they were not covered by a collective agreement , they were exploited and some also engaged in self-exploitation .
We know that this overload sometimes gave rise to alcohol-related problems .
Parliament has shown sufficient flexibility ; Mrs Smet highlighted our legislative maturity .
I think , Mrs Smet , you have proven that we can also fight .
The results are acceptable .
I am trying to muster support , even if we have not achieved everything we wanted to .
But the transition period and the graduated plan are the maximum we have allowed the Council .
I hope that no government will use up the full period of time and am counting on constructive competition between the Member States to see which State will be the first to implement the proposals from Parliament and the Commission .
Directive 93 / 104 was already very restrictive as far as worker production is concerned .
It does not harmonise social legislation upwards , quite the opposite .
It establishes a European framework which falls a long way short of workers ' expectations : an 11-hour daily rest period , a 48-hour working week , a 24-hour weekly break .
What is more , a number of categories were excluded from its field of competence .
We find the compromise , which Parliament is to vote on today following the meetings of the Conciliation Committee , unsatisfactory in terms of both the health and the safety of workers .
It makes flexibility more widespread , particularly for sea fishermen , establishing the systematic annualisation of reference periods .
It will permit further exemptions to the already excessive legislation of 48 hours per week .
Finally , it will take nine years , in the best possible case , for the working week of doctors in training to be reduced from 58 hours to 48 .
In fact , the proposed working time organisation institutes social deregulation at the very time when , in France , doctors in training are campaigning for decent working conditions and genuine safety for service-users .
Proper organisation of working time would entail , we reiterate , a real reduction in working hours accompanied by moves to create a sufficient number of jobs .
We cannot support this report as it stands .
Mr President , this proposal will bring an additional seven million workers in Europe under the protection of the Working Time Directive , allowing them to have reasonable working conditions and proper rest periods .
However , to get a 48-hour week , junior doctors must wait nine years minimum and possibly twelve years .
I will not pretend to be happy with this situation .
It is , however , the best that we could achieve if we were to end once and for all the Council 's delaying tactics .
It has been obvious since 1993 that those excluded from the directive at that time would eventually come under its protection .
One has to ask , therefore , why over that seven-year period virtually nothing was done in Ireland or in Britain to bring the number of doctors forward that would be needed to implement it .
In Ireland some junior doctors work over 100 hours per week , the average being 70 to 80 .
Only last night they suspended strike action which they had threatened because they have now reached an interim agreement which will ensure that they are actually paid for the overtime they work .
In some cases they were not paid at all , in some cases only half the normal rate . Some progress has been made and no doubt the conclusion of the conciliation has helped them in that regard .
Through the Council of Ministers both Britain and Ireland fought tooth-and-nail to slow the process down .
That was unfortunate .
The working arrangements for junior doctors are like a horror story from a Dickensian novel of the nineteenth century .
I find it bizarre that at the beginning of the 21st century we are still arguing for common sense with regard to health and safety .
I would appeal to all national governments , including Ireland , not to utilise the additional provisions for extending the implementation of this directive beyond the nine-year period and would remind them that it is intended only as an exceptional measure if all other genuine steps have been taken to implement the measures here .
Mr President , the proposed working time directive for specific categories of worker such as doctors in training , offshore workers or mobile workers , is typical of the slow and derisory nature of social Europe .
The recitals of the proposal , nonetheless , stress the specific importance of this file , the first major file on social issues , adding , even , that it is a matter of the health and safety of 7 million workers .
In France , for example , a number of strikes by junior doctors recently drew the attention of public opinion to the intolerable length of the working day for this category of worker , harmful to the doctors in training themselves , but also to the quality of the care they are providing their patients with .
The same question arises , with at least as much urgency , for other categories such as offshore workers or transport workers .
What we should have had was a quick decision and an appropriate reduction in working hours . Well , the proposal does intend to cut hours , but by phasing in the cuts .
For the first three years , 58-hour working weeks are permitted .
We have to wait 5 years for the maximum working week to be reduced to 48 hours , and the Commission is cynical enough to cite technical reasons in order to grant a further 2-year delay in application .
Who are they trying to kid that these measures could not come into force almost immediately if there was any political will to act in favour of the interests of the workers concerned rather than favouring the claims of management ?
Some restriction , even a derisory cut , in working hours is better than no restriction at all .
We shall not vote against this text , but we shall conclude from this experience that workers can have no expectations of social Europe and that , decidedly , nothing can replace the collective strength of the workers when it comes to amending legislation in favour of the workers .
Mr President , the chairman of the European Parliament ' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs could not remain silent in this debate .
Thank heavens , my fellow Members have already said what needed to be said about the issue itself .
I shall come back to this point .
We are not terribly proud of the final result , but I should at least like to pay tribute to it , as some outcome had to be found .
At this point , I should like to thank Mrs Smet , our efficient and indefatigable rapporteur , and Mr Provan , who was also the persistent and efficient chairman of our Conciliation Committees .


I should like to thank all our coordinators , Mr Brok , Mr Hughes , Mrs Flautre , Mr Schmid , Mrs Lynne , who demonstrated great understanding in order to reach some sort of outcome .
I should like to pay tribute to the Commission . Without wishing to embarrass you , Mrs Diamantopoulou , throughout almost all this debate Parliament has had the technical and even political support of the Commission , particularly on the important amendments .
I have one small correction to make , unless I misunderstood , to what Mrs Smet has just said .
It is not exactly the first successful conciliation on social matters between the European Parliament and the Council .
It is the second , following the successful conciliation on the minor issue of workers working in an explosive atmosphere .
This is , however , an infinitely more wide-ranging issue , of course .
Mr President , I must point out how unusually tough the Council is to deal with .
The political truth is that the Parliament team , in an astounding spirit of responsibility and unanimity - and you have witnessed the benign respect which I and Mr Bushill-Matthews , for example , have for each other - was remarkable for its united front as much as for its determination to succeed .
Parliament made most of the running .
We are not proud of the result in terms of the content .
In a real democracy Parliament would have been determining the legislation .
I would like to remind the Council that we are just as dedicated to achieving results , but that they must not expect Parliament to make quite so many concessions on a regular basis .
Mr President , I would like first of all to make three political comments .
I feel that the successful outcome of the conciliation procedure proves that where there is a will , there is a way .
In order for this conciliation to succeed , we had to take account of the fifteen different systems in the Member States , different fields of work and proposals from various employer and employee federations .
We also had to take account of the viability of health services as things now stand and competitiveness in sectors such as transport and fisheries .
This was no mean feat !
It has taken six years to achieve today ' s result and it is the first major conciliation decision in the social sphere - and I say major because it affects some 5 million workers .
I feel that the most interesting point - and this is my third comment - is the number of workers affected by this directive , who are at present excluded from the working time directive and who will enjoy these rights once this directive is applied .
In my view , therefore , we should be satisfied regardless of whether or not this directive meets all our requirements .
The upshot is that the provisions of the working directive will apply to doctors in training , workers at sea , rail workers and all non-mobile workers in excluded sectors .

I would like in particular to thank the Chairman of the Committee , Mr Rocard , the Vice-Chairman , Mr Provan , who used his great experience to guide the conciliation procedure , and of course , Mrs Smet who , with her wealth of ministerial experience , helped achieve such a difficult conciliation .
I would also like to give special thanks to the Portuguese Presidency and the Member States , particularly those which , for reasons we cannot go into right now , have experienced major problems with their national health services , such as Great Britain , Spain and Ireland .
Certain speakers raised the issue of the implementation of the directive .
I should like to stress that it is indeed a particularly important issue .
One of the Commission ' s fundamental duties is to monitor the implementation of directives .
Here I should like to ask the MEPs to cooperate with us and closely monitor any underhanded plans in Member States , so that the Commission can intervene immediately .
A further two questions have also been raised , the first by Messrs Hughes , Schmid and Pronk as to what we intend to do in the road and rail transport sectors .
First , I must tell you that the Transport Council is involved , making the whole process even more complicated .
Secondly , as for road transport , the Commission tabled a proposal in 1996 , but it was blocked by the Council in 1998 .
The Commission intends , with the cooperation of the French Presidency , to re-table the issue .
We are awaiting new negotiations by the social partners and we hope to obtain their assent .
If we cannot proceed in this way , we shall have to change the whole approach we have adopted so far .
With regard to the issue of fisheries , the matter was raised once again by Mr Hudghton .
We have discussed this in the past .
I will try to clarify it .
I am afraid I was not clear enough .
So I would like to repeat that the issue of self-employment in fisheries is not included in this directive .
The self-employed in fisheries is a matter of national competence .
That is very clear and very precise .
I thank you very much for all your support and help during these discussions , and that of your services .
It is very much appreciated indeed .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Reviewing aid to third countries
The next item is the Commission communication - Reviewing aid to third countries .
Mr President , I hope Parliament will excuse me if shortly after making a brief presentation I have to leave , but this is , as Parliament knows , very much the collective work of the RELEX Commissioners as a whole and very much the shared work of my colleague , Commissioner Nielson and myself .
Commissioner Nielson will still be here to make his own contribution to this report and to answer any questions which may arise .
The function I have to attend is a joint meeting of two committees which was specially arranged to discuss a number of external assistance issues so I hope Parliament will be understanding .
I think it is fair to say that the proposals that we have put forward go right to the heart of the issues that are raised in the White Paper on reform and it is extremely important for us to demonstrate that the reform of our external assistance programmes is the flagship or one of the flagships , for an overall reform process .
People occasionally get a little bored when one talks about internal procedures but what they should recognise is what we are discussing in these particular proposals : ways in which , first of all , we can get assistance to people more rapidly and effectively and , secondly , ways in which we can change the image of the European Union around the world .
All of us have , alas , experienced too frequently occasions when instead of us getting the credit for what we are trying to do on behalf of Europe 's taxpayers , we get blamed for not doing it a lot more effectively and a lot more rapidly .
I hope that is a problem which we will be able to tackle .
Very briefly , it is worth reminding ourselves what the background to this issue is .
We have seen a threefold increase in external assistance commitments managed by the SCR over the last 10 years .
That has been driven by events and by political pressures ; a recognition of the responsibilities we should discharge in Central and Eastern Europe - the recognition which that triggered of our responsibilities in the Mediterranean .
It is worth noting that our assistance programmes in the Mediterranean have increased four and a half times since 1990 .
Then there is the Balkans crisis where the attempts to put in place a common foreign and security policy are being particularly tested .
While our external assistance programmes themselves have grown very rapidly , staff resources have failed to keep pace .
The Commission has 2.9 staff for every EUR 10 million that we manage .
That compares with an average figure about twice that for Member States - the figure is 5.7 but it goes as high as 9 for some Member States and 4.2 for the World Bank .
One of the consequences of that has been the increasing use of technical assistance offices which has been much criticised by Parliament and by the Court of Auditors on the grounds of weak monitoring and a lack of political control .
It is worth noting that we have spent about EUR 170 million a year on the 80 technical assistance offices which is equivalent to the cost of 800 staff working for the Commission .
A consequence of all this is that the SCR today has over EUR 21 billion in outstanding commitments awaiting payments .
That is an embarrassingly large figure .
I do not blame the staff of the SCR who work extremely hard in very difficult circumstances , but there are not enough of them .
They have had to operate with extremely difficult procedures .
They have also had to operate against a background of Member States second , third and fourth guessing every implementation decision that we try to make .
We have brought forward in the document , which has now been made public , our proposals for dealing with this problem .
As honourable Members will know , over the years Parliament has put forward a number of proposals including the idea that we should externalise the management of our overseas aid .
That remains a possibility for the long term though it would take some time because one would first have to get in place the necessary legal framework .
However my principal concern at the moment is not how we get from A to Z - that often seems rather easier than getting from A to B. What we have to do - whatever the long term objective may be is - to find better ways of managing our external assistance straightaway .
We have put forward a number of proposals .
We have put forward proposals for improving programming : making sure that all the RELEX Commissioners share responsibility for programming - we have suggested the reuniting of the project cycle from identification to implementation - we think the present split has not worked well .
What we propose to do is to create a new implementation body replacing the SCR which we think should be called Europe Aid .
It would be initially an office under a board made up of all the External Relations Commissioners though , as I say , the option of moving to externalisation in the longer term remains on the table .
We want to devolve more responsibility to delegations and , where possible , to national authorities in the field .
We have proposed special treatment for the pre-accession strategy : humanitarian assistance and macro-financial assistance with fully integrated management .
That means , for example , transferring the residual SCR functions for PHARE to the Directorate-General for Enlargement .
We have proposed taking urgent measures to tackle the backlog of old and dormant projects .
We are writing to the relevant chairmen of parliamentary committees and to the Court of Auditors to explain our approach .
I do not want to go on for very much longer , except to say this : where will the resources come from to manage and run our programmes in the proposed office , Europe Aid , rather better in the future than we have managed in the past ?
We have to take our turn with others in the Commission in arguing our corner in the peer group process for the assistance we think is required to manage our programmes effectively .
We may , as a result , present the budgetary authority with a rectifying letter to the 2001 budget proposals in September .
That is for the future .
The simple point I want to make is this : we cannot go on as we have .
In my judgement it is simply not an option .
We have to do better .
We are not bidding for a bigger empire .
The budgetary authority will ultimately have to judge the right scale of European Union external aid programmes .
However , my only aim is to put the Commission in a position where it can run these programmes competently .
I have to say very bluntly to Parliament that there are two possibilities : either the budgetary authority agrees with our ideas and will then try to implement them from 2001 , or else , in order to manage what our programmes amount to more competently , we will be obliged to propose very large cuts .
We cannot go on in a situation in which we are not prepared to provide the resources to manage effectively the money that is voted by the budgetary authority for our external assistance programmes .
We have to be prepared to face up to the management and administrative consequences of what we are trying to do around the world , otherwise the people who suffer are those who should be receiving our help to enable them to read and write or live a better and healthier life or create the institutions of good governance in their communities .
They are the people who suffer as well as the European Union 's reputation .
I am sure this will be a long debate .
I am sure that Parliament will have a considerable contribution to make to the discussion over the next few months .
However , my impression after a few months in this job is that Parliament wants as badly as the Commission to deliver a more competently run assistance programme all around the world .
Mr President , this is refreshing - the fact that the European Union is acknowledging that there are problems but that we have solutions .
Commissioner Nielson will recall that a couple of months ago I suggested that it might be the case that he could become an emperor without clothes .
Is it not the case now that this proposal , taking away so much from DG Development as it does , is likely to make my prediction come true ?
Secondly , at the end of what Commissioner Patten was saying , I think he reiterated what he was quoted as saying in " The Times " this morning where he said that Member States should back his plans with resources or cut aid .
I have to say , Commissioners , that I find this a deeply worrying and dangerous statement and likely to be taken at its face value by Member States and not in the way that you suggest .
I would very much appreciate clarification of those two questions by one or other Commissioner .
Mr President , I do not feel like an emperor without clothes , but you can judge for yourself .
The situation is that we had to do something not just to integrate the project cycle in terms of the line management of activities .
We also had to do something concerning squaring the circle organisationally giving substance to my political overall responsibility for development policy .
We have done this without changing the portfolios that were defined .
The solution we have reached is to create a board of directors which will oversee and politically be the managerial part of running the new office or EuropeAid or whatever SCR is going to be called .
My role on that board will be that of the chief executive officer . Commissioner Patten will be chairman , reflecting the position he already has at the head of the table being the ultimate coordinator of all RELEX Commissioners ' activities .
We are in a sense structuring the political roles that have been defined and we are doing it in such a way that I think it really does have a chance of functioning .
There are two elements in this which will contribute to better coherence and better political consistency .
One is what I have already mentioned with a closer political involvement in the management of the actual implementation .
The other one is the quality-support group which will have its secretariat in DG Development .
The role is to make sure that the formulation of the different programmes , including those in DG RELEX , is consistent with the policy and principles that we have defined .
All in all , I think this is a good attempt at doing things given the way things were defined last July .
This will also concentrate a lot of attention among all RELEX Commissioners on the problem of whether or not we actually are delivering .
We have to get out of the culture of commitment and into the culture of delivering .
What we are doing here will be part of that change .
We also talk about ownership in our partner countries as being a major problem .
The reality , because of the way we are organised in the Commission , is that ownership on our side is extremely vague and problematic .
This is going to change as a consequence of the reform we are putting forward now .
Finally , I will address the issue of the risk of what happens if we do not get the staff and the resources to do the job .
Clearly continuing the way things are now is not acceptable , it is not possible .
We have to make the point as clearly as Commissioner Patten just did which means that we want those resources .
We have commitments , we have an agreement with 71 ACP states , we have the Member States backing that and accepting the next ninth European Development Fund .
All this is part of the promises we have made already , so there is really no alternative to getting the people to do the job .
But how to do it - this is a problem we cannot solve alone , which is why we are appealing as strongly and clearly as we are ; and we make no secret of the fact that if the budget authority will not make it possible to get the staff , we will not be able to do the job .
This is the situation as we see it .
We do not want to invest our own role as Commissioners in fighting a losing battle .
We want to fight a battle we can be proud of participating in .
Mr President , I am very happy to hear that , in order to fulfil commitments , more resources and personnel are required .
As Parliament is aware of this , we will offer our full support .
However , I would like to ask a question , since I have not had time to study the document at length . What will happen to humanitarian aid ?
We understand that the Union ' s policy of humanitarian aid does not end with simply granting it , but it has to continue - we talk in this context of a ' continuum ' - so that development policies can be carried out .
Otherwise , we may see a repetition of what is happening in Mozambique at the moment : clearly , humanitarian aid was removed , ECHO disappeared , development policy is no longer being implemented and therefore , violence may erupt once again .
Within this ' continuum ' I would like to know whether , as has been the case until now , ECHO will be an office dependent on the Commission , but whose action will be based on development policies aimed at what we want to see , and that is the eradication of poverty .
Mr President , it is a shame that Mr Patten had to leave so soon .
I actually wanted to put my question to him .
But I think that Mr Nielson is equally well placed to answer me because he has been standing by his colleague ' s side and he also said that both Commissioners were responsible for the proposal .
Mr Nielson , of course we here in Parliament share your aim of providing quicker aid to men and women , and raising the profile of the European Union .
That goes without saying .
But we had all agreed that what the Commission wanted to introduce now by way of reform had to be done jointly with us .
When Mr Patten says in his presentation that either the Commission programme is accepted or we must make cuts , I find that highly displeasing .
It is we who are the budgetary authority , or at least part of it , and I think that the Commission cannot simply say we shall make cuts or we shall have to make cuts .
That , if you please , has to go through the budgetary procedure first and what is certain is that you will have to implement your reform programme jointly with us .
I should like to know what your colleague meant by this threat .
Mr President , I am very sorry that Commissioner Patten had to leave .
In his absence I am delighted to direct my questions to the Development Commissioner , Mr Nielson .
I am delighted to hear of new innovations and reorganisations which the Commission is going to put into place .
EuropeAid would be a very important attribute of the European Union as far as our external relations are concerned .
It has been extremely embarrassing so far that some of our promises have not been kept .
Not keeping promises to the poorest people in the world is not the nicest way to go about - as a rich part of the world - trying to help them .
Consolidating the RELEX Commissioners and increasing the management support staff and resources have my fullest support .
I am also delighted to hear that they are planning to create a board very much like the World Bank .
But I should like to ask Commissioner Nielson if he has thought about something which is very important to this side of the House - the IFC in the World Bank has the ability to help in the private sector with funding .
Micro-credits and various other mechanisms are key to helping people to help themselves .
Have they considered extending , in EuropeAid , some element of helping people to help themselves through an investment arm where the European Union becomes a partner in venture and enterprise ?
Firstly , ECHO is not affected by this reform of development assistance .
ECHO is going to continue .
This is clearly part of what we have decided .
The only issue is to create a better link or bridge between the phase of humanitarian assistance and the more forward-oriented , long-term development assistance .
This is a well established discussion .
We want to keep ECHO more or less the way it is .
I have confidence that with the new director of ECHO we are on track .
To Mrs Haug I should like to make it clear that Commissioner Patten was saying that we will have to propose deep cuts in the level of activity if we do not get a positive response from the budget authorities concerning the staff issue .
Why are we saying this as clearly as we are , even running the risk of being interpreted as if issuing a threat ?
I noticed your choice of word there .
We think it is necessary to make it clear that we seriously think it is problematic to continue without the resources and the manpower that we need .
It is not possible to do this well without being more or less organised like other well-performing donors .
This is the message .
It may very well be the case that we are being misunderstood in this Parliament because , on this matter , we are definitely among friends .
So saying it as clearly as we do here may sound wrong . I realise that .
But there are other elements around .
We have to say it à tous azimuts .
It is absolutely necessary to make these measures clear .
I do not mean to be negative about ministers of finance , but sometimes they can be quite demanding partners in discussion .
Development ministers are not that unproblematic either .
The biggest problem is actually the lack of consistency between the level of ambition defined in this field and the resources and tools that we have available to carry out the job .
This is our biggest problem .
We will be making a positive effort to get a solution that makes it possible to continue at least at the level of activity that we have now .
I should like to add that , though it is right to point out the backlog , the problems and the embarrassment , it should not be forgotten that we are building roads out there , thousands of kilometres in length ; we are drilling bore-holes for clean , safe water , giving millions of people access to safe drinking water every year .
We are investing in people in primary education in a large number of countries .
We are making a contribution to the debt initiative second to none , even comparing ourselves with the biggest countries in the world .
We would welcome a little more competition as far as that is concerned .
I warn against giving the impression our development cooperation activities have all but stopped .
That is not the case .
We have to be realistic , clear and demanding in order to enter the primary league amongst donors and not to remain where we are right now .
This is the goal .
Mr Deva , we will , as part of the new Suva Agreement - the successor to the Lomé Convention - be including in our activities a EUR 2.2 billion private investment facility which will be administered by the European Investment Bank at arm 's length .
It will deal with private partners , inspiring and helping the creation of business activities between European companies and business in the developing ACP countries .
This major innovation is being prepared right now on the same basis as you were talking about .
Micro-credit is a big thing but it is not the only answer to all problems .
However , we are quite active in this field also .
I thank Parliament for what I sense to be a more than positive reception because the critical notes that I have heard are of a kind that I would tend to interpret as enthusiastic support .
We should be careful not to end up facing a situation where there is a real threat of having to set our sights lower .
Thank you very much , Mr Nielson , for your optimistic view of the future .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0220 / 2000 ) . We will examine questions to the Commission .
First part
Question No 32 by ( H-0433 / 00 ) :
Subject : Jailing of opposition politician Xu Wenli in China Is the Commission aware of the recent trial involving Xu Wenli in China and the severe prison sentence that was imposed .
What action did the Commission take ?
The Commission is aware of the recent trial referred to by the honourable Member in his question and of the sentence imposed on Mr Liu , who assisted Xu Wenli in setting up a branch of the banned China Democracy Party .
Xu Wenli , one of the founders of the CDP , was sentenced to 13 years in jail in December 1998 , along with two other prominent democracy campaigners .
As the honourable Member will know , the longstanding policy of the Union is to raise the individual cases of Chinese citizens who have been in prison for political offences with the Chinese authorities , particularly in the context of the human rights dialogue , the last meeting of which took place on 25 February this year .
The Union has therefore raised with the Chinese Government the cases of Xu Wenli and others who have been trying to exercise basic rights that are specified by the United Nation 's Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , which was actually signed by China in October 1998 .
To date , the Commission knows that at least 23 CDP members have been jailed for subversion as a result of their efforts to exercise those rights to which China is committed .
In relation to these and other cases , the Commission consistently calls upon the People 's Republic of China to comply with the letter and spirit of the United Nation 's human rights conventions which it has signed ; to do so even before China 's ratification of those conventions and actively to pursue ratification .
These efforts by the Commission will continue .

I thank you , Commissioner , for your answer and I should like to ask whether the Commission is aware that 14 months into his 13-year prison sentence Mr Xu is suffering from hepatitis and there are serious doubts as to the effectiveness of the medical treatment he is receiving .
I would seek an assurance that the Commission will enquire into this and ask the Chinese authorities whether they are providing the appropriate medical treatment .
Bearing in mind , Commissioner , what you said about your willingness to raise individual cases , could I also ask you to make enquiries about the fate of Rebiya Kadeer .
She was arrested on 11 August 1999 in Urumqui , the capital of the XUAR , while on her way to meet representatives of the US Congressional Research Service .
She was charged with providing secret information to foreigners and is believed to have been sentenced to eight years ' imprisonment at a secret trial .
I will gladly provide more detailed information on that , Mr Commissioner .
It makes me even more angry that European Union Member States , faced with these cases and the 23 in general you referred to , show such spinelessness in refusing to support the US initiative in Geneva at the UN Commission on Human Rights attacking China 's human rights record .
I should like to tell the honourable Member that in respect to Mr Xu , I will convey what he said about the apparently grave condition of that political prisoner to my colleagues in the external relations area .
I am certain that they will follow previous practice in making enquiries of the Chinese authorities as to the quality and consistency of the treatment of Mr Xu for hepatitis .
I know that my colleagues will be happy to respond to the honourable Member in order to keep him informed with any information they are able to obtain .
So far as Miss Kadeer is concerned , obviously I did not have notice of that question and am not in a position to respond .
The question will , however , have been recorded .
I will bring it to the attention of my colleagues and they will provide the honourable Member with the response he is seeking .
Obviously , it would be a matter of great concern if someone , whose only offence is to be antagonistic towards an existing regime , were to be the victim of insufferable treatment .
I know that my colleagues elsewhere in the Commission share this view , which I share with the honourable Member .
As the author is not present , Question No 33 lapses .
Question No 34 by ( H-0357 / 00 ) :
Subject : The Commission 's reform programme and enlargement On 1 March 2000 , the Commission adopted the White Paper on the reform of the Commission .
The measures and actions announced in the White Paper provide for a radical reform of the Commission which will involve a considerable amount of time .
Can the Commission indicate to what extent the present reform proposals take account of the forthcoming enlargement ?
Do they anticipate the consequences which enlargement will have on the internal structure of the Commission and do the proposed measures and actions take account of such consequences ?
If so , in what way ?
If not , would it not have been more logical for the Commission to take account of enlargement in respect of certain aspects , thereby avoiding a situation whereby shortly after completion of the current reform process the Commission has to enter into a fresh round of reforms to cope with the impact of enlargement ?
Does the Commission intend to present an action plan with a timetable , as is the case with the present reform plan , in order to prepare the structure of the Commission for the forthcoming enlargement ?
The Commission 's reform strategy White Paper fulfils the undertakings readily given to Parliament and to the Council last year to give immediate attention to addressing the way in which the Institution , as an organisation , currently undertakes its duties .
Delay in designing a practical strategy and in pursuing necessary modernisation would not have been acceptable to the Commission , to the Council , to this Parliament or to the public , as I am sure the honourable Member understands .
One of the specifically stated purposes of comprehensive reform is the development of strengthened administrative performance which will , amongst other things , enable the Commission to deal more effectively with changes in the current and the future Union and in the wider world .
Clearly the challenges posed by the forthcoming extensive enlargement are different in nature and scale than those presented by any previous enlargement .
The Commission must therefore be capable of achieving the highest standards of executive and administrative performance in the discharge of its powers and duties in order to facilitate that massive and welcome development .
As the College of Commissioners made clear in our introduction to the White Paper , and elsewhere in that document , and I quote what we said : " the challenges of globalisation and future enlargement require better governance at all levels including the European Union " .
All political institutions must rise to this challenge and so must the Commission .
Reform is therefore an essential precondition - a precondition for realising our vision of Europe .
The current administrative reform is not a limited exercise - it is an evolutionary process as we have made very clear - it will be continuously monitored and the results achieved will be assessed in order to provide for any relevant adjustments .
Proper account will be taken of any specific requirements that arise from the enlargement process , and naturally that will apply to human resources implications of the ongoing change .
Issues such as the management of the increased cultural diversity within the Commission and an early retirement scheme that is directly linked to enlargement will , for instance , be amongst those that receive particular attention .
As with past enlargements , specific measures concerning the appointment and integration of officials from the new Member States will be adopted at the appropriate time .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
I would , however , like to add something .
One of the main challenges in the enlargement process will be to tailor the veterinary and plant-health conditions prevalent in the acceding countries to those in the European Union .
Would the Commissioner be prepared to encourage observers from the Central and Eastern European countries that wish to join the EU , to attend management committees , scientific committees or any other committees concerned with veterinary and plant health , on a permanent basis ?
Mr President , the honourable Member 's approach to these and many other matters is I know extremely constructive .
What I know on the basis of precedent , and also the Commission 's assessment of the scope and the depth of the challenges that arise from the forthcoming enlargement , is that appropriate measures will be taken at the right time not only in terms of the recruitment and integration of properly skilled staff from the new Member States but also to assist with the preparation of other areas of expertise - presumably including the Scientific and other committees .
To some extent , of course , the process will be assisted by the fact that the international science community inside and outside the European Union is genuinely international .
In addition to relying upon those casual professional relationships , I am sure that the Commission will want to ensure that there is continuity and access provided for those new incoming Member States not only in areas like those that he has mentioned - veterinary and plant health - but in many other areas where the smoothest possible integration of efforts is a matter of crucial and mutual importance .
Question No 35 by ( H-0411 / 00 ) :
Subject : Boarding of Community vessels by Canadian inspectors in international waters Five years after the seizure of the Estai , the Community fleet fishing in NAFO international waters has expressed deep concern at the boarding of a Portuguese vessel , the Santa Mafalda , supposedly by Canadian inspectors .
The Santa Mafalda , a vessel used to catch halibut , was boarded on 24 April last . The inspectors confiscated all documentation and refused to leave the vessel .
Furthermore , a launch belonging to the Canadian authorities has been tracking the vessel constantly , thus hampering its fishing activity .
A few days earlier , Canadian inspectors had apparently boarded a Spanish freezer trawler , which was also fishing in international waters .
European fishermen fear that the underlying aim of these boarding incidents is to deter them from using the fishing grounds in which they catch halibut and cod .
What information does the Commission possess on these incidents ?
Can it clarify whether the inspectors were acting on behalf of NAFO or the Canadian Government ?
Has it taken any action in this regard , or does it intend to do so ?
Should accepting Community monitoring rules for inspections in NAFO waters prove problematic for Canada , what initiatives could the Commission take to set clear and binding rules which would allay the doubts of those working in the sector and the Canadian Government alike ?
Thank you Mr President .
As the honourable Member who raised the question will know , in accordance with the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation scheme of joint international inspection and surveillance , each contracting party may assign means of inspection and inspectors to the NAFO scheme and NAFO inspectors may inspect any fishing vessel flying the flag of a contracting party .
NAFO inspectors are obliged to carry out their duties in accordance with rules set out in the NAFO scheme and they are also obliged to remain under the operational control of the authorities of their contracting parties and be responsible to them .
Against that background , on 23 April two Canadian NAFO inspectors accompanied by a trainee carried out an inspection of the Community fishing vessel Santa Mafalda which was operating at that time in the NAFO regulatory area .
The Canadian inspectors in question and the surveillance vessel from which the inspection was carried out are assigned to the NAFO scheme .
Their inspection was carried out under its auspices .
Having been informed by the Canadians , inspectors of the Commission boarded the Santa Mafalda to verify the grounds on which the Canadian inspectors based their citation of a serious infringement .
In conducting this verification the Commission inspectors ensured the security and continuity of the evidence on board and transmitted their report to the Portuguese authorities .
Those authorities in turn ordered the Santa Mafalda to the port of Aveiro in Portugal for a thorough inspection .
The Santa Mafalda arrived in Aveiro on 10 May 2000 and two Commission inspectors participated in a thorough inspection of the vessel .
The Commission has drawn the attention of the Canadian authorities to the procedures followed by the Canadian inspectors in relation to their seizure of documentation and their continued stay on board the Santa Mafalda .
The Commission takes the view that the Canadian NAFO inspectors in question acted in breach of the NAFO scheme by taking away documents from the vessel without the permission of the master and by continuing to stay on board the vessel .
However , it is relevant to note that in this case the master of the vessel and the Portuguese authorities did not oppose the prolonged stay of the Canadian inspectors on the vessel and the fishing activities of the Santa Mafalda were not obstructed .
Mr Commissioner , I am satisfied with your reply , but I would like to add something else . The sea is a difficult world , and the Community fleet which fishes in international Atlantic waters experiences the interference of controllers and patrols from coastal countries which give the impression that , behind the harassment they sometimes suffer , there is one sole intention ; to expel them from those fishing grounds .
The Commissioner knows , as I do , that the current situation in the NAFO is not , fortunately , what it was five years ago after the seizure of the Estai .
The European Commission - like the fishing sector itself - has made significant efforts to iron out our differences .
However , there are still outstanding questions , such as the extraterritorial clauses , which allow the Canadian Government to carry out inspections , controls and seizures beyond their national waters , in open sea , which is incompatible with international provisions and which , all too frequently , involves the arbitrary application of controls within the framework of the NAFO .
For all these reasons , I would like to ask the Commissioner how the European Commission intends to defend the right of the Community fleet to fish freely in these waters , albeit within the existing rules .
Mr President , I am grateful to the honourable lady .
The only way in which we can actually ensure the proper maintenance of an international convention which has the effect of law is to demand on all occasions that the procedures required under the law are fulfilled properly in a balanced but a completely full way .
That is the position being taken by the Commission which is why I drew attention to the fact that the Commissioners have already reached the conclusion that the Canadian inspectors actually acted in breach of the scheme by taking documents without the sight of the master and by virtue , maybe , of their very prolonged stay on board that vessel .
The Portuguese authorities , as the honourable lady will know because of her interest , are now undertaking a full investigation and it would therefore not be proper for the Commission to communicate opinions beyond those I have already offered , but she can be absolutely certain that the Commission and its inspectors together with the Member States are vigilant in sustaining the proper rights of all vessels on the high seas .
Mr President , I had asked the question as a result of Mr Kinnock ' s first reply , before Mrs Miguélez asked her question .
I had understood from Mr Kinnock that the ship was in fact being inspected in a Portuguese port and that this inspection had taken place in the presence of Community inspectors .
I understand , from his second reply , that he does not yet have the result of that inspection .
That is what I wanted him to clarify .
If he does have it , I would like him to say so , but I understand from his second reply that he does not .
If that is the case I believe it would be prudent and logical for us to await the final result .

I would ask Mr Kinnock to communicate to Mr Fischler that , as chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , I would like to know the result of that inspection as soon as possible .
I would like to receive it because this Parliament will have to act accordingly .
In any event , I would like to condemn , in support of Mrs Miguélez , the abuse of authority on the part of the Canadian NAFO inspectors which Mr Kinnock mentioned .
I would therefore like to make that request and condemn this violation of NAFO regulations .
Mr President , I will draw the honourable Member 's remarks to the attention of my colleague , Mr Fischler , and I know that they will be of interest to him .
He summarises the position precisely because the inspection has taken place and the Portuguese authorities are reaching their conclusions .
It would not be proper publicly to pursue the matter further , but when the report of that inspection and the assessment by the Portuguese authorities are available , I am certain that they will be communicated to interested Members including , of course , the chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries and I am certain the honourable lady whose interest is manifest .
Question No 36 by ( H-0415 / 00 ) :
Subject : Need to support and strengthen the olive oil sector The implementation of the new olive oil regulation is having severe consequences for Greek producers who are poor farmers in infertile and island regions .
The abolition of the intervention price which had already been eroded has brought producer prices down to derisory levels : together with the co-responsibility levy this has had the effect of decimating olive oil producers ' incomes .
The profiteering of traders who sell olive oil to the consumer at prices many times the producers ' price have increased , and the small quota accorded to Greece in practice cancels out the entitlement to plant a further 3 000 hectares provided for in the new regulation .
Since olive oil is a basic product and the main source of income for farmers from the most disadvantaged regions in Greece and is also a staple of the Mediterranean diet , will the Commission say what measures it intends to take to protect olive oil cultivation and producers ' incomes so as to enable them to stay on the land and when it intends to act ?
Does it intend to increase the quota in order to cover existing production and the volume of production expected to result from the new plantations ?
Will it reintroduce the institution of intervention , but improved as far as prices and the date of commencement are concerned ?
Finally , will it draw up and implement an integrated and effective policy to promote and advertise olive oil both in the EU countries and in third countries , so that olive oil can occupy the place to which it is entitled - according to scientific findings - in the human diet ?
Second part
Questions to Mr Solbes
One of the greatest benefits of the question time arrangement is the way in which it endows me with instant expertise on issues as far apart as fishing , olive oil and human rights in China !
I am happy to respond to Mr Korakas .
In June 1998 , the Commission undertook to present a proposal on the future of the common organisation of the market in olive oil to the Council and Parliament in 2000 .
The new regime would apply from the 2001 / 2002 marketing year which , as the honourable Member will know , begins on 1 November 2001 .
The Commission is currently studying new data on the structure of olive oil production in the various producer Member States , as well as developments in the world market where the Community is the leading producer by a considerable margin .
The study will also take into account the need to draw up an olive oil quality strategy in order to add more value to the product .
As far as product promotion is concerned , the Community is already financing promotion campaigns through the International Olive Oil Council .
Those campaigns appear to have a positive effect within the European Union and indeed in third countries .
In response to a specific issue raised by the honourable Member 's question , I have to point out that the produce of new plantings would not give entitlement to aid .
However , the Commission hopes that the Community producers concerned will benefit fully under derogations from the rules as they relate to approved planting programmes , although the olive oil in question would count towards the maximum guaranteed quantity which has already been set .
Finally , the Commission wishes to point out that rather than simply abolishing the intervention system , what has actually happened is that it has been replaced by a system of private storage which is more flexible than the intervention system because it applies throughout the marketing year if the market situation calls for such support .
Since the start of the 1998 / 99 marketing year , it has not been necessary to pay private storage aid .
However , it is worth emphasising that over that same period the old buying-in intervention system would not have been activated either .
Mr President , we do indeed appear to be having problems understanding each other in this Chamber .
Because of the policies of the European Union , olive oil producers are truly at the mercy of big producers who negotiate among themselves and try to buy olive oil at unbelievably low prices .
This situation has reached dramatic proportions with the abolition of the albeit downgraded intervention system and the system of private storage , let me assure you is , quite frankly , a joke .
So how are we to deal with this situation ?
Will an improved intervention system providing rudimentary protection for producers be reintroduced ?
And given that , on a global scale , olive oil is so important to the human body and plays such an important role in maintaining farming populations in disadvantaged areas , why is it that the quotas , particularly for Greece , are so low ?
Are you going to increase them ?
And with the widespread practice of mixing olive oil with sunflower seed oil , what does the Commission intend to do to put a stop to this practice , which is harming producers and consumers to the benefit of industrial racketeers ?
In this spirit , does the Commission believe that this phenomenon can be tackled through guile , i.e. , by increasing the quota for Italy , which is the main country responsible for mixing oil , and reducing the quota for Greece ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member and I know of the deep concerns he voices .
They certainly are communicated in this House and he does it in a most articulate fashion .
All I can say to him at this juncture , because I know this is a matter of continuing concern and activity by him , is that the CMO for olive oil is due to be reformed , as I indicated earlier , by 1 November 2001 , following agreement in the Council and in this Parliament in adopting Regulation 1638 / 98 .
I cannot assume that if the situation were precisely as the honourable Member describes , and smaller producers were in a dangerously disadvantaged position by comparison with the big producers , there would have been such agreement in the Council and in this House .
Therefore , I hope he will give attention to the results of the studies I mentioned being undertaken at the moment by the Commission , both in terms of the general questions he raised when he submitted his question and also in terms of the relative fortunes of big producers and small producers .
Finally , as someone who is merely a consumer of olive oil , I hope there is no extensive dilution of what is one of my favourite complementary foodstuffs and that , whatever else we do in the European Community , we strive together with olive oil producers of all sizes to maintain the maximum quality .
That is how we sustain our considerable lead in world markets .
Thank you very much , Mr Kinnock , for your cooperation during this Question Time .
We also congratulate you for using olive oil , which is very good for the health .
I also say this from a Mediterranean standpoint .
Question No 37 by ( H-0409 / 00 ) :
Subject : Further integration entailed by EMU In the Commission 's estimation , to what extent do the requirements imposed by EMU on economic policy - which include permanently fixed exchange rates - create the need for further economic integration in the form of a more extensive common budget ( a common fiscal policy ) , cyclical transfers between Member States , increased labour mobility between the participating states and / or a more flexible labour market ?
The introduction of the euro will increase economic integration and reinforce the positive effects of the single market , primarily by eliminating the risks relating to exchange rates .
There are also other factors . There is greater transparency in prices , an improvement in competition and an increase in trade and investment both cross-border and also between other countries or areas affected by monetary union .
At the same time , as the common monetary policy will mean the same interest rate for all Member States of the monetary union , it will not only have an effect in terms of developing demand , but it will also mean greater integration of the financial markets .
This should also bring benefits for savers and investors .
For this to have the greatest positive effect , it is essential that we carry out a policy of rationalised public finances , which will not generate tensions in monetary policy itself , and at the same time , a decisive policy of structural reforms and a competition policy , which will allow the maximum benefit to be drawn from the process .
In order for economic and monetary union to function successfully , we do not need a major budget which will allow cyclical transfers in the event of difficulties .
I believe that the Treaty , supplemented by the Stability and Growth Pact , provides adequate instruments to implement an economic policy which is compatible with a unified monetary policy .
The basic framework which we have introduced is a framework of mutual supervision of national fiscal policies and of coordination of economic policies by means of processes to improve our structural situations and the coordination or creation of a positive macroeconomic environment which will favour growth and employment , and at the same time reduce the possibility of asymmetric clashes caused by economic policies .
Budgetary consolidation itself , which is , of course , the reduction of the public deficit , gives each Member State room to act in adverse situations .
Greater labour mobility may certainly help to confront the problems which may arise in the event of asymmetric clashes .
Both an increase in the available work force and an improvement in productivity would improve the situation in terms of creating jobs and helping to reduce unemployment .
That is why we attach particular importance to labour mobility .
The Commission has therefore insisted on its various strategies regarding the specific point of labour mobility , while remaining aware that this is a difficult issue .
It is difficult within Member States and it is difficult between one Member State and another , due not only to historical and cultural incompatibilities in terms of education , but also to a series of other aspects related to this type of situation .
Finally , I would say that clearly these difficulties which are being considered - and which may arise in the future - will surely be much less serious than those which have been brought up in theory by people who study monetary union , given that - and this is our experience to date - we are seeing an approximation of the economic policies of the countries and we have created room , in monetary terms , for us to confront difficulties more easily than in the past .
Thank you very much for your answer which , up to a point , contains many of the features I had expected .
I should like to follow up your answer and ask you what is meant by saying that the euro project will not be a success unless there is a large budget which can cope with fluctuations in the trade cycle .
What kind of large budget ?
Is it a large EU budget which is being considered ?
I should also like to hear whether it can be imagined continuing with a policy based upon recommendations and exhortations to the euro zone countries .
For example , Denmark has , in fact , on a number of occasions disregarded recommendations from the Commission .
Is this state of affairs to be accepted in the long term or will the Stability and Growth Pact be followed up and a stable environment ensured for EMU by adopting working methods of a type different from those involving recommendations and exhortations ?
In your reply - or comment - I note two implicit questions .
Firstly , a major budget is essential to tackle the cyclical difficulties .
This would lead us into a very complex debate . The problems are not caused by clashes themselves , but by asymmetric clashes ; asymmetric clashes differ depending on whether they are temporary or permanent , whether they relate to supply or demand .
We have little experience to help us define a typology and lay down a single formula for resolving these difficulties by budgetary means .
We believe that it is a much better idea to establish a general framework of economic health , of good economic behaviour , which will allow us to confront the difficulties in the case in question .
In the future we will continue with recommendations to comply with the stability and growth pact .
I do not know whether it is a good or a bad thing , but that is our obligation as the Commission .
This is an agreement adopted by the Council of Ministers as a result of initiatives by certain Member States and which I also support , since I believe that a good budgetary policy provides greater room for manoeuvre in the event of difficulties .
Earlier I referred to the fact that the situation is different in each of the Member States .
In this year ' s recommendations we have taken particular account of the Commission ' s own analyses regarding what the margins are , and which benchmarks we are setting in each of the Member States to tackle the crisis without exceeding the 3 % public deficit , which is the figure we have established as a reference .
We can see that that situation is different in each of the countries and , therefore , our recommendations and our comments will always be different in each of the countries , although this is not the only aspect that we take into consideration .
Mr President , the current weakness and volatility of the euro is a cause of concern both within and outside the euro-zone .
Does the Commissioner feel that the current stability pact and the powers of the European Central Bank are sufficient to force the Euro-land states to make the difficult and fundamental adjustments in their economic and labour markets , which are essential if the euro is going to be taken seriously by the global financial markets ?
I do not see any great correlation between the two questions , but I do note that the euro is being taken seriously .
What has happened with the euro ?
There are many technical explanations as to why we are in this situation .
This would require a broader debate , focussing on the starting point , which is the development of economic forecasts and the real economies of each of the areas . It would also clearly concern changes in interest rates and certain other technical elements , such as expiry dates for certain types of issues etc .
The reality is that , by analysing the euro on the basis , fundamentally , of the evolution of the exchange rate , we are making an incorrect evaluation of its introduction .
The euro has been a great success , in terms of its introduction , in terms of issuing it as a currency , in terms of the consolidation of an excellent economic situation in Europe and in terms of the forecasts for the future .
It is true that the interest rate is not what we would have liked .
We believe that a strong economy means a strong euro .
We also believe that the development of growth in Europe will be strong throughout 2000 and , as a result , we will match US growth by the end of this year .
In these circumstances , we believe that the value of the euro will be rising in the coming months .
Therefore , despite a certain degree of concern - because that concern exists within public opinion - about the evolution of the euro , we believe that this situation will be corrected and that it should be considered to be temporary rather than permanent .
Mr President , in my opinion , the supplementary question by Mr Purvis was most pertinent , since recently the need for increased economic cooperation amongst the EMU countries has been justified by precisely this weakening of the value of the euro in relation to the US dollar .
The reason for the dollar becoming stronger in comparison to the euro is simply that the national economy of the USA is stronger than that of the euro countries .
Hundreds of thousands of new jobs have recently been created in the USA , while the number of jobs in Europe has been cut .
I would like to ask the Commissioner firstly , whether the Commission admits that the weakening of the euro that has been much thrashed out in public , is a consequence of the infrastructural problems and lack of dynamism of the EU economy , particularly in relation to the USA , and whether he really believes that the kind of Keynesian action as proposed by Mrs Frahm would be the cure for this weakening of the euro , and whether he believes that the Commission will achieve better results in this matter , when the national governments of France and Germany have actually proceeded in the totally opposite direction , and their actions have weakened even further the competitiveness of the euro area .
As an example , I refer here to the decisions made by the French Government on working hours .
I will try to reply briefly , although these are complex questions and I will therefore have to give this point some attention .
Firstly , with regard to increasing cooperation in terms of coordinating economic policies , I believe that it is necessary and positive and is one of the elements which is emerging from this current crisis .
The French President has highlighted this and it will obviously be a point for debate during the next presidency .
I do not agree with the theory that the euro ' s development is leading to a fall in employment in Europe and an increase in employment in the USA .
Transfers of capital may generate additional activity in the United States , but the positive increase in exports is generating activity in Europe .
It would require a very complex and profound debate to deal with this issue .
In any event , what I do believe - as I said earlier - is that the euro , at the moment , has an exchange rate which , if we analyse it in relation to its components and its historical situation , is not that different from situations which have existed at other times .
I am convinced that this is a transitional situation which will improve during this year .
Question No 38 by ( H-0419 / 00 ) :
Subject : Precarious employment and the industrial-accident rate in Spain and in the Murcia region At the Lisbon Summit , a commitment was made to achieving full employment in proper jobs throughout the EU .
In response to the French Government ' s proposal involving a reduction in working hours in order to create more proper , stable jobs , the approach agreed between the Spanish and UK Governments , which calls for further deregulation of employment conditions in order to increase the number of jobs , has been adopted .
Spain ' s experience over the last four years has demonstrated that jobs are indeed created but are predominantly casual and precarious in nature , and they are associated with a high rate of industrial accidents , the Murcia region being the part of Spain where that rate is highest .
Does the Commission not think that there is an urgent case for monitoring the conditions under which jobs are being created in the various EU countries and regions , so as to ensure that job-creation is not at the expense of the stability and dignity of workers and especially of young people entering the job market for the first time ?
Questions to Mr Verheugen
Mr President , despite the fact that I was born next to the Murcia region , it is difficult for me to analyse , in Community terms , the problems of the precarious employment there .
Therefore , allow me to make a rather more general comment .
The assessment of the labour market reforms which have resulted from the processes we have established in the Union - the Luxembourg process and the broad guidelines for economic policy - demonstrates that the reforms of the regulations on the labour market in the different countries are making a positive and significant contribution to greater economic growth and to promoting the creation of employment and the greater participation of men and women in the labour market .
The broad guidelines of economic policy and the recommendations for employment have never advocated a simple deregulation of the labour market , as the question states .
Together with the reform of certain labour market regulations , they also include , for example , the need to adopt measures which will promote entrepreneurial spirit or active labour market policies - and we state this quite deliberately - to improve employment opportunities .
The measures adopted in each Member State must be adapted to the problems and reality of each of them .
It is also quite normal for the Commission to insist on the need to hold debates and make agreements with social partners so that they may actively participate in the changes to the labour market in each country .
As well as a significant and lasting increase in the levels of employment , one of the key priorities of the employment strategy is to improve the quality of jobs .
The recent Lisbon Summit gave a new impulse to the Union ' s economic and social agenda and we have also insisted on this point by talking of more and better employment .
I would also like to highlight , as a fundamental contribution to the consolidation of the progress made until now , the promotion and maintenance of rigorous regulations on health and safety at work , which has been one of the most prominent issues in the debate held in the Commission , which advocates better jobs in Europe .
Labour market reforms directed at improving employment opportunities and workers ' ability to adapt to these new opportunities in no way seek to undermine working conditions or health and safety at work .
In accordance with its legal competence as laid down in the Treaty , the Commission has kept up the necessary efforts to implement and propose various legal instruments and monitor the incorporation of the acquis communautaire in this area .
With regard to your specific question and the case of Spain , it is Spain ' s responsibility , like the other Members , to apply the Commission ' s directives .
It is also the responsibility of the Member States to monitor the application of these directives in all of their regions .
The Commission must guarantee that those directives are transposed into national law correctly and , clearly , to monitor all the issues relating to its application , which is the responsibility of the national authorities .
I am grateful to Mr Solbes for the intention behind his reply , which is to safeguard and show concern for worker ' s conditions .
Nevertheless , the political analysis of the Lisbon Summit reveals that there were two proposals : one which was more social , more committed , which came from the French Prime Minister , Mr Jospin , and the other , resulting from a previous agreement between Mr Blair and Mr Aznar , deregulating the labour market and making it more flexible .
The latter proposal won the day .
If we take Spain as an example , it is clear that job instability , temporary employment and work accidents are on the increase .
Do you not therefore believe that it would be appropriate , in the review of the Treaty of Amsterdam , to incorporate the Social Charter with specific instruments and measures , as occurred with the five classic points of the Treaty of Maastricht , in order to guarantee full employment and employment quality and that it therefore not be left to the whim of each of the countries ?
By way of clarification , reference has been made to the number of work accidents in Murcia because it has such a sad record within Spain ; that is why we are concerned .
I imagined that was the reason for the reference to Murcia , and not the fact that I was born next to that province .
With regard to the basic problem , I would make a different comment .
Our concern has always been not only greater employment but also greater quality of employment .
In the broad guidelines for economic policy for this year , and in the specific recommendation for Spain , we expressly refer to the need for the problems to be analysed , amongst them the cost of dismissal , which may be important with regard to temporary employment , because we believe that a distinction should be made between precariousness and flexibility , which are two very different things .
Nevertheless , you introduced a second element in your supplementary question which , in my opinion , is of great interest : Why do we not establish the objective of full employment in the same way that we established the objectives of the Treaty of Maastricht at the time ?
Basically because they are two completely different types of figure .
At Maastricht , what we put in place was compliance with obligations dependent on voluntary decisions adopted by the Member States which form the European Union .
In the case of full employment , the figure is the consequence of measures which are intended to achieve an objective , but which do not have a causal relationship which guarantees its objective .
What we can consider is what is being done in the various employment programmes , and that is the implementation of certain elements which will allow us to move towards full employment .
When we spoke of full employment in the Commission document which served as a basis for the debate in Lisbon , we expressly said that if we add the development of the economy in accordance with currently available figures to the various determining factors and policies proposed by the Commission , full employment will be achieved .
However , this cannot be a political objective , as in Maastricht , because it does not depend on the will of the different governments or on a specific decision by each one of them .
I would like to say that , in order to judge from afar , it is often necessary to understand the reality .
In the countries of the Southern Mediterranean , and specifically in the region of Murcia , they have , in recent years , stopped managing unemployment and started to manage employment .
They have moved from an extraordinary and terrifying level of unemployment , originating in the great state industries whose economic model was unsustainable , through a crisis and then to a situation involving the growth of small businesses ( SMBs ) and economic incentives which have generated a new and vibrant model .
However , it is clear that accidents in the workplace - which I am now talking about - are a problem of education and mutual responsibility on the part of businessmen , the state , public administration and , of course , trade unions .
Unless they all work in unison , they will not achieve this objective .
In Spain , back in 1995 , a law was adopted in this respect , and they are trying to comply with it , but this cannot be achieved in a day .
Therefore , Commissioner , firstly , what active policies and which economic sectors do you intend to bring into play in order to achieve better education in this particular area , so that a sense of responsibility may be developed ?
Secondly and very specifically : is there any programme to educate immigrants in the language of their host country , so that we can educate them to understand the minimum safety standards in this region which is host to many immigrants who do not speak our language ?
Thank you for your comments .
With regard to your questions , I will say again that the distribution of responsibilities between the Commission and the Member States dictates that these matters fall to the Member States .
Consequently , both the funding of these immigrant education programmes and the active policies are decisions which logically depend on which social policy the Spanish Government accepts or decides on .
Question No 39 by ( H-0352 / 00 ) :
Subject : Adaptation of the applicant countries Will the Commission indicate the total number of documents that have been sent to the applicant countries as well as the total volume of the ' acquis ' and will it consider forms of cooperation that do not require the applicant countries to accept every rule ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the entire Community acquis , i.e. all the legal acts of the European Union without exception were sent to the candidate countries immediately after the resolution of the Luxembourg European Council in December 1997 , during the course of screening .
No-one has ever counted them and I cannot therefore tell you how many there are .
We usually talk of just over 20 000 legal acts in this context .
Mr President , there is not very much to thank the Commission for .
I find it completely incomprehensible that there should be an institution which is unable to put together elementary statistics concerning the existing rules , which is unable to add up how much money is being sent to the candidate countries , which is unable to provide some general numerical information so that ordinary people can follow what is happening and which is unable to supply the total acquis on a CD-Rom to anyone who might be interested in it .
It is really quite simple . I have worked on it for a good many years .
It is completely impossible even for organisations with academic employees to find out how extensive the ' acquis ' is , and it is apparently impossible for Mr Vanhengen to give the entire acquis to a Member of the European Parliament who is quite prepared to go through it and distribute the tasks among the different employees in order to see what positions are to be adopted on its various aspects .
So there is nothing to thank the Commission for .
Mr President , Mr Bonde , we have met each other face to face here before , and I personally am having to exercise a great deal of self-control in order to maintain the necessary degree of decorum in the House .
The legal acts which we are talking about here are legal acts passed by the Council , by Parliament , by the Commission and by all the Community institutions .
You , as a member of the most important legislative institution of the European Union know full well that these legal acts have not been numbered consecutively .
I do not know of a single Member State of the European Union whose laws are numbered consecutively .
Even the laws in your country - and I have taken the trouble of finding out - are not numbered consecutively .
If you think that Commission officials are well employed if I sit them down and tell them to spend a week counting the legal acts issued since 1955 , then let me tell you that I do not .
I have no intention of arranging for them to be counted .
The information which I have given you is as accurate as possible : i.e. that candidate countries are sent all , I repeat all the legal acts of the European Union without exception .
I am curious to know how it helps if I tell you that this figure is 21334 or 21425 .
If you want , you sit down and do it . You can find the entire Community acquis on-line on the Celex website here in Parliament .
You tell your employees to count these legal acts , because I shall not tell mine to do so .
Mr President , Commissioner , the acquis is , of course , an important basis for accession .
Can you tell us how acquis screening is proceeding in your view ?
With which candidate countries has most progress been made ?
Which chapters have been completed ?
Chancellor Schröder recently stated in a press conference that the first admissions will probably be in 2002 .
How do you assess the scenario if the legal inventory is completed in optimum time ?
What do you think is the earliest possible date for accession if optimum use is made of all deadlines and options ?
I can tell the honourable Member that screening - i.e. legislative adjustment - was of course completed with all candidates some time ago .
It is updated now and again because the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission are not idle and continue to produce legal acts , meaning that the acquis changes .
This amended acquis must , of course , be included in negotiations . But this happens on a regular basis .
The screening process has therefore been completed with all candidates .
Your question is based on a misunderstanding .
Screening is not the same as negotiation , screening is merely an adjustment process .
Screening is used merely to identify the acquis of the European Union and how much of it already forms part of the candidate country ' s legislation and how much does not .
That has been done .
Now you want to know how far negotiations have proceeded overall .
I know that for the Luxembourg group of countries , with which negotiations started in March 1998 , between 10 and 15 out of a total of 31 negotiating chapters have been provisionally completed .
A few more will be completed during the Portuguese presidency .
But more important than the number of chapters completed is probably the number of chapters opened .
By the end of the Portuguese presidency , all 29 chapters will be on the negotiating table for the Luxembourg group of countries .
Only the chapters entitled " Institutions " and " Miscellaneous " are still closed for obvious reasons .
They come at the end .
With the Helsinki group of countries , negotiations did not start until February of this year .
Between 5 and 8 chapters will be opened for these countries during the Portuguese presidency .
Indeed , I think that we will be able to provisionally close a whole series of chapters by the end of the Portuguese presidency , but we cannot yet forecast how many with any degree of accuracy .
In all events , the process is proceeding apace .
It is quite impossible to forecast when the negotiating process will be completed and when the first accessions will take place .
There have been intensive discussions on this over recent weeks and months .
The Commission stated quite clearly in Helsinki that an accession scenario could not be developed until all the information needed was available .
We need to clarify if the Union itself is ready for accession , i.e. if the institutional reforms have been completed , how far negotiations have progressed and , most importantly , and this will be the most difficult exercise at the end , if a candidate country is judged to be in a position to really apply and implement the acquis it has adopted .
As things stand today , I am bound to say that we cannot forecast when such a scenario will be ready .
I have said on many occasions that I would like it to be ready by the end of this year , at the Nice summit .
But whether or not that will be possible will only become apparent in the autumn of this year once we have the up-to-date progress reports on preparations for accession for each individual candidate country .
Mr President , Commissioner , my question does not concern the timetable ; instead I would like to ask a question regarding a principle of enlargement .
The process of enlargement is expected to be a truly demanding one , in which there is a danger that we either become frustrated by long waiting times or compromise over the criteria by granting overlong transition periods , which will naturally cause displeasure in the old Member States .
An arrangement such as the EEA agreement may be regarded as a solution of the past , but I would nevertheless like to ask , whether the Commission could , even in principle , consider a possible solution along the lines of the EEA agreement - not as it stands but of that nature - to be used as some sort of ' hatchery ' or incubator for the new Member States prior to actual membership , instead of the applicant countries having to wait for long periods of time before permanent membership becomes a reality . I would further like to ask , whether the Commission shares the view that this kind of arrangement , along the lines of the EEA agreement , could considerably reduce the costs of enlargement and promote the economic development of the applicant countries .
I hope this question was not an improper one at this time .
Madam , what you wish to engage in now is a hypothetical discussion .
This discussion was held in the first half of the 1990s and it culminated in resolutions of which you are aware , which were discussed on several occasions in Parliament and which can no longer be made retroactive , namely the resolution of the European Councils of Copenhagen , Essen and Luxembourg to prepare the Central and Eastern European Countries and Cyprus and Malta for full membership .
There is no point today in debating whether or not there might have been an alternative .
In any case , it is my recollection that the candidates were not satisfied with anything less .
They would not have accepted less and would have seen it as discrimination , meaning that , in Luxembourg in 1997 , there was no longer any realistic alternative to the resolution taken in any case .
There is not a single country involved in the process which takes the view that we should depart from this objective of full membership .
If there were , I would know about it .
But there is not .
All 12 countries with which we are negotiating are seriously working towards the goal of full membership and I urgently advise you against opening a debate on changing the fundamental objectives of enlargement now that the process has begun .
The candidates will only see it as a serious breach of trust .
Question No 40 by ( H-0388 / 00 ) :
Subject : Eastward enlargement : transitional arrangements regarding the free movement of services Negotiations with the first group of applicant states ( the ' Luxembourg group ' ) on the free movement of services have reached a provisional conclusion .
What transitional arrangements have been agreed to date ?
What effects does the Commission expect these to have on small businesses and self-employed craft workers , particularly in the regions bordering on the applicant states ?
Questions to Mr Monti
Mrs Müller , the question is based on an erroneous premise .
The chapter entitled " Free movement of services " has not been provisionally completed with any candidate country .
Nor do I expect this chapter to be completed with any country in the immediate future .
Mr President , it is certainly correct to say , Mr Verheugen , that the chapter has not been completed , but negotiations have started .
However what I am interested in is this : Have transitional arrangements in the area of the free movement of services been applied for during these negotiations ?
You know , I am from a border region and I know exactly what the situation is on the ground .
I am convinced that medium-sized companies and the craft industry will face huge problems and enormous challenges when it comes to the free movement of services , because there is a huge wage differential of 1 : 10 at present .
You yourself know full well which industries are affected .
Is there any intention on the European side to apply for transitional arrangements in the area of the free movement of services ?
The Czech Republic has already applied for transition periods for the acquisition of land by foreigners and this will have an impact on services .
What is your position on the transition periods which the Czech Republic has applied for and what is the Commission ' s position in general on this point ?
Mr President , Mrs Müller , I assume that you know that accession negotiations take the form of a state conference at which the Member States , not the Commission , negotiate and I am not therefore entitled to divulge the content of negotiations which have not yet been completed .
I would gladly do so , but I am not allowed to .
However , I can still answer the question , because the Commission naturally has an opinion on the points which you raised .
First , the Commission takes the view that transition periods should only be considered during the enlargement process if the aim of enlargement cannot otherwise be achieved within the required time or by the required date .
Transition periods must be very , very limited in both scope and duration , especially where the internal market is at stake .
You must know that every transition period , irrespective of whom it benefits , suspends the internal market for that area .
And if a large number of transition periods are agreed , then we can forget the whole idea of the internal market for years to come .
That cannot be the meaning of enlargement .
The question which you actually want answered is the question of how we can prepare for the problems which will arise in certain border regions following enlargement .
The region which you come from and the region which I come from are just such regions .
I have discussed this matter on many occasions in your country , as you know , and so I can be brief .
I think that there may well be transition periods in relation to the free movement of workers , which is the really difficult question .
But we have not yet reached that point .
In the area of the free movement of services , which will lead to stiffer competition in border regions , I think that we need to start preparing an action programme right now , particularly so that small and medium-sized enterprises in border regions will be capable of adapting to and withstanding this new competition .
When , a few weeks ago , I once again read the Commission ' s progress report on Lithuania , it occurred to me that the progress reports are being produced as if it were the previous enlargement we were talking about , that is to say the enlargement which took place before the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force .
The Social Chapter is the corollary and counterpart of free movement of services and labour mobility .
My question is about whether the forthcoming progress reports will , to a greater degree than the previous reports , take account of employment and of the Social Chapter , which is now a part of our ' acquis ' .
I believe , in fact , that we can succeed in enlarging the Union if we combine these two aspects : firstly , the free movement of services and employees and , secondly , more equal conditions when it comes to the dialogue between employers and employees .
The Social Chapter is , in fact , a part of our common regulations , with which the candidate States must also comply .
I would like to remind MEPs in general that questions during Question Time must be specific questions on specific issues , which lead to specific answers .
Everything else must take place during the normal debates of the parliamentary committees , because , otherwise , the MEPs who are due to follow will not be able to put their questions .
Having given this general warning , I give the floor to the Commissioner .
Mr President , to be honest , the underlying question was how many legal acts does the European Union have .
Now I am being asked to answer a supplementary question which very specifically concerns one candidate country .
I really cannot see the connection between these two questions , except that both relate to enlargement .
However , if you take the view that there is a connection , then I am prepared to answer the question and am able to do so .
All the acquis is taken into consideration in the progress reports on the candidate countries .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights cannot be taken into consideration because it is not yet ready .
It is only now being drafted and its legal status has not yet been recognised .
I know no better than you if this Charter will become part of the Treaty or if it will be no more than a solemn declaration .
If this Charter should become part of the Treaty , it will of course be taken into account in future progress reports and we shall report on how the details of this Charter are being taken into account in the individual countries concerned .
We must also report in the progress reports - as you will have noticed - as to whether a country is complying with the Copenhagen criteria .
That basically answers the questions , because the political criteria of Copenhagen basically cover everything which will appear in this Charter of Fundamental Rights and these questions have also been answered in relation to Lithuania and will be answered in the next progress report on Lithuania .
Mrs Thors is raising a point of order .
I wish to point out that I was not earlier referring to Mrs Thors , but to all MEPs , but you have the floor .
I would ask you not to enter into a debate with the Commissioner .
Commissioner , I just want to clarify matters as there seems to be very bad interpretation - I was not talking about the Charter of Fundamental Rights but about the Social Charter including the rights of workers .
These include working conditions which I think are a corollary to the movement of services .
What are the conditions under which services are provided ?
What are the conditions under which people are working ?
That is the corollary of free movement .
Mr President , I did indeed hear the words Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Of course , the Social Charter forms part of the Treaty and is therefore negotiated with all candidate countries .
It forms part of the Community acquis .
We report on how the individual candidate countries are preparing to apply the acquis , i.e. to apply the Social Charter .
I am not at the moment in a position to tell you exactly how things stand with Lithuania in particular , but I would be more than happy to give you a written reply specifically on Lithuania and the Social Charter .
Commissioner , we were in fact discussing the matter of transition periods .
I should like to ask what your position is on the wishes of Poland and the Czech Republic to introduce long transition periods for two areas of concern to them , namely the free acquisition of land , including farmland , and the freedom of establishment .
These are two very fundamental points and I should like to know what the Commission or your position is on this .
I also wanted to ask you what you think about linking transition periods in the Member States and the candidate countries in the sort of package deal that is constantly being discussed .
On the first question , I should like to say that the Member States still have no negotiating position on this question , nor is there any Commission draft on it .
My own personal opinion is irrelevant .
In any case , I cannot explain it to the European Parliament until the institutions have formed their own opinion .
As far as linking transition periods is concerned , this happens automatically .
We shall have a so-called " play off " at the end of the negotiations between the wishes which the Member States still have and the wishes which the candidates have .
Basically their wishes concern transition periods .
Irrespective of whether or not that is what it is formally called , you can imagine how this sort of negotiation process proceeds .
It will be a negotiation and one of the principles of negotiation is that one side makes a concession so that the other side also makes a concession and an overall compromise must be found in the end which takes accounts of the wishes of both sides .
Highly specific packages - if that was your question - whereby we also say : we are linking the wish for transition periods on the one side to the wish for transition periods on the other side are not feasible in my opinion .
I should draw your attention to the fact that the question of transition periods in relation to the free movement of workers , for example , only gives cause for concern in two of the fifteen Member States .
It is a German problem and it is an Austrian problem .
It is not a problem for the other thirteen which is why I cannot predict exactly how this issue will be handled in the final stage of negotiations .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner , for your replies .
Questions Nos 41 and 42 will be replied to in writing .
Mr Titley has the floor for a point of order .
- Mr President , you realise this is the second month running you have done this to me - cut me off as my question was coming up .
Yet you have allowed speakers to speak for over one minute including a rather long and pointless dialogue about the merits of Murcia .
Also in the rules as I recall , you are only allowed to take one supplementary question per political group and these rules are being broken and as a consequence , for the second week running , I miss out on a question .
I think it is absolutely outrageous and I will be writing to the President to complain .
Mr Titley , I will reply briefly so as not to inconvenience the other MEPs .
I am not getting at you .
What has happened is that the 20 minutes devoted to Mr Verheugen have run out and it is now Mr Monti ' s turn to reply , and he has been waiting some time .
With regard to the Rules of Procedure , I must tell you that there are two supplementary questions , not one .
Please read the Rules of Procedure .
There are two questions .
I am not going to get into a debate .
You may write the letter you mentioned and you will receive a polite and full reply , but please do not worry since my intention was to give you the floor within the time allotted .
Question No 43 by ( H-0354 / 00 ) :
Subject : Applications by Member States regarding state aids Is the Commission happy about the speed with which it deals with applications by Member States to provide state aids ?
The time-limits for the Commission to take a decision on aid projects notified by a Member State are laid down in Council Regulation 659 / 1999 .
In most cases the Commission can close the examination of the notified aid project after the preliminary examination , that is without opening a formal investigation .
Such decisions must be taken within two months following the receipt of a complete notification .
In practice , notifications are frequently incomplete so that the Commission is forced to request additional information before it can take a decision .
In order to further reduce this type of unnecessary delay , the Commission has prepared detailed standard notification forms for certain types of aid - regional , training , R & D , etc. and will continue to do so where appropriate .
When doubts are raised about the compatibility of an aid project with the common market , the Commission must open a formal investigation for which the regulation provides an indicative time-limit of 18 months .
The Commission would certainly prefer to be able to reduce this time-limit .
However , this seems at present not feasible for different reasons .
Firstly , considerable time is needed for translation and publication of the decision , for third parties to submit observations and for the Member States to comment on these observations .
Secondly , the cases for which a formal investigation is opened are usually very complex and therefore require a longer period of examination , often also involving meetings with the Member State concerned and modifications to the original project .
Nevertheless , the Commission considers that given the absence of any time-limit for the formal investigation procedure before the regulation , the regulation has already brought some progress .
The Commission is also considering new ways of improving the efficiency and speed of state aid procedures .
In this regard , the group exemption regulations , which are currently being prepared for aid to SMEs - training aid and de minimis aid - should be mentioned .
Once they are in force , Member States will no longer need to notify aid projects complying with the conditions of the exemption regulations but can grant the aid immediately .
This will considerably simplify state aid procedures .
I wish to thank the Commissioner for that very full answer and , in particular , for the last part where he indicates that the Commission is looking at speeding up and , where possible , giving fast-track approval for state aids .
However , in some Member States there is still a serious problem created by delays in decision-taking on state aids .
I am convinced that some jobs have been lost because waiting for the decision on state aid has meant that a company has gone out of business in the end because it did not have the approval in time .
In terms of the delay , is the Commission of the opinion that the reorganisation that is currently going on will provide new resources and assistance to him in his attempts to speed up the processing of state aids , or does the problem lie , as he partly indicated , with the Member States in the inadequate information provided by some of them when they make an application ?
As you know , Mr Martin , we are working in a number of directions concerning state aid and in order to make state aid control more stringent .
As to time limits , there are no plans to change the time limits in the near future .
The deadlines are laid down in a Council regulation , which for the first time codifies state aid procedures , and since that regulation was only adopted in 1999 it is not likely to be modified in the near future .
However , we are prepared and indeed willing to try to speed up certain aspects of the decision-making wherever possible , for example preparing the standard notification forms .
You mentioned the problem of resources .
Of course , this is a key problem for the whole of the competition policy activities and that includes state aid .
The better the quality of information provided to begin with by Member States in their notifications , the more likely it is that the process will be smooth and conducted in a relatively short time scale .
Question No 44 by ( H-0355 / 00 ) :
Subject : State aids to nuclear power Given that the electricity market came into effect in February last , subjecting all electricity production to the rules of the internal market , and that the nuclear common market under Article 92 of the Euratom Treaty does not include electricity as a product , does the Commission agree that electricity generated using nuclear energy is now subject to the same internal market rules as all other forms of electricity ?
Does the Commission therefore consider that all state aids to the nuclear industry are prohibited by the EC Treaty , given that no derogation is specified , and that Article 98 of the Euratom Treaty does not provide for a subsidised accident insurance scheme for nuclear risks ?
In this context what proposals , if any , has the Commission made to the UK Government concerning their NFFO system under Article 87 of the EC Treaty ?
Can the Commission now confirm that it is investigating state aids to the nuclear industry as requested by the Green / EFA Group in its letter to Commissioner Monti of 10 March ?
Mr President , the Commission shares the opinion of the honourable Member to the effect that the liberalisation of the electricity market affects all types of electricity , including electricity generated using nuclear energy .
The Commission considers that there are no grounds for interpreting the EC or the Euratom Treaty as necessarily prohibiting all state aids to the nuclear industry .
The Euratom Treaty does not include any clauses specifically prohibiting state aid .
Moreover , while Articles 87 and 88 of the EC Treaty do provide for a general principle prohibiting state aids , they also authorise specific categories of state aid .
It would only be possible to determine the incompatibility of aid following specific investigation of each case .
The Commission has not made any proposals to the UK Government on the subject of the NFFO system in application of Article 88 of the EC Treaty .
As regards any existing aid to the nuclear industry , the Commission is not undertaking any systematic investigation .
If , however , cases of incompatible aid are brought to the attention of the Commission , such cases will be dealt with in compliance with the terms of the relevant articles of the EC and Euratom Treaties .
Commissioner , thank you for your response , but I must admit I find it hard to grasp the logic of it .
On the one hand , regarding state aid to the environment , you expect to implement a very thorough analysis of the subsidies to renewable energies even though it is clear that , for the time being , this sector is at a disadvantage due to the internalisation of costs .
In other words , the market share of renewable energies within the current electricity market is barely 5 % .
Alongside that , nuclear energy amounts to 30 % of the market but in this case you do not plan any systematic investigation .
I do not therefore see how we can possibly understand this , if the logic of your energy policy is supposed to be fair , treating all forms of electricity production alike .
I must therefore ask you to justify your position since , as far as I am concerned , and also many others , most especially the renewable energy industry , it is a position which is extremely difficult to comprehend .
Thank you , Mr Turmes .
I am very aware of environmental requirements , as I was even in the previous Commission , when I proposed the directive on the taxation of energy products , and I try to adopt the same approach in my activities within the Prodi Commission .
I very clearly understand your concern , but permit me some observations .
The proposed new framework for state aid to the environment is very flexible with regard to the granting of aid to renewable energies .
It authorises aid of at least 40 % of eligible costs in the case of investment , and for operational aid the Member States are entitled to adopt a system authorising aid up to 100 % of eligible costs .
I do not think , therefore , that you can accuse the Commission of banning aid to renewable energies .
There is some competition , again permit me the observation , not only between renewable energies as opposed to conventional energies , but also between the various forms of renewable energies .
Aid to these forms of energy may , moreover , vary according to the Member States .
Unregulated aid would therefore engender distortions of competition , which could have an adverse impact primarily on certain forms of renewable energy .
The Commission recognises that renewable energies may need support in order to be able to develop but , at the same time , it is also important for these forms of energy to adapt gradually to competitive markets in order to ensure their long-term development .
Question No 45 by ( H-0383 / 00 ) :
Subject : Financial aid given to the European nuclear industry What assessment has been made by the Commission of the financial aid given to the European nuclear industry - in the form of support for Euratom and the Joint Research Centres - in respect of competition policy on electricity production in the European Union ?
Community action within the context of the Euratom Treaty complies with the provisions of the Treaty and relates , in particular , to the financing of the Commission 's tasks : protection against radiation , monitoring safety and research .
As far as the latter is concerned , Community programmes for nuclear research are established by the Council which , pursuant to Article 7 of the Euratom Treaty , acts unanimously on Commission proposals .
In this context , the activities of the JRCs are intended , in conformance with its mission , to increase protection and nuclear safety , and in particular , provide scientific and technical assistance to the competent directorates-general .
Article 305 ( ex Article 232 ) of the EC Treaty establishes that the provisions of this Treaty do not derogate from the Euratom Treaty .
This is particularly true in the case of the competition rules , which do not derogate from the framework established by the Euratom Treaty regarding Community nuclear research .
Therefore , the Community research policy under the Euratom Treaty does not contradict the competition rules laid down by the EC Treaty .
Commissioner , you have failed to answer my question .
I want to know what assessments you are making on financial aid .
This relates to the previous question by Mr Turmes as well and the answer you gave to that in respect of competition policy on electricity production in the EU .
I conclude from your answers both to my question and the previous one that here we have not just a white elephant in the nuclear industry in Europe but a holy cow .
You can provide state aids that are untouchable , even by a Commissioner as powerful as yourself !
But let me ask you what exactly is the situation ?
You said that under the Treaties there are derogations - and you quoted the Euratom Treaty .
There is clearly a distortion between Member States because of the state aids .
Where exactly in the Treaty are the written permissions for these state aids ?
Could you elaborate on that please ?
I shall try , Mrs Ahern .
First of all , if you allow me , I have here a note in French .
I should like to emphasise that the Commission does not rule out applying the rules of Community law on competition to public interventions in favour of nuclear electricity producers .
In its illustrative nuclear programme according to Article 40 of the Euratom Treaty , in particular , the Commission very clearly indicated that " Developments towards the liberalisation of the Community internal electricity market will mean that nuclear energy will have to compete in the same framework and under the same conditions as all other energy sources . "
A full implementation of the internal market and a rigorous application of the relevant state aid and competition rules implies a level playing field for all energy sources .
Once this principle has been established , it is up to the Commission to investigate on an individual basis any allegations according to which the nuclear sector is in receipt of subsidies engendering unfair competition .
I may add that the services I am directly responsible for within the Commission are of the opinion that it is necessary to keep to a strict interpretation of the Treaty .
Competition rules are applicable to all electricity producers , including the nuclear sector , insofar as they do not depart from the terms of the Euratom Treaty .
I consider this position to be all the more justifiable since the directive liberalising the internal electricity market does not stipulate any specific rule for nuclear producers and does not make any distinctions on the grounds of the source of the electricity produced .
Commissioner , you say that neither the Treaty nor the directive on the internal electricity market stipulate any exemptions regarding subsidies to the nuclear sector .
On what part of the Treaty , then , is the exemption that you are still allowing the nuclear industry based ?
Articles 87 and 88 make no reference to nuclear energy .
So it is not very clear what your legal basis is for exemptions for electricity generated using nuclear energy .
I believe I have given you all the information available to the Commission on the subject .
I can add that , on the operational level , as indeed I think I said in response to your own question , Mr Turmes , on existing aid to the nuclear industry , the Commission is not undertaking a comprehensive investigation .
If , however , cases of incompatible aid are brought to our attention , then these cases will be dealt with in accordance with the terms of the two treaties .
I would further like to add that in the logical overall construction of the EC Treaty , the articles governing state aid , i.e. Articles 87 and 88 , are not restricted to specific sectors .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 46 to 83 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Carbon dioxide emissions from new cars
The next item is the report ( A5-0128 / 2000 ) by Mr González Alvarez , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a scheme to monitor the average specific emissions of CO2 from new passenger cars .
Mr President , there are few of us here at this time in the evening , but it is also true that this is the third time we have debated this report in the European Parliament .
On the first occasion , in December 1998 , this report on the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from new passenger cars was approved at first reading with 48 amendments .
Of those 48 amendments , the Council and Commission accepted some in their entirety and others only in part .
The report therefore returned for a second reading .
The Council had accepted certain amendments which we considered to be important , but there remained certain aspects of the report and the amendments approved unanimously in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy - and by a large majority in plenary session - which we also considered to be important and which had not been accepted .
We are basically talking about the inclusion , in this scheme to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from new cars , of lightweight industrial cars , which are used widely within cities and whose carbon dioxide emissions also pollute .
It also seemed to us that they had not included a guarantee of the quality of data .
For a scheme of this nature , rigour and comparability , in terms of the data collected by the governments , are essential .
It also seemed very important that we maintained something that was traditional in the positions of the Committee on the Environment : a certain degree of precaution in relation to voluntary agreements .
If we bear in mind that Community Law - directives and regulations - is often not complied with , it seems to us all the more unlikely that voluntary agreements will be complied with .
The Committee on the Environment had little faith in these voluntary agreements and another amendment asked for the establishment of a clear legal framework which would come into play in the event that the voluntary agreements failed .
They also finally accepted our concern that one of the paragraphs should not only mention the stabilisation of emissions , but also their reduction .
Another amendment which we felt was important concerned the dimensions of vehicles .
Mr President , in total , 10 amendments were approved by a substantial majority in this House and then not accepted by the Council , and we therefore had to embark on this conciliation procedure , which I must point out has been neither difficult nor controversial .
As its very name indicates , the conciliation procedures require each of the parties to give some ground so that a final agreement can be reached .
In this final agreement , our main concerns have been addressed .
It includes a study of the future inclusion of lightweight industrial vehicles , the possibility of shortly presenting a proposed legal framework and reviewing the data with a view to making them more rigorous and more or less equivalent in each of the countries .
In short , Parliament ' s main concerns have been taken up , if not in an immediate and radical manner , at least to the extent that a commitment has been given to adopt decisions on this issue in the future .
The only amendment which was not accepted was the one relating to dimensions of vehicles .
Parliament continued to insist that this was very important because the more powerful and larger the vehicle , the greater its level of emissions , and we considered it important that this be included in one of the annexes .
However , bearing in mind that another six issues relating to the capacities and conditions of the vehicles have been accepted , we felt that we could not prolong the conciliation process any longer , particularly considering that we want this study on the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from new passenger cars to be implemented immediately in each of the countries .
Finally , I believe that this is a reasonable agreement , which is neither Parliament ' s nor the Council ' s initial proposal .
Mr President , I believe that we will have no problem ensuring that this agreement is approved .
Mrs González Álvarez , conciliation processes vary in difficulty , I can assure you .
I am glad that this one has gone smoothly .
Mr President , Commissioner , allow me to start by congratulating Mrs González Álvarez .
She really is most persistent , because we had a very good report at second reading as it was , but she was determined to incorporate more proposed amendments and I really must congratulate her on succeeding in doing so .
Parliament has asserted itself against the Council once again .
The introduction of this sort of monitoring scheme is just one of the many steps on the path towards compliance with the Kyoto protocol .
Reducing greenhouse gases by 8 % in comparison with 1990 is therefore the main objective between now and the year 2012 .
The dramatic change in the climate has been noticeable here in Strasbourg over the past two days and is far greater than we assumed .
It will therefore come as no surprise if we adopt this report unanimously tomorrow , as will certainly be the case , and that the Council and Parliament have been able to find a common position so quickly .
This joint monitoring scheme is the first of its kind and I think that its success or failure will decide whether or not we opt to introduce other similar schemes .
We have taken recourse to a three-part strategy in order to reduce CO2 emissions and fuel consumption : environmental agreements with the car industry , a system of tax incentives and a system of labelling for fuel consumption and CO2 emissions .
But despite all these efforts , directives and joint measuring schemes , we should not delude ourselves : we are unlikely to achieve the target objective of reducing greenhouse gases to 1990 levels .
Some experts are advising us to try and stabilise emissions at present levels .
That may well be pessimistic but if we consider that the number of cars on the road is continuing to rise in the 14 Member States , oh excuse me , I meant 15 ; we Austrians often have to stop and ask ourselves if there are 14 or 15 Member States , but there are in fact still 15 , and if we consider enlargement to the east and if we consider that people in China and India also want to live as we do , then we should make no mistake : it will be difficult to achieve a reduction in greenhouse gases or CO2 and we should therefore make every effort to stabilise them at the very least .
Despite all the pessimism , introducing a pan-European monitoring system for CO2 emissions will not do any harm .
Let us try yet again with one small step at a time and perhaps the House will sit in 2005 , when we need to examine the initial results , and complain that perhaps we did not do enough today .
Mr President , Commissioner , trust is good , control is even better , as the Head of State of a now defunct system used to say .
Nonetheless , once in a while these words of wisdom fit the bill because our CO2 strategy for cars is of course a new departure in that we are trusting in the willingness of car manufacturers in Europe , Korea and Japan to take voluntary technical measures to reduce CO2 emissions from their cars to 140g by 2008 , which will represent a reduction of around 25 % .
But we do still need a control mechanism so that we can intervene if necessary .
Hence : trust is good , control is even better .
We want a statistically perfect control instrument at our disposal and in this respect I thank the rapporteur for her persistence in establishing a reasonable control instrument for CO2 emissions from cars in Europe which applies to all Member States , which clearly shows which vehicles are registered where and what their CO2 emissions are , so that we can see clearly in 2003 if the manufacturers ' undertakings are being respected or not .
And if they are not , then we must take legislative measures .
I should like to refer to another two pillars in our strategy : the question of labelling , which has been dealt with and the question of additional tax incentives for low-consumption vehicles , which is still a somewhat weak point .
I think that all of us , especially of course the Member States , need to give clear additional incentives , so that we really can achieve our objective of 120 g in 2005 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate our rapporteur on the excellent results that she has achieved and to begin by placing this report in the broader context of climate change .
Since the Rio de Janeiro Conference and then Kyoto , the European Union has always led the political side of the debate on climate change .
Nevertheless , although Europe continues to lead the debate in terms of rhetoric , it is beginning to lose the legitimacy to do so in a credible way .
It is rather pointless for the European Union to try to alarm the whole world with this problem when , in reality , the European greenhouse gas bubble , in particular the carbon dioxide bubble , is more likely to increase by 6 % to 8 % than to decrease by the 8 % that we agreed in Kyoto .
It is therefore time to take internal action in order to lend credibility to our external efforts .
In terms of political action , the transport sector must be our priority for the following two fundamental reasons .
Firstly , because , according to the Green Paper published by the European Commission , this sector will not be part of the European trading system for carbon dioxide emissions , and all greenhouse gas reductions will therefore have to be achieved exclusively through national and Community policies and measures .
Secondly , because transport is the sector that is contributing most to Europe ' s falling short of the levels set in Kyoto .
According to a study recently published by the European Environment Agency , transport is responsible for almost 30 % of the European Union ' s total emissions , and it predicts that the level of carbon dioxide emissions generated by this sector will increase by 39 % of the 1990 level by 2010 .
Given this extremely disturbing picture , which shows that road transport is responsible for 85 % of total carbon dioxide emissions in the transport sector , and given the overwhelming need for action , the agreement reached in the Conciliation Committee on this system for monitoring CO2 emissions from light passenger vehicles is to be welcomed .
This system is a crucial aspect in the implementation of the Kyoto protocol and will ensure rigorous control of the voluntary commitment made by the car industry to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in new passenger vehicles by 25 % .
I regret the fact that it has not been possible to include light commercial vehicles in this system .
In any event , I congratulate Mrs González Álvarez once again on the results she has achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , I intend to be as brief as our successful rapporteur in the conciliation procedure .
However , let me just offer her my hearty congratulations on her excellent report and brilliant success , as some of the previous speakers have done .
Contrary to some previous speakers , I think it is most important that the report should seek not just to stabilise concentrations of greenhouse gases but to reduce them , especially given the fact that we need to achieve a demonstrable success by 2005 under the terms of the Kyoto protocol .
I think it is fundamental , given the reservation which this Parliament has always expressed in connection with voluntary obligations in environmental agreements , that we have managed to include the passage stating that data will be used from 2003 onwards to monitor the voluntary obligations of the car industry .
I also think that it is fundamental - and the scope is not extended by this decision - that we have managed to bring the Commission so far down the line that it is looking into implementing harmonised measurements for the specific CO2 emissions from class N1 vehicles and presenting proposals to this effect .
I think that is a huge success .
I should like once again to congratulate the rapporteur and vote in favour of this report .
Mr President , I welcome the excellent result reached by the European Parliament and the Council on this dossier .
I congratulate the co-legislators on their efforts in finding a swift and satisfactory agreement .
The process leading to the approval of this proposal constitutes a prime example of how the two arms of the European legislature can settle their differences and work together towards adoption of sound and effective environmental law .
I should like to seize the opportunity to thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and , in particular , the rapporteur , Mrs González Álvarez , for its constructive approach .
The adoption of this decision will allow the effectiveness of the Community strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars to be monitored and , more specifically , it will provide credible data to monitor the implementation of the voluntary agreements with car manufacturers .
This strategy is one of the most concrete activities of the Community on CO2 emissions and reductions from the transport sector .
Therefore it represents an important milestone in the achievement of the Kyoto target .
Mr President , unforgivably , I have forgotten something .
It will take me just 20 seconds to express my gratitude to all the members of the Conciliation Committee : to Mr Provan , to Mrs Jackson , who also participated , and to the members of the Commission and the Council with whom we worked in order to reach an agreement on the report .
Furthermore , I would like to thank all the MEPs for their support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Interoperability of the trans-European rail systems
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports , tabled by Mr Savary on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism :
( A5-0112 / 2000 ) on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation and effects of Directive 96 / 48 / EC concerning the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system ;
( A5-0113 / 2000 ) on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system .
Mr President , I hope that the two members due to speak before me were not travelling by train and have been delayed .
I think they are in the House and will arrive in time .
Unfortunately , the fact of the matter is that we are fighting numerous problems on the railways which are a legacy from the past .
For example , in 1970 , the railways ' share of the freight traffic market was 21 % , compared with just 8.5 % now .
The railways have lost out massively in freight traffic and their share of the passenger traffic market has fallen from 10 to 6 % .
The winner has been road freight traffic , which is increasing constantly and winning market shares : 16 % per annum on the eastern borders of Austria , for example .
It is now 2.4 times higher than in 1990 .
If you take lorries and buses from eastern Europe on the A1 motorway , which is the most important east-west route , traffic increased sixfold between 1995 and the year 2000 .
In other words , freight traffic , especially transit freight traffic , is growing massively .
According to forecasts , it will rise by more than 100 % between 1995 and 2015 .
That is why it is important and urgent that we concern ourselves with the European rail network .
It totals 156 000 kilometres in length , of which 78 000 km are accounted for by the TEN network .
12 600 km of new lines for speeds of over 250 km / h should be constructed by 2010 , with at least 16 300 km of lines due to be upgraded for speeds of over 200 km / h .
The total costs - and they are huge - are estimated at EUR 186 billion between now and 2010 .
So it is obvious how important this investment is for the European Union and that is why we are being called on here to set the priorities quickly .
I think that it is high time we adapted the railways to the market economy , so as to ensure that the railways invest more money more often in customer requirements and that we can jointly set the priorities and draw up a tight , efficient timetable .
The main requirements are , of course , to harmonise the gauge throughout Europe , especially where more than two countries cooperate .
At the moment , we still have five different gauges .
We need uniform electrification , especially in relation to voltage and frequency .
In other words , the technical properties of the electricity must be brought into line so that extra electricity can be bought from the national grids and fed into the national grids without any significant losses .
The third , and I think the most important point is the safety of trains .
We really do need external inspection and certification agencies .
We cannot have a situation in which the agency operating the railway is also responsible for inspecting it .
No-one questions the fact that cars and lorries are inspected by external certification agencies .
I think there is an urgent need , given the recent train crashes , for external inspection agencies to look after the safety of passengers in Europe .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank all the Members who supported the rapporteur in his work in presenting these two reports which are , I believe , absolutely crucial to the future of the railways .
What is the subject matter ?
The first report analyses the application of the 1996 Directive on the interoperability of the high-speed rail system , drawing the lessons of this for the future .
Next , and this is the substance of the second report , we must discuss and vote on a proposed directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must appreciate the full importance of this subject .
There is today an unacceptable contradiction between what is said in speeches and the reality of European transport systems .
As might have been expected , the creation of the internal market has , logically , considerably developed the trade in goods and the mobility of persons within the Union , which have shown an increase of 21 % and 15 % respectively between 1990 and 1997 .
The bulk of the traffic from this explosive growth in internal mobility , which is expected to be consolidated in the next few decades , has been acquired by road systems and , secondarily , maritime cabotage via the North Sea .
At a time when we have right here , in most of the countries of the Union , a rail network and technology unparalleled in the world , with a recent study evaluating the external costs of road transport in terms of public health , infrastructure and pollution at some EUR 480 billion , even though the objective of sustainable mobility and respect for quality of life are now shared by all Europeans , it can be noted that rail has only an 8.6 % market share for freight , and 5.8 % for passenger transport .
There is more than one explanation for this paradox : rail ' s reduced level of competitiveness due to a social differential in relation to the road sector , but also the distortions of competition engendered by the considerable external costs of road transport , the priority which most major railway companies in recent years have given exclusively to prestigious high-speed passenger transport , but also excessive national characteristics in terms of railway traditions , techniques and protocols , thereby compromising the flow of continental rail traffic .
Today , the situation of the European transport network situation is simple to the point of caricature : there is only one common area in transport and that is the road network .
There is no longer any single airspace or European maritime area , nor especially a continuous railway area within the countries of the Union .
The issue at stake in railway interoperability is , of course , doing away with the technical frontiers that have been inherited from the national railway structures set in place gradually since the nineteenth century .
Today , the Europe of the Fifteen has no less than sixteen electric signalling systems , six electrical voltages , five track gauges and several equipment and therefore infrastructure gauges .
Of course , the new high-speed train infrastructures offer a prime area for the introduction of interoperability , since they are new or recent networks devoted to very similar technology .
Directive 96 / 48 was adopted for this purpose .
The report on its application , four years on , referred to Parliament to express an opinion , delivers contrasting results , but results that are in the end more positive than they may seem .
In the first place , significant delay is observed in the transposition of laws and regulations since , to date , only two countries have transposed it and the first technical specifications for interoperability are on the point of being completed and published .
The conclusion is therefore that the time limits for transposition and publication must be more stringent in future .
This delay in transposing into law has not , however , hindered the development of interoperable cross-border lines , although Thalys is the only example of true interoperability , more so than even Eurostar , despite its attempts to solve the gauge problem .
These two international lines have established a precedent which can serve as a model for future developments .
More than that , however , in anticipation of tangible results in future , the directive on the interoperability of high-speed routes has primarily made it possible to define and iron out working methods .
For the first time , the railway industry , rail companies and infrastructure managers have started up a joint project to define the technical specifications for interoperability .
They have worked on the basis of the most general studies by the International Union of Railways .
Within the European Association for Railway Interoperability ( EARI ) they have set up a working group which now has methods and experience available for transposition to conventional systems .
Finally , the Committee established by Article 21 , bringing together representatives of the Member States and the Commission , enables political and technical monitoring of interoperability projects and intervention at the discretion of states to direct such projects .
In other words , while the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism felt bound to remind the Member States of their obligations in terms of time limits and transposition , it must be admitted that the high-speed systems have provided a first-rate testing ground for the vast worksite of interoperability .
In this respect , we have to bear in mind that the network and the conventional stock present problems for harmonisation that are formidable in other ways , due to the national and historical characteristics of networks , the great diversity of the stock , and the considerable extent of the networks .
It must be made quite clear at this point that there is no question of insisting that rail companies and infrastructure managers immediately proceed to replace their equipment comprehensively . This is totally out of reach , economically .
In the first place , if the goal is to achieve interoperability , this must entail using the fastest and least costly means to achieve decisive progress .
In this respect , interoperability may be achieved by methods other than the harmonisation of equipment , since it is possible to adapt equipment to operate in different configurations , following the example of the quadruple-system locomotives .
This is a proposal for a pragmatic and realistic approach which would not detract from railways ' competitiveness in relation to other modes of transport by imposing additional costs .




The key principles of this proposed directive are as follows : restriction of the geographical area covered by conventional system interoperability to the trans-European network as defined by the 1996 European Parliament and Council Decision ; a policy of gradual convergence rather than systematic renewal , taking the form of phasing in priorities and interoperability , establishing a hierarchy for subsystems to enable the fastest and cheapest access , with priority only to new investment for creating , extending , renewing , maintaining and operating systems ; establishing a hierarchy of objectives , distinguishing across-the-board objectives to be included in all standards : safety , reliability , health , environmental protection and technical compatibility ; the objectives inherent in each technical subsystem : infrastructure , energy , rolling stock , etc . ; the separation of the technical task of framing the TSIs assigned to a joint representative body , from the standardisation work entrusted to the European standards institutes , and the inspection and certification entrusted to notified bodies ; a policy of user consultation , as suggested by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism which cannot be envisaged , ladies and gentlemen , without concomitant consultation of staff representatives , the subject of an amendment that we shall be discussing tomorrow ; finally , ongoing monitoring of these projects by the Member States and the Commission through the Committee established under Article 21 , implemented by the high-speed directive , enabling states to request exemptions , to include special cases in the technical specifications for purely historic or regional networks , as well as certain types of equipment originating from third countries , and also instruments for authorising commissioning operations notified by Member States to the Commission .
In other words , there are safety valves for countries with a high level of special characteristics , and , within the institutions stipulated by the directive , they still have the opportunity to argue the case for these special characteristics and to have them included in the studies and in the TSI publications .
Finally , during the transition period , it is important to prevent the networks from growing further apart .
To this end , new investments , between now and the publication of the TSIs , shall have to comply with authorised technical references .
A Union rolling-stock register will be set up , making it possible to identify the rolling stock , its renewal and ageing , in the same way that this is still carried out , albeit imperfectly , for the maritime fleet .
Furthermore , we have to look to the future and , therefore , both the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy have proposed involving candidate country representatives in the projects at this early stage , so that they can anticipate this future acquis communautaire .
Similarly , and this is a recommendation that we make , we should already be planning conditions of interoperability between the various modes of transport , in accordance with our general objective of developing intermodal interoperability .
It would , of course , be presumptuous to expect everything to be achieved by this directive and the long-term upgrading work it requires from railway operators .
Quite clearly Europe is proposing to undertake a long-term and very large-scale project throughout its vast railway network .
It cannot single-handedly solve the problem of distortions of competition or of network access or charges which would represent crucial progress towards a new golden age of rail in Europe .
All the same , the technical interoperability of our old national networks is indeed an essential condition for the recovery of rail , which this balanced , reasonable and flexible text should make possible to achieve in gradual phases under acceptable economic and social conditions .
To the many of you who contributed to this , let me reiterate my gratitude and my appreciation .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Savary , and all the members involved for their excellent and constructive cooperation on this difficult , purely technical subject .
The number of proposed amendments tabled , including here in plenary , shows how important this issue is for Europe , which is why I can also praise the Commission for addressing the subject of the interoperability of conventional trains as well as of high-speed trains .
I think it is a pity that few Member States have transposed the interoperability directive with regard to high-speed trains and I call on the Commission to exert pressure to prevent the loss of valuable time which is costing the railways in terms of market shares and competition .
The directive is even more important where conventional trains are concerned .
The aim of the directive - as with high-speed trains - is to harmonise technical provisions in order to ensure that conventional rail traffic within the Union runs as smoothly as possible and to give candidate countries really exact specifications so that through traffic is also guaranteed after enlargement .
Interoperability will also have many advantages for both passengers and freight transport .
Better services , greater comfort , less travelling time , increased safety and possibly also lower prices .
The harmonisation of technical standards is also needed for the long overdue liberalisation of the railways .
Both together , interoperability and liberalisation , are most important if the railways are to survive in the internal market .
I am delighted that we have succeeded with the rapporteur and numerous other members in finding a good , common line on most aspects of this very demanding subject and would like to thank them for that .
This applies above all to the initially highly disputed derogations from the TSIs , but also to the social dimension of this directive , where we were finally able to achieve a compromise .
Nonetheless , - and we in the group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats continue to believe that we are right here - generally-worded social aspects do not belong in this purely technical directive , even if the Commission and the Council may think otherwise .
We are likewise opposed to involving passengers in working out TSIs .
Including these aspects will only result in the directive being difficult or impossible to manage .
Finally , a few other proposed amendments have been tabled , which we consider are quite simply too bureaucratic and have no positive aspects to boot .
In short , our group is against any elements which are counterproductive when it comes to achieving the important objective of an efficient European railway , as outlined above .
Allow me in closing to highlight the excellent cooperation once again ; I am optimistic that together we shall achieve the objective of creating as smooth a railway system as possible .
) Mr President , I would first like to congratulate Mr Savary on his drafting of such excellent reports .
This is an important topic , but also an extremely complicated one .
Mr Savary has taken good account of the views of others .
My group supports improvement of the competitiveness of railways and liberalisation of competition .
The first stage is to create the conditions for uninterrupted movement of trains over the entire region of the European Union .
Technical Specifications for Interoperability ( TSIs ) and common standards are a sine qua non for the development of railway interoperability .
The rapporteur has quite rightly adopted a gradual approach .
Technical solutions can vary a great deal .
The competitiveness of railways should not be undermined by the imposition of additional economic burdens , even though common standards will lower costs in the longer term .
Existing differences between national railway systems will make necessary some exceptions in the harmonisation of railway systems , so that no Member State shall have to face inordinate difficulties and so that current railway transport will not be jeopardised .
This report outlines a course of action by which these exceptions can be accepted without jeopardising the principal objective .
There is one further matter which would require fine tuning ; this was outlined in Amendment No 35 by my Group .
It applies to Finland in particular , but some of the applicant countries will be faced with the same problem in connection with enlargement of the Union .
The matter referred to concerns Russian freight wagons , where technical solutions are applied which differ from those of the Member States , inter alia in the area of couplings and brakes .
They are not necessarily inferior , but different .
Russia is hardly about to change its standards in order to comply with the requirements of the Union .
For Finland , this is an exceptionally major issue .
Due to historical reasons , the track gauge in Finland and Russia is the same , but it is different from that in Europe in general .
Russian wagons account for approximately 40 % - almost a half - of Finnish freight transport .
The reason for this high percentage is that we do not want to take the risk of sending Finnish wagons to Russia , since experience shows that they are so very rarely returned .
Russia , of course , is a country which leans heavily on rail transport , with a rolling stock which must equal that of the entire region of the EU put together
In the review concerning point 5 of Article 5 , Mr Savary proposes that when considering special cases , particular attention should be paid to the rolling stock of third countries .
This proposal is very good , but the solution remains half-finished , as far as Finland is concerned .
It will lead to unnecessary and laborious inspections of Russian wagons and to massive bureaucracy .
There is no certainty either that Russian wagons in all instances would be regarded as special cases .
This is why we have tabled an amendment of Article 7 , which simply aims at making it possible to use third country freight wagons for traffic , as long as they do not cross the border between two Member States .
This is the addition referred to as point f in the Committee ' s amendment .
Implementation of this proposal would give assurance that rail traffic in Finland could continue without becoming drastically reduced .
Mr President , Environment Commissioner , I am pleased that you are here because we can now address this matter straight away .
We are evidently debating a highly technical subject matter , namely the interoperability of both high-speed and conventional rail systems .
This gives me the opportunity to make a few comments on the environmental dimension to this proposal .
Today , we are essentially witnessing one of many historic moments which those who work in the sector , as well as those who are in favour of trains , have waited for for a long time , because at the end of the day , all this is , of course , meant to culminate in technological harmonisation , which entails the harmonisation of international rail , labour organisations , train drivers who have to make international rail journeys , etc .
This also means that employers ' organisations and trade unions will have an entirely different role and outlook with respect to this work .
In short , the proposal has a knock-on effect on many other areas and it will be some time before it is a reality .
Certainly if I look at the high-speed link and its technical specifications , I share Mr Savary ' s view - who has drawn up an excellent report - that it is scandalous that three , nearly four years after the previous directive on interoperability of the high-speed link , we are still waiting for technical specifications for interoperability .
This does not bode well at all for the future .
What we are aiming for in the long run with this rail proposal is to attempt to cut down on traffic jams but also , more importantly , to benefit the environment , safety and a number of other aspects .
It has to be said , and I have already mentioned this several times within other fora , that the rail system is gradually losing its environmental edge , not so much because it does not take any initiatives itself , but more so because we ourselves prescribe few , if any , specifications for example , regarding the use of diesel-electric locomotives , the type of electricity used , etc .
What we would like , and this is why we welcome with open arms the dual speed for technical specification requirements , is for this technical specification to at least take account of energy consumption and air pollution , something which will require a great deal of hard work .
The second important point is of course the social dimension , as I touched upon a moment ago .
I regret that we are confining ourselves to the bare minimum , i.e. working conditions .
We refer to a social dialogue but we should really take it one step further , because this affects the entire labour organisation of railways .
I would urge you to look into the positive experiences which certain countries have had in changing the labour organisation of the rail system , in order to bring about a more efficient rail system and to set up exchange programmes , so that we can learn from experiences in countries which have struggled in the past , and which are often still struggling where other elements of the rail dossier are concerned , such as liberalisation or fair pricing .
Mr President , despite European integration , the rail system is disintegrating .
It is increasingly hard to obtain international rail timetables and it is often the case that train tickets to remote destinations have to be bought outside the country of departure .
Not so long ago , it was possible to take a direct train from Cologne to Athens , from Paris to Lisbon or from Amsterdam to Copenhagen .
This is now a thing of the past .
Meanwhile , railways are , however , in the process of being re-discovered .
The times when trains were seen as a burden inherited from the nineteenth century , something that can be neglected and dismantled , are fortunately over .
Almost everyone admits that trains should once again play a key role in European long-haul transport for people and goods alike .
This is not just necessary to meet the increasing demand for transport options , but mainly to curb the tide of cars and aeroplanes which form a threat to the environment .
The views on how to modernise the rail system are strongly divided .
For a long time , it was fashionable to apply everything that had contributed to the emergence of cars and aeroplanes to trains .
According to this line of thinking , everything should come down in price and should become flexible , so that price-based competition has a less detrimental effect on trains .
Some people still advocate that everything should be privatised and liberalised , that the influence of trade unions must be restrained and that railway personnel should perform more work for lower wages .
According to the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , these remedies are worse than the disease .
These would reportedly lead to further decay of the railway business and deterioration in the quality of services , and would force personnel to strike more , for reasons of self-preservation .
The real solutions must be sought in a completely different direction .
For starters , there should be better cooperation between the existing national railway companies in the management of frequent and fast cross-border routes .
In the case of the conventional railway system , the routes Brussels to Amsterdam , Hamburg to Copenhagen and Dublin to Belfast are good examples of this .
The passengers are unaware that it is two companies who are responsible for this one joint and frequent link .
This could also apply to the extensions of the French high-speed links in England , Belgium , the Netherlands and Germany which are running under the names " Eurostar " and " Thalys " .
To guarantee success , it is important not to bring in a whole ream of new commercial businesses , which would lead to bad connections and variable pricing .
Furthermore , the money to finance such a high-speed network should not be found through cutting down services on short-haul routes in the individual Member States , as many people are indignant - and rightly so - about the huge amount of funding being ploughed into fast connections for the benefit of a small , privileged minority .
The construction of new high-speed links will continue to meet with protest if the ordinary domestic train user only ever experiences higher prices and fewer facilities and if they do not solve the environmental problems caused by cars and aeroplanes .
Needless to say , technology should be better harmonised by means of common mains voltage , joint equipment , fewer changes for passengers at borders and uniform safety requirements .
Privatisation and fragmentation according to the British model offer no guarantee whatsoever that those improvements could be better accommodated than if we were to keep the present state enterprises .
The position of the one million employees in the European rail system must be protected .
They are people who offer useful services to each and every one of us .
This is why they should not come at the bottom of the list in our railway policy , as is sometimes advocated , I regret to say , by those in favour of a commercial approach .
My group would like to see trade-union rights , participation , working conditions and work pressure given a more prominent role .
Luckily , the rapporteur is not yielding under the pressure to consider personnel as a cost factor alone .
I am pleased that Mr Savary ' s proposals help strike a happy balance .
Mr President , Mr Savary ' s reports raise a matter of crucial importance to European railways .
Given the alarming position rail finds itself in in most Member States , intervention is vital .
It is of utmost importance to drastically reduce the obstacles created for international traffic by inconsistencies in the different types of equipment and networks used .
The harmonisation of the physical networks for the conventional rail system is a step in the right direction and certainly deserves support .
Nobody can deny its importance .
Despite this , I am of the opinion that a great deal of the work done by Members is superfluous .
Most of their wishes have already been incorporated in some shape or form in the text of the directive .
This should not be done again .
Furthermore , we are dealing with a directive here , which means that it makes little sense to include too detailed and intricate specific cases .
This directive is extremely technical in nature and its main objective is to facilitate the use of all kinds of trains using all kinds of networks .
This is why comments concerning personnel do not really seem to fit in here .
Only clear agreements on qualifications for personnel who will be deployed on cross-border routes are necessary .
The curbing of the freedom of enterprise should not go further than strictly necessary .
In short , Mr President , I will certainly support the idea contained in the reports , even if certain proposed elements are not appropriate in this context .
A very good evening Mr President , Commissioner . It is unusual , but you know that I have the highest personal regard for you and am therefore delighted to see you here this evening .
Interoperability is a fundamental issue and , if we take it seriously , the time has come to admit that the European Union has failed over recent years .
We have made no progress whatsoever with interoperability .
I think it is extremely important that we again inform the Council , where everything is diligently recorded , that 40 years after the creation of the European common market , we have made no progress in the railway sector .
I hope that the draft report by Mr Savary , whom I should like once again to thank for his draft , and I should also like to thank my colleague Mrs Jeggle for her shadow report - I hope that if we manage to persuade the Commission and Council to accept the draft report , we shall be reasonably well placed for the future .
I also hope that the Council will accept our proposed amendments .
We have taken a great deal of trouble and Mr Savary has also tabled umpteen proposed amendments for the plenary sitting , which we support , in order to achieve a report which the Council can accept , thereby avoiding a conciliation procedure and second reading .
I hope that the Council will do so and I call on it to act responsibly .
Having made no progress whatsoever with interoperability for years now , the Council should accept our decision tomorrow so that we can make some progress and avoid yet another second reading and conciliation procedure .
The difficulty which must be acknowledged is , of course , that the internal market can only function if we have uniform systems in the long term and we must ensure that we really do make progress here .
I also call on industry in Europe to abandon the policy it has pursued over recent years of separating off its national market by deliberately not manufacturing rolling stock which can be used in other countries .
Everyone has staked out their own market , which is why we have this fragmented railway market in Europe - and this is unacceptable .
Allow me one more closing comment . Mr Swoboda , who is about to speak , and I shall soon be discussing the Railway Pact here in the House .
We are opening the markets but we need interoperability in order to do so .
These are two aspects of the overall complex and I therefore hope that the Council really is wise and clever enough to accept the proposed amendments which we shall probably adopt by a large majority tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , we are , in fact , in a situation in which we are building up a European railway system , albeit somewhat late .
Mr Jarzembowski and I hold such similar views that I should like to begin where he left off .
In a few weeks ' time , we shall propose to Parliament at second reading and by a large majority - there are still a few differences of opinion here and there - what framework market conditions and operating regulations are needed in order to create a European railway system .
All this , as the previous speaker has already said , will not produce a European railway system unless there is also a degree of interoperability on the technical and social side .
It is grotesque : every private company , even small private companies , think European nowadays .
It is only on the railways that we have not managed to achieve this and we are now endeavouring to bring about a European attitude .
The comment about industry is correct .
We always look spellbound at America , at the United States , where industry and , of course , the free market economy are also promoted by the state .
Except that , when it comes to American companies , the situation is quite different .
In Europe , uniting in a common European market is proving to be an arduous task .
How can we expect European products to be used throughout the world , when we are cannot even agree on certain technical conditions and interoperability in Europe ?
In this sense I should like to offer the rapporteur , Mr Savary , my full and unequivocal support and congratulate him on his excellent report .
What we need is technical interoperability .
That has already been said .
Industry has its part to play here , but of course clients , i.e. the European construction companies , must also do what they can to force industry to cooperate .
This also applies , and here I disagree with a number of previous speakers , to social comparability and alignment .
Of course , that does not mean that everything will become identical , because we do not want a situation with one side more or less exploiting the other ; we want a situation in which we look together to see how we can bring about a European railway system .
Safety is also , without doubt , an issue .
The huge advantage of the railway is that it is safe and environmentally-friendly .
Just as it is a pity that the transport Commissioner cannot be here , it is a good sign that the Commissioner for the environment is here , because , in the final analysis , traffic , and railway traffic in particular , is a means to an end and not an end in itself and it should help to improve our environmental situation .
Mr Savary has also highlighted a very important point ; namely that we must ensure during the enlargement of the European Union that the European railway system does not stop at the current borders of the European Union but covers the whole of Europe so that it can help to improve the environment and increase traffic safety throughout Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these reports make it quite clear that we are flying the flag for the transfer of traffic from road to rail in vain . If there is no technical follow-up , then our demands will obviously remain a dead letter .
Actual observations today point to the fact that rail in Europe is not matching up to its ambitions and , I would add , it is falling far short of our ambitions .
It is true that in a good number of European policies we put forward the need to transfer passenger transport , but most especially freight transport , from road to rail in order , on the one hand , to comply with our international commitments but , on the other hand , to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , to reduce environmental pollution in general , to relieve congestion on the roads and to reduce the social costs of road transport , which are borne indirectly by the community as a whole .
For all these reasons , none of them new ones , the European Union must make it possible to take up the challenge .
In relation to the reports on interoperability it must be noted that the train was not considered to be the transport of the future which was going to provide the solution to a number of problems , particularly environmental problems .
In transport policies within the European Union , rail was overlooked .
As evidence of this I would cite the considerable amounts of Structural Fund , trans-European network and Cohesion Fund aid allocated to roads and motorways , which for far too long have had more than their due .
Only rarely was there a question of allocating aid to conventional rail systems in order to modernise them and so that they might compete , particularly with heavy goods vehicles on the roads .
The declining figures for rail transport , particularly for freight , bear witness to the lack of investment at this level .
In the race to develop infrastructures , rail has been the great forgotten area .
Fortunately , there are now crucial studies which make it possible to justify the urgent need and the relevance of investing in rail .
Moreover , we would point out that it is essential that the European Parliament should incorporate staff training and health and safety conditions into this directive .
Indeed , many of us still remember the conditions in which the transportation of radioactive waste between Germany and France was carried out for many years .
Because they did not know about radioactivity , and were not informed about it , some members of staff at the Woippy marshalling yard , in the Lorraine region , used to gather round these heat-generating carriages to keep warm in winter .
The chemical containers which we would also like to see transported by rail also require specific training in order to guarantee general safety as well as to prevent exposure and handling which may prove dangerous to the health of the operators involved .
In general , then , we consider this report to be a well-balanced one , and we also wish to congratulate the rapporteur , but we have nonetheless tabled a number of amendments in order to improve it still more .
These are to do with taking account of social dialogue , which we deem essential .
I would urge you to support the amendments to this effect .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members present in the House , Mr Savary ' s report is an excellent piece of work and he deserves both thanks and recognition .
I should like to focus in my speech on three aspects and I am sorry that Mrs Jeggle and Mr van Dam take the opposite view on two of these aspects .
First , liberalisation of the railway networks in the Member States and the establishment of a common market for railway services is addressed from the point of view of free access and transit rights for the infrastructures of the Member States in cross-border traffic , especially freight traffic .
And new technical specifications for interoperability are at the forefront here .
In my view , the proposed extension to the concept of interoperability , by including questions such as the professional qualifications of staff and the need for health and safety regulations at the workplace , is of paramount importance and a vote in favour of the report by my group depends on it .
Most national railway systems in the Member States have comprehensive rules governing the aforementioned social aspects and rather than lose them in the process of liberalisation at European level , we must harmonise them at the highest possible level .
At this point I should like to support the call for more authority to be given to the merely advisory voice of the social partners in the sectoral committee and for the European social partners to be granted equal decision-making powers similar to those in many national regulations , when resolutions are passed .
Secondly , in addition to agreeing to the minimum level of technical harmonisation proposed in the report , the preparation of ex ante cost-benefit analyses and the order of priorities for drawing up TSIs , my group sets particular store by including the social partners , associations and organisations , passengers and users in the work of drafting and checking technical specifications for interoperability .
Thirdly , we also support the proposal to allow representatives from the candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe to attend committee meetings from the outset .
The plan to involve them in the process of discussing and setting TSIs from the outset is important if the technical standards and specifications of future candidate countries to are to be brought into line early on with current developments in the EU .
This will allow us to ensure ahead of time that the infrastructure in these countries can keep pace , thereby helping to minimise the separate costs which the European Union would otherwise incur .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Savary report follows the rationale of sustainable development .
As we consider interoperability to be essential , we support this report , and offer our congratulations to Mr Savary for the pertinence of his observations .
The road-rail balance must be adjusted by means of a carefully calculated interoperability .
In the long term , the increase in heavy goods transport will cause enormous problems , such as congestion , the construction of new routes , and problems of safety and pollution .
It is absolutely essential , in this eventuality , to have recourse to rail transport .
The problem is even greater for countries located at strategic crossroads , such as France , where the saturation of the road networks is yet another argument for the crucial need to put interoperability into practice .
The models of Thalys and Eurostar must be extended and intensified with the new high-speed train routes : TGV-East to Germany , Southern Europe-Atlantic to Madrid and Lisbon , and South-Mediterranean to Barcelona .
As for conventional rail networks , it is time that interoperability was made compulsory , reinforced by considerable amounts of European aid which would , moreover , enable Member States to safeguard their conventional local networks .
Interoperability is all the more necessary as rail transport is profitable over long distances .
So border stops , changes in equipment and staff and , more importantly , transhipment operations should be limited to avoid putting a strain on reliability in terms of the time and service provided .
Airfreight manages perfectly well without border stops .
So let us adapt .
We shall not be able to upgrade the competitiveness of rail unless we bring in stringent constraints .
Interoperability must be made compulsory , particularly for the new networks that are being built , even if the TSIs have not been finalised .
We cannot afford to delay any longer before actually implementing this measure which will acquire even greater significance with the enlargement of our Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , a great deal has been said in today ' s discussion .
In my view , the most important points to be borne in mind are two figures , which are really quite shocking .
The first is that in 1970 , the railways had a 20 % share of the freight market , whereas today they have just 8.5 % .
The second figure concerns the average hourly speed of railways in Europe , which is 16 kilometres per hour .
And all this in the year 2000 !
Evidently , we need an immediate political response from the 15 Member States of the European Union .
Before such a response can be given , we first need to understand the problem and we need the corresponding political will .
In my view , and of course this is the view of all those who have spoken today , we need to take steps as regards network compatibility and interoperability , because we have different technical specifications , different standards and different management systems .
And of course , we all endorse the report by Mr Savary , whom I would once again like to commend on his work .
However , it is not enough for us just to forge ahead with interoperability .
We need to consider the entire railway liberalisation package and combine this with interoperability . In this context , I would like to say that the Helsinki Council resolutions may well be satisfactory , but they are inadequate .
If we want to make headway , then we need to adopt the opinion expressed by the European Parliament at first reading , because it deals more fully with the problem which , as is already quite clear I think , is a particularly acute problem .
We should all realise that a common market without a unified transport network is simply will-o ' -the wisp .
So if we want to examine the problem in its entirety , we need to have , and to provide , the necessary responses .
I would like to add two separate issues concerning my country , Greece , since my capacity as chairman of the Transport Committee does not , I imagine , deny me the right to raise problems of this kind .
The first problem is that Greece has no main cross-border rail links , especially with other Member States .
On the contrary , it has important cross-border rail links with third , non-EU countries , which are not bound by Community legislation and , consequently , employ their own national standards and systems and will no doubt continue to do so in the shorter or longer term .
This is certainly an issue which merits special mention and regulation so that the European harmonisation we are working for does not prove to be detrimental to the cross-border rail networks of countries such as Greece .
Another issue I would like to touch upon is that special provision should be made for peculiarities and differences caused by the geographical location and topography of various Member States such as Greece , the United Kingdom , Denmark , Finland , etc . , whose remote or island nature causes particular problems .
Mr President , I too regret the absence of the Commissioner here this evening .
Perhaps she is stuck at Brussels airport .
Perhaps she should have taken the train .
I begin by welcoming the Commission 's proposal to integrate Europe 's convention on a high-speed rail network .
I thank the rapporteur for his patience , his skill and , above all , his commitment to the cause of Europe 's railways .
I would also like to thank the Portuguese presidency for its skilful handling of this very complex dossier - an example of Europeans working together to solve common problems .
This problem , I believe , can only be solved satisfactorily at EU-level .
What is the problem ?
As we have heard already this evening , in 1970 the railways had a 21 % share of the freight market , today just 8.5 % .
In 1970 the railways had a 10 % share of the passenger market , today just 6 % .
If these trends continue just 4 % of travellers will go by train at the end of the decade and rail freight will all but disappear .
The sad fact is that the railways have lost ground even where there are well placed , for example , in long distance freight .
The very future of our railways is at stake , together with the jobs of one million people employed in the industry .
A key reason for this decline is that , in contrast to aviation and road haulage , a single market does not exist in this sector .
For 150 years , the railways have been organised along national lines .
Even the opportunity of electrification further divided Europe 's railways because there are now five different systems in operation .
More recently the railways have adopted 16 different and incompatible electronic signalling systems .
That all adds costs and it means railways cannot compete .
Differences have also contributed to the fragmentation of the market for railway equipment .
This proposal being considered here tonight , together with other proposals from the Commission , aims to create an internal market in rail services .
It will help achieve a harmonisation of technical standards for equipment and rolling stock and the integration of national networks to boost cross-border traffic .
That will make the railways more efficient , reliable and more competitive .
It would also boost the railway equipment industry in countries such as my own .
It will contribute to the fulfilment of our aim of switching freight from the congested and polluted roads to Europe 's railways and encouraging the development of more high-speed rail services to take the place of short-haul flights .
The revitalisation of the railways is crucial to the future of Europe 's transport system , our environment and our economy .
That is why Mr Savary 's report deserves our full support .
Mr President , Commissioner , like aviation , the present issue is reminiscent of air traffic control .
It is high time that the Member States forsook their national stances in favour of a European stance because it is national stances that have prevented the rail system from being vital and from retaining its passengers and freight . Instead , we are now faced with the opposite .
Mr Savary ' s excellent report is the first in a whole series of reports which will deal with the rail system and its liberalisation , which is essential , in my view .
Trains should not be confined to internal borders within a large European market .
I think that is important .
Liberalisation and competition should be introduced within this large European market .
That , in my view , is the best solution for customers and services .
If the best solution had been cooperation between national companies , then they would have done this a long time ago and we would not be faced with this long-standing problem , namely that rail transport is on the wane .
For a country like mine , and several other Members have spoken about their own countries , it is , of course , essential that we have one European market with technical unity or ' interoperability ' , to use a buzz word .
Indeed , a small country is vulnerable in that respect , but a country which lies at major intersections is even more vulnerable to this .
I think that we need to take sound steps and take them fast .
A difficult issue was that of personnel .
Mr Savary , I welcome the compromise that we were able to reach in that respect .
It is , of course , important for health and safety to be regulated and not compromised over , and this is also true , of course , of training . We should be very clear about this too , so as to ensure that these issues are brought into line .
I am left with one question , namely I wonder whether we are sufficiently ambitious , as indeed , we are only referring to trans-European rail systems .
In my opinion , however , if we harmonise trans-European rail systems , we should also do the same for national rail systems .
This is especially important for those people who manufacture trains and train equipment .
We need , as a matter of urgency , to create a European single market in that respect too , and this will only be possible if we harmonise trans-European , i.e. international , as well as national traffic .
As such , we need to ensure as soon as we can that we create rail systems modelled on the HST , such as Thalys and Eurostar , which do not stop at borders but which carry on .
This should also be possible for ordinary trains because if not , Mr President , we are heading for a traffic nightmare .
Indeed , if we do not breathe new life into the railway sector , we will always have that traffic nightmare hanging over us and it is absolutely essential that we resolve this matter .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin , as some previous speakers have done , by thanking Mr Savary - the author of these two reports - for his work on achieving harmonisation , which has been difficult , but which has looked to the future .
His task has certainly been difficult , and this has been demonstrated by the conflicting interests expressed during tonight ' s speeches .
As a Spanish MEP , I would have preferred the task to have been achieved with greater flexibility and certain technical specifications which affect structural issues within the railway system not to have been applied .
I am referring specifically to the Spanish rail gauge , which , since this is a problem affecting the basic railway structure , we believe would involve a costly and slow renovation , and its particular circumstances need to be taken into account .
This means that it should not be regulated by means of the so-called ' specific cases ' , subject to committee decisions , but that , on the contrary , we should consider the possibility that automatic derogations should apply depending on the incompatibility of these technical specifications with existing lines .
We therefore hope that you will be receptive to this request because , otherwise , we should bear in mind that all the projects , all the development plans for the rail networks affected by these specifications , would be subject to difficult conditions , and this would have a negative effect , since it would create uncertainty in relation to the planned investment programmes themselves .
Mr President , Commissioner , I recently visited the newly constructed Öresund Bridge which links Sweden and Denmark and which is , of course , a part of the European transport network .
It means that a fixed link is being created between Scandinavia and the continent .
The bridge will make it considerably easier to convey people and goods from Sweden and Finland to the rest of Europe .
However , we have a problem , at present , with different voltage systems .
In fact , the power has to be taken away from a portion of the track so that the trains are able to alternate between the different voltage systems in Sweden and Denmark .
We have different gauges in Sweden and Finland .
The only railway linking the two countries is that between Haparanda and Torneå .
Gauge switches are now being tested there to make it easier to cross the border .
However , there are also some extremely good examples of other systems .
The ore trains which travel from northern Sweden to northern Norway have just the one driver to take the train across the border .
This works well because the countries concerned have cooperated with the employers and employees .
Within the EU , we now have fifteen different and separate railway systems which are often incompatible with one another .
This means that , within the railways sector , we have neither free movement nor a common market .
If we are serious about creating an international , competitive railway , we must also create a common railways structure within Europe .
Coordination of the railway systems is especially important for those countries and regions which are not situated in the centre of Europe .
In order to be able to travel right through the EU , Swedish trains , for example , must be able to pass through several countries and , thus , several national railway systems .
At present , this involves an obvious competitive disadvantage and means that the centrally situated countries within the EU should be urged to coordinate their various systems .
For the same reason , it is also important for those countries bordering the EU to be able to be involved in the work on harmonisation so that there are no restrictions upon transport to and from third countries .
If compatibility is to be achieved , the specifications of a range of technical components need to be brought into line with one another .
What , however , is at least as important in terms of this change is that coordination should also be achieved within the operational and administrative systems , that staff should be duly trained and that there should be agreements in place to enable drivers to take trains across the national borders .
Road traffic in Europe is increasing each year .
It creates problems in the form of environmental damage , noise , overcrowding and accidents .
In order to be able to cope with this trend , methods of transport must become cleaner , quieter , safer and more efficient .
Railways are the means of transport which now best meets these requirements .
Rail transport must therefore become more attractive and competitive .
In order to reach that point , however , the railways must be able to compete on the same conditions as other forms of transport .
The Savary report is therefore very important and one step along the road .
It is now just a question of all the Member States turning it into a reality .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , literature has a few well-known words for what we are discussing in the two Savary reports this evening : " You are late , but at least you are here " , was how Friedrich Schiller put it , words which also apply to our work here in the European Parliament .
To discuss the interoperability of the conventional trans-European railway system at the end of the 20th century , just as everyone is getting ready to leave , looks bad , even if , admittedly , interoperability has increased .
But still !
It has taken more than 100 years for us to pluck up the courage here and give the railways another chance .
And yet the facts do not look very promising .
The rapporteur has included figures in his report which are all the more significant for being so thin on the ground .
Mr Hatzidakis has already told us that the railways had a 21 % share of the freight traffic market in 1970 and now have a mere 8.5 % ; in passenger transport , their share has fallen from 10 % in 1970 to 6 % .
The prospects for high-speed trains are somewhat more encouraging , although here too , not everything in the garden is rosy .
It is true that we have at least got something on the rails in western Europe , namely Thalys and Eurostar .
But where we want to network Europe in the long term , especially with the future Member States of the Union , things do not look any better .
Yet it is vital to win over Eastern Europe , which still makes relatively good use of the railway network , to interoperability with Europe before everything switches to the roads .
Incidentally , this must be done through dialogue with the candidate countries , as the Savary report rightly stresses .
On one point , there is a need for nostalgia : we want to maintain a small part of the history of Europe and keep historic railway lines in their original state .
We shall leave them out of the scope of our directive and the friends of the railway will thank us .
Interoperability is rightly not required where regional demands and solutions need to maintain their own legislation within the framework of subsidiarity .
In this context , a word to my Austrian Minister of Transport .
The southern railway in Austria is an old stretch of line and is of regional importance .
But , more importantly , it is the north-south link in the east of the present Union .
If we do not invest in it , the east of Austria will run the risk of economic exclusion in the future .
That is in nobody ' s interest .
Austria is excluded from the Union at present more than enough as it is .
Let us end all forms of isolation and ensure that we have comprehensive interoperability in the Union .
( Applause from various quarters )
Mr Rack , I repeat what I said to Mrs Flemming at the start of the night sitting : from an institutional and legal point of view , under the Treaty , Austria has every right to be in the European Union .
Therefore , let us deal with this issue when other points are under discussion .
Mr President , I believe that Gilles Savary has done magnificent work with these two reports .
The routes of the railway structures on our continent were set a long time before Schuman made his famous speech on the Quai d 'Orsay .
In those days , military factors were given priority over the transport of people and goods .
In my country , Spain , as in Russia , a different gauge to the rest of Europe was chosen in order to make a possible military invasion more difficult , which proves that European construction was not the priority for those people who took the decisions on railway routes .
Furthermore - as others have said - almost every country has constructed its network in a radial manner , around its capital , which is a serious obstacle to all those who want to create a different kind of route , such as from Spain to Germany or Italy to the UK without passing , for example , through Paris .
Paris and many other capitals and almost all intra-European borders act as barriers for through rail routes .
For this reason , the transport of passengers and goods by rail has been suffering for decades .
We have managed to harmonise the European economy , but the current rail network is not a useful instrument for the single market .
Therefore , we resort to road transport , despite the fact that it creates pollution and is dangerous .
We must free the citizens of Europe from the road monopoly by offering them working railways throughout the Union which are competitive in relation to other modes of transport .
The inclusion of a social clause seems to me to be an excellent idea .
The railway workers are going to play an important role in interoperability and their interests must be addressed in the text of the directive .
These workers have already paid the price for our forgetfulness .
Their number has decreased by 500 000 in the last 15 years .
It is possible to revitalise the railway , as certain projects that have already been undertaken demonstrate .
A Community which is undergoing a rapid process of integration and which is facing imminent enlargement needs to improve the efficiency and quality of the railway services it offers to customers .
As Mr Savary says , this would contribute to achieving the objective of sustainable mobility and greater social and economic cohesion in Europe .
Mr President , one of the European Union ' s key goals was the creation of the internal market , but this market has created a volume of traffic which is growing at an alarming rate .
Despite this , we need to ensure that goods and people arrive at their destinations faster , more efficiently , at cheaper rates and in cleaner conditions than before . Rail transport is not really a great help in this respect , quite the reverse , in fact .
Let us be honest , the train has remained stuck in the nineteenth century .
In percentage terms , trains have certainly not retained their share in transport .
We can only hope that they have retained it in real terms .
Trains have proved the European Union right : more competition keeps you alert and on the ball .
Well , due to a lack of competition as a result of excessively protectionist behaviour on the part of the Member States - and I am not ashamed to admit this - the train has been condemned to a second-class position even in this century , also in terms of technology and even durability , which certain Members have emphasised .
Trains are not durable and they are no longer clean , especially the diesel locomotives .
We have finally reached a point in Europe where we are about to try to bring about a change in mentality .
This is desperately needed , and about time too , for the sake of both the people and mobility within the European Union .
We can no longer rely on road transport alone for it is fraught with problems , pollution , traffic jams , increased risk of accidents , as well as the problems which an increasing number of people are facing with the swelling flow of through traffic zooming past their doors .
If the rail systems can overcome the obstacles facing cross-border transport , i.e. by using each other ' s rail infrastructure and if they make their equipment more durable , then this will relieve the pressure on road transport .
Rail systems develop extremely slowly .
In France , for example , this is because the government protects its own market and in the Netherlands , it is because we never manage to bring a procedure to a close and to start doing the groundwork .
As a result of this , planes are still used in Europe for short-haul distances .
Naturally , high-speed links such as those from Paris to Brussels should have superseded the plane a long time ago , but because of the vulnerability and sluggishness of the present trains , many prefer to take the plane .
It is not just manufacturers and governments that should be represented during the decision-making process pertaining to rail systems - in respect of which , incidentally , there is much room for improvement - but also the railway companies themselves .
This is already the case in the technical field , in the form of the European Association for Railway Interoperability .
This should also be the case for railway legislation , right across the board .
After all , railway companies have the necessary in-house expertise and need to be involved in the entire process .
The requirements for admission to the railway network and cooperation between the railway companies and the EU leaves a great deal to be desired .
Take , for example , the night train from Amsterdam to Milan which will be introduced from 28 May .
This route covers Germany , Geneva and Italy .
Each country has its own set of rules regarding speed , safety and travelling comfort .
Only if these requirements are met can access be gained to the railway network .
This beggars belief , especially if the rules change and are adapted virtually by the day , as has been the case .
This makes the interoperability of the European rail systems almost impossible in practice .
What we need are harmonisation and standardisation as soon as possible , if we want to create a true internal market for rail systems .
Mr President , the vast majority of investments that have been made in the EU ' s infrastructure have been made at national level .
As a result , a lot of things work well within our countries .
However , the deficiencies become apparent as soon as it is a question of crossing a border .
In spite of the fact that there have been several attempts to solve the problems , partly within the International Railway Union , this is especially the case in the area we are discussing here this evening , namely that of Europe ' s railway networks .
As long as we have obstacles of this kind , there will also be clear limitations of at least two different kinds .
Firstly , there will be a deterioration in the prior conditions of Europe ' s being able to compete with other markets where these problems have perhaps already been solved . Secondly , there will be a deterioration in the prior conditions of the railways ' being able to compete with other types of transport .
There is no doubt that the railways have been the big losers in recent decades , and remain so .
From a position , thirty years ago , when it had a more than twenty per cent share of the goods transport market in the EU , the railways are now down to having a share of less than ten per cent .
At the same time , the market share for passenger transport has almost halved .
It is just not an option to force goods or passengers back onto the railways .
The railways will become winners in the market if they become efficient and are given the opportunity to develop by their own efforts .
Otherwise , there is an obvious risk that Europe ' s railway network , at least where goods transport is concerned , will no longer exist within a few decades .
For this reason , it is a step in the right direction when the Commission seeks so-called operational compatibility within the railways sector .
The next step is to help extend the EU ' s internal market to embrace the countries of Eastern and Central Europe , too .
Common operating systems and businesslike pricing should benefit Europe ' s railway networks but , if the railways are to survive in the long-term , at least two additional things are required .
Firstly , a diversity of operators is required .
Just as there are many haulage contractors on Europe ' s roads , there ought also to be many competing railway companies .
Secondly , a distinction needs to be drawn between the national operator and whoever owns the track .
That is the model we have in Sweden , and I believe in fact that it would be marvellous if similar systems could be introduced in all the EU ' s Member States .
Otherwise , the confusion between public authority and operator will continue to be an obstacle to the development of Europe ' s railway networks .
In general , this means that an awful lot remains to be done even after the decisions which the European Parliament is making in conjunction with the present report . These nonetheless constitute extraordinarily important steps in the right direction .
I would like to speak on this particular subject but from a regional aspect .
I cannot speak about high-speed railways in Northern Ireland , never mind the island of Ireland , because the railways do not go at any great speed in that particular part of the world .
It is extremely important that we recognise the importance of a railway system .
One thing that has concerned me recently in my region is that , in Europe , we talk about how important to regions it is that we should have the most environmentally friendly type of transport . At the same time within my area people are talking about doing away even with parts of our present minute railway system .
I find that totally atrocious .
We have one of the main links between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland between Dublin and Belfast .
This is a very important link and one that has been upgraded recently .
Probably that would be up to at least half the standard of the rest of continental Europe , but it is very welcome to those of us who live in that area .
Then we have the link between Belfast and Larne which links us to the rest of the United Kingdom .
Parts of this have had to be closed down because there is not enough money to keep it in repair and upgraded .
We have also recently had Northern Ireland Railways tell us that they are going to close the link between Coleraine and Londonderry which is absolutely unbelievable and totally unacceptable .
This is the one commuting area from the Northwest and it takes in part of the Republic of Ireland and the inner shore and peninsula .
They need that railway system as a link for those who want to get to Belfast to reach airports and everywhere else .
So we have to take a really serious look at what we are talking about here .
For too often within Europe we have talked about trans-European networks - be they road-rail , air or sea - but at the end of the day we are not prepared to put in the finance at either European level or national level .
We have to take on board the challenges that come before us and we have to ensure that we have a very highly established rail link .
I certainly want it within my region because that is important .
There should be no more closures and we should make more finance available to improve the present railway system to have more goods moved by rail and not by road , which is totally unacceptable from an environmental point of view .
It is hurtful when I go back to my region and am told the money is not there .
It is hurtful when you go back and you are told that : " No , we must improve the road system - we must not improve the rail system " .
The rail system has a tremendous future .
It is wrong , it is totally unacceptable that it is allowed in any way to be run down .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission wishes to begin by thanking you for this interesting debate and thanking Parliament for the fact that you attach such great importance to the question of the interoperability of the conventional rail transport systems .
I want to highlight the excellent contribution which has been made by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , especially by MEP Mr Savary who has prepared the report .
The directive must be seen , in the first place , as a technical measure , but the proposal is , of course , also of political significance in so far as it helps implement a common and open market for railway services and railway materials .
As is well known , the Commission has made the railways sector into one of its priority areas for taking action .
This was especially made clear in the 1996 white paper on the revitalisation of the Community ' s railways .
As early as the end of last year , the EU took a large step towards revitalising railway transport when it introduced the so-called railway package .
I am convinced that this can contribute to a renaissance for goods transport in the Community .
Above and beyond these measures , further efforts are required if the strategy is to be complete .
By this , I mean primarily measures which integrate the national networks and increase the quality of the public services .
We all know how different the various countries ' technical standards and operating regulations are .
This has also emerged clearly in the course of the debate .
This makes international transport both more expensive and more complicated than domestic transport .
These differences affect not only interoperability but also the internal market for railway equipment .
The Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has adopted an amendment to the report and , in that way , backed our own proposal .
Most of the amendments to the report are acceptable .
A series of amendments entail actual added value , something for which we wish to thank Parliament .
As you know , the Council too has examined the proposal and , thanks to contacts between Parliament ' s rapporteur , the Presidency of the Council and the Commission ' s officials , it is entirely possible that the proposal may be adopted as early as at first reading .
A prerequisite for its becoming a reality is the desire to pursue a genuine convergence policy even where an essentially technical document is concerned .
When it comes to the amendments , I only wish therefore to deal with those which are unacceptable .
First of all , Amendment 9 , Article 1 ( 3 ) .
The area of applicability is established in Annex I and cannot be limited in the way proposed .
Those cases which are mentioned may be dealt with as special categories , as special cases or , at worst , as exceptions .
Amendment 28 , Article 22 ( 3 ) .
The proposed change is incompatible with the idea that the technical qualifications for interoperability are to be introduced gradually .
Nor does it fall in with the need to prioritise those measures which provide the greatest benefits in terms of cost .
Amendment 29 , Article 24 ( 1 ) .
Where this is concerned , there are legal obstacles to acceptance .
Amendment 32 , Annex I , together with Amendment 35 on exempting passenger carriages from third countries .
The proposed wording is unacceptable because it means a fundamental change to the rolling stock referred to in the directive .
The principle which the Commission upheld before the Council and the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and upon which the proposal is based is that the directive must embrace all rolling stock used on the trans-European railway network .
This is important for the purpose of promoting the internal market for rolling stock and also for the purpose of guaranteeing a minimum level of safety the length of the trans-European railway network .
In order to achieve this minimum level of safety , all rolling stock must fulfil certain minimum specifications .
Amendment 39 , Article 18 ( 3 ) and Amendment 40 , Annex VII .
The proposed measures are incompatible with Article 14 ( 2 ) which specifies that it is the Member States ' responsibility to make sure that the system complies with the STI , or spécification technique interopérationnelle , regulations .
This proposal could be introduced into the framework directive concerning railway safety which the Commission will be introducing later this year .
Clearly , however , exceptional instances of transportation or , for example , locomotives involved in track maintenance do not need to fulfil the same requirements as passenger trains .
The proposal therefore mentions a number of special cases ( cf .
Article 2 K and Article 5 ( 5 ) ) where special , suitably adjusted regulations may be applied .
Allow me to leave the other amendments , because they all have our support .
They help make the directive clearer , especially the special cases .
Otherwise , they involve acceptable supplementary provisions , for example certain cases exempted from the technical specifications .
I would conclude my intervention concerning the interoperability of the conventional rail systems by thanking Parliament for its efforts .
We must hope that it will be possible to adopt the directive as early as at first reading .
The directive will take on a key role when it comes to revitalising railway transport .
I now move on to the second report , which concerns the interoperability of high-speed trains .
In this case , too , Mr Savary has prepared an interesting report containing a number of constructive observations and proposals .
The Commission will examine them in detail and , as far as possible , take account of them in planning its activities .
The Commission ' s report was more concerned with the implementation and effects of Directive 96 / 48 than with the actual progress made towards the interoperability of high-speed trains .
This has to do with the fact that the railway network in question is still at an early stage of development .
Parliament ' s proposal for carrying out an assessment of how much progress really has been made on interoperability is therefore very interesting .
Where the conventional railway network is concerned , the Commission proposed that a common representative body should provide , and regularly update , a facility to help monitor progress .
At the request of a Member State or of the Commission , this would provide a picture of the trans-European rail system for conventional trains .
The Commission has examined all the proposals in the report on the interoperability of high-speed trains , and they constitute a welcome contribution to the Commission ' s ongoing deliberations in this area which continues , of course , to be given high priority .
It is generally known that the railway sector is of crucial importance in terms of Europe ' s future transport needs and a more sustainable European transport system .
Increased interoperability is a key factor in our endeavours in this area .
It is very pleasing to have it confirmed through today ' s discussion that the European Parliament and the Commission see the issue in much the same way .
Mr President , Commissioner , we and the rapporteur , Mr Savary , have gone a long way towards accommodating the Council by including umpteen proposed amendments here in plenary in order to reconcile the two versions .
The Council should accept our opinion and the Commission should support us , not the Council , Commissioner .
Secondly , please be so kind as to point out to your employees that the report is not from the Committee on Regional Policy , but from the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , because we are devising a transport policy for the whole Community , not just for the regions .
Mr Jarzembowski , the name of the committee is the " Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism " .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
British Nuclear Fuels at Sellafield
The next item is the oral question ( B5-0223 / 2000 ) by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , to the Commission , on the installation of the MOX demonstration facility at the British Nuclear Fuels site at Sellafield .
Mr President , the report on safety at Sellafield , published by the UK Nuclear Installations Inspectorate , is a damning indictment of safety at the plant and falsification of safety checks there .
In mid-February Chief Inspector Laurence Williams said that he himself would pull the plug on the THORP reprocessing plant if his safety recommendations were not acted on .
However , it is clear from his own report that BNFL cannot be trusted .
The response to previous recommendations by the NII was to ignore them .
Indeed , I have documents showing this to be the case as far back as 1981 .
This shows arrogance , even when they are called to account .
What are we to make of the fact that this investigation by the UK Nuclear Inspectorate resulted from a press report in the UK Independent , following which the UK Government sent in a posse , as it were - the Nuclear Inspectorate .
Surely it should have been the other way around .
We received continuous reassurance regarding the safety of EU nuclear installations , so why does it need a press investigation to alert Member State governments to serious safety issues ?
It is time that the citizens of Europe received detailed answers to the questions of the effect on safety and the environment of the falsification of data in the MOX facility at the BNFL Sellafield site - falsification that has been ongoing for some years - because of the seriousness of the questions it raises for the safety of MOX fuel in use and for the nuclear installation 's safety generally .
It also raises questions for the transport of nuclear material such as MOX fuel and , indeed , for nuclear safeguards because of the production of plutonium stockpiles .
Indeed , I would ask what level of Euratom safeguard efforts , personalities , site visits etc. has been deployed on that site since 1996 since when , we are told , reprocessing in the UK has been performed under Euratom safeguards ?
I questioned Chief Inspector Laurence Williams in committee on whether the inspectorate staff in the UK were going native and imbibing the cultures that they are there to control .
He gave me a serious answer .
However , what about Euratom inspectors ?
Can we trust them ?
Do they also imbibe the cultures that they are there to control ?
I would also ask you to deal seriously with the harmonisation of minimum standards , because here we received conflicting answers in committee .
I am also directly concerned with the effects of reprocessing on neighbouring states , such as my own , where radioactive contamination from Sellafield has been found on the east coast beaches , in particular Carlingford Lough , where I grew up .
Local people often ask me what the EU is going to do about it .
I can give them very short answers .
Denmark and other Nordic states are also concerned at the radioactive contamination of their seas and fishing grounds from reprocessing at Sellafield .
I believe the scandal of abuse of safety at Sellafield is a European question .
In particular , the high-level waste tanks pose a serious , on-going risk to the east coast of Ireland because of the risk of a release of large amounts of radiation should the cooling tanks overheat .
The Nuclear Inspectorate 's report stressed that the amount of high-level liquid waste continues to increase faster than BNFL can deal with it .
The THORP reprocessing plant produces continually more waste .
It is this plant that the inspectorate threatened with legal sanctions if the backlog is not cleared .
Reprocessing by its nature produces large quantities of liquid waste .
For more than 40 years high-level liquid waste has been stored in tanks at Sellafield under constant cooling .
It is now urgent that we cease reprocessing and that the high-level waste tanks be shifted to passive containment such as vitrification .
Even then , they will still be highly radioactive for more than 50 years .
The problem for BNFL is that the amount of high-level liquid waste produced by reprocessing continues to increase faster than it can deal with it .
The NII would like to see the minimisation of the amount of high-level liquid waste stored in order to reduce the potential hazard .
I would suggest that this could be done by ending reprocessing now .
In committee I also queried whether a culture of corruption had spread to the independent quality assurance verification by Lloyd 's Quality Assurance who verify that BNF procedures comply with health and safety requirements .
Last September it published a report stating that BNFL has high-quality management in terms of health , safety and the environment .
As this was clearly inaccurate , according to the regulator 's report , this independent verification now lacks credibility .
I have already talked about going native in regard both to Euratom and the UK inspectorate .
This is the polite euphemism for corruption , and that is what we must control here .
The Chief Inspector recommended that the high-level waste tanks and the serious risk resulting from the inability of BNFL to make them passively safe through vitrification was an urgent issue .
I would ask what does " urgent " mean in this context ?
Must we wait for years more of serious risk to the health and environment of people in the British Isles and Europe generally ?
The Commission is informed of the events surrounding the falsification of the pellet diameter data at the MOX demonstration facility and the BNFL Sellafield site .
We are closely following the developments and have made direct contact both with the UK authorities and with the company .
The Commission is highly concerned with this event which raises questions in relation to nuclear safety .
Before I refer to the specific aspects raised by Mrs Ahern in her question , I would therefore firstly like to state that we cannot tolerate any negligence in relation to nuclear safety within the present and greater European Union .
The neglect of internationally agreed nuclear safety standards should be openly and firmly condemned .
I am therefore grateful that the European Parliament decided to debate this important issue in plenary tonight and to adopt a resolution later this week .
Let me now turn to the first specific issue which is the implications of the MOX data issue for the safety of nuclear installations .
Let me first remind the honourable Members that under the International Convention on Nuclear Safety the responsibility for nuclear safety rests with the state having jurisdiction over a nuclear installation .
It is also clear that our Member States do not wish to give up this responsibility .
I therefore need to refer to the UK and the NII report on the falsification of the data which states that the nuclear installations inspectorate is satisfied that the fuel manufactured in MDF will be safe in use in spite of the incomplete QA records caused by the falsification of some AQL data by process workers in the facility .
That is a quote from their report .
However , the inspectors ' report on the control and supervision of operations at the BNFL Sellafield site also stated its opinion on the deterioration in safety performance at Sellafield .
The company has reacted to the requirement of the NII to produce a programme responding to the recommendations in the report .
We are now awaiting the formal reaction of the inspector to this programme .
Secondly , on nuclear safeguards : according to the investigations carried out by the UK nuclear installations inspectorate , the falsification of data occurred during a secondary manual diameter check of a sub-set of the MOX pellets in the Sellafield MOX demonstration facility .
As far as Euratom nuclear material safeguards are concerned , checks of the diameter of pellets are not covered since operators ' declarations for safeguards are based on pellet weights and not on a diameter measurement .
Therefore the verifications performed by Euratom safeguards did not indicate that these declarations had been incorrect .
Thirdly , in relation to the transport of nuclear materials , transport of radioactive material is implemented according to regulations that are elaborated by the IAEA and transposed into national legislation .
Therefore , also for the transport of radioactive material the prime responsibility lies with the Member States .
As such the measurement deviations at Sellafield do not have any consequences on the safe transport of pellets .
However , the Commission welcomes any decision which would increase even further the safe transport of nuclear material .
The Commission has as its objective to promote the harmonisation of the regulations in the field of transport of radioactive material , which would increase safety in the field .
Finally , regarding the concept of proposing a Euratom directive for harmonising minimum standards for nuclear safety in the European Union and its value in discussions of nuclear safety with the accession states : individual EU Member States ' safety requirements are more specific and demanding than those of the International Atomic Agency .
Because of different historical background , legal framework , type and numbers of reactors and different approaches to regulation , they cannot easily be harmonised into a set of common rules .
My concern is that any attempt to achieve a consensus on a set of common Euratom safety standards might only result in a very generalised set of rules and principles .
As such they would be unlikely to improve on current nuclear installations ' safety standards .
It is therefore unlikely that harmonising minimum standards at an EU-level would have been able to prevent what happened at Sellafield .
There are , however , several activities at Community level where harmonisation would be both beneficial and possible .
These activities are based on common recognition of national requirements and the promotion of best practices .
One area where there is scope for in-depth harmonisation is in relation to new types of facilities .
I do not see any obstacles to future harmonisation of rules in the field of safe management of radioactive waste and decommissioning of nuclear installations .
In the context of enlargement , a directive setting out harmonised minimum safety standards might have facilitated our early discussions on the very sensitive issue of nuclear safety .
As part of the Community 's acquis it then would have been routinely screened together with other EU legislation .
However , it is difficult to say if such a directive would be developed quickly enough to play a key role in the ongoing discussions with the accession states .
It is also difficult to prejudge if common minimum standards would give us the level of safety that we wish the accession states to aim for .
We have in fact set our sights and those of the accession states beyond such a level .
We are working to encourage the applicant states to apply the good practices in use in the European Union .
One example of this is the development by the DG-Environment of guidelines for periodic safety reviews of the Soviet-designed light water nuclear reactors .
Another major step forward was taken only last week with the setting up of a European nuclear installation safety group .
It will bring together nuclear power plant operators and nuclear regulators from both Member States and applicant states .
I can assure you that the Commission will do everything it can to pursue the objective of a high level of nuclear safety , both within the present Union and an enlarged one .
I am convinced that more could be done at Community level to achieve this .
However , it is not clear that a directive requiring the harmonisation of safety standards at a European level at this moment in history is the best way forward .
It is very important that we retain a sense of perspective , a sense of proportion about this issue and I welcome the balanced response from Commissioner Wallström .
It is very important that we stick to facts and avoid some of the wilder claims that have been put in the Green motion for a resolution on this issue .
I want to emphasise that safety was not compromised in the incident of record falsification .
I would like to quote also from the NII report that the fuel manufactured in MDF , the MOX Demonstration Facility , will be safe in use in spite of incomplete quality assurance records caused by the falsification of some acceptable quality-level data by process workers in the facility .
The NII takes this view on the basis of the robustness of the fuel manufacturing process and the totality of the checks made on the key parameters .
I would also like to draw colleagues ' attention to the positive response by BNFL to the two reports made by the NII , one on the records incident and the other on the control and safety management regime at Sellafield .
I welcome the response and their three key recommendations to improve the safety management system and management structure by implementing a comprehensive overhaul of the safety management system across the company . To improve resource availability by taking on more monitoring staff , by improved training and further emphasising the safety culture and thirdly , to improve independent inspection , audit and review by appointing independent senior compliance inspectors and the like .
BNFL has responded positively to the 28 recommendations in one report and 15 recommendations in the other , the falsification report .
I do not propose to go through those in great detail .
I have no time .
Let us not lose sight of the fundamentals here .
Regulatory safety mechanisms worked in this instance .
Members of the staff reported the error and then the regulatory procedures took their course .
There was no actual breach of safety , only a breach of record-keeping regulations for one particular customer .
The offence of falsification of records must not negate or obscure the long-term case for reprocessing or MOX fuel assemblies .
Both of these are forms of recycling .
Both of them are effective ways of reducing , of concentrating waste and in the case of MOX manufacture are the best answer known presently to the issue of safe disposal of weapons grade plutonium .
I welcome the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association WENRA which was formed just over a year ago in February 1999 .
I welcome their launching of a project aimed at harmonising its members ' safety rules and practices .
The regulators themselves are undertaking this job across Member States : who better to undertake that task ?
The result will be an enhanced safety culture and that is to be welcomed by all .
Mr President , the vast majority of United Kingdom citizens or indeed EU citizens were deeply shocked and dismayed at the recent events at BNFL .
Let me quote BNFL 's own words : " At company level it has been recognised that in the mind of many stake holders quality and safety are inextricably linked .
Failure to comply in one aspect of an accredited quality system has led to a major loss in confidence in BNFL overall . "
That is from a management which is now aware of its shortcomings , a management that foolishly engaged in staff reductions , now reversed thank goodness .
The highest standards are required of any nuclear installation .
I have considerable sympathy for the workers at BNFL let down by a sloppy management .
Their livelihoods were endangered .
They will now speak out whenever they see evidence of lack of safety culture .
I do not want to talk at this stage about the viability or wisdom of reprocessing nor about the economics of MOX .
That is not under debate , although those matters should be debated in the UK and elsewhere .
BNFL is now in for a very difficult period and deservedly .
The main reason this is being raised in the European Parliament is to point out the lack of European harmonised standards in the nuclear industry .
There are harmonised standards in almost every other aspect of European industry .
The Euratom Treaty is deficient and that must be rectified so that we can have the sort of directive we need .
We cannot really contemplate enlargement without some sort of acquis communautaire in the nuclear sector .
The Commissioner says she does not feel it advisable to produce a communication .
Please come to our committee Commissioner and we can discuss this further .
I think one is needed in the near future indicating how we could achieve more harmonisation - of course not at the lowest standards in existence but at the most stringent .
If you want public acceptance - and many of you do - of the nuclear industry , you have to ensure that .
Commissioner you say that as far as new facilities are concerned , if there are to be any , you feel that there is a case .
I really do not see the difference , and I urge you to reconsider what you have said this evening to come to our committee , look at this one case as an example of what we need for the public of Europe and for the workers in our nuclear plants .
Mr President , what the investigations into this incident show is what can best be described as a culture of management incompetence and one of complacency .
The report by the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate in February of this year into the safety records found that these records had been systematically falsified .
The processing of spent fuel from 34 plants in 9 different countries was thrown into doubt and , indeed , Japan , Germany and Switzerland stopped sending material - and quite rightly so - to Sellafield .
This whole sorry tale has added to the UK 's reputation , as sordid as it is often inaccurate , as the " dirty man of Europe " .
I believe that all at Sellafield must accept collective responsibility for the things that have gone wrong and must act to improve them .
A number of improvements have been made : the new chairman of BNFL has undertaken a fundamental review ; a number of people have been dismissed .
There is undoubtedly progress .
However , there is a lot yet to be achieved and there is a long way for the UK to go , and for BNFL to go to re-establish its reputation .
I would ally myself with the concerns of Mrs McNally , when she asked the Commissioner to look again at these matters .
The fact is that the Commissioner telling us that the rules of individual Member States are more specific is simply not good enough .
We need high minimum standards and , in particular , we need those standards in the light of the accession of candidate countries , many of which are more reliant on nuclear technology than existing members of the Union and have much older generating capacity .
The importance of European Union action in this matter is that it will be a confidence-building measure , and what the public want are confidence-building measures .
I recognise and feel deeply the concern expressed by colleagues in the Republic of Ireland and Denmark .
The fact is that we need legislation to implement what is called for in the motion put forward by the three main political groups tonight : high minimum standards for the safe and reliable design , construction and operation of nuclear and nuclear-related installations , as well as for nuclear-safety management systems .
My group cannot support the Green motion here tonight .
We feel that it treats the matter in too gargantuan terms .
It raises the perfectly legitimate question of whether nuclear reprocessing should continue at Sellafield .
But one cannot conduct this debate in the terms employed by the tabloid newspapers .
We support the motion put forward by the three major political groups because we believe that improvements need to be made , improvements are being made , but that those improvements will be encouraged by an EU-wide approach to this whole matter .
We recognise too the great significance of this plant for employment in west Cumbria and we believe that should the future of the plant be thrown into jeopardy then the European Commission must come forward with special measures to help regenerate other employment in the area .
This is a saga in which nobody , least of all Sellafield , comes out well . But it is an area where action at European-Union level really can make a difference .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking my colleague , Mrs Ahern , for raising this very important issue .
No one in this House could have been anything but appalled at the recent events linked to Sellafield , with the falsification of MOX fuel data and the Nuclear Installation Inspectorate 's report on the low level of safety procedures at the plant .
Following the initial defensive response by BNFL , it was only when that report was published that the real scale of the problem emerged , that the falsification of figures had apparently been going on secretly since 1996 .
Wales , like Ireland , has suffered from the radioactive contamination in the Irish Sea , due essentially to Sellafield .
There has been a theory about a link between a high incidence of childhood leukaemia , for example , and proximity to the Welsh coastline .
Now , added to that , we have a situation where any confidence the public had in the safety of the plant , and therefore their own health and safety , has been destroyed .
It is this crisis of credibility in the management of British Nuclear Fuels which may actually bring about the end of reprocessing .
BNFL was determined to press ahead with the Sellafield MOX plant to keep reprocessing going .
But one of the reasons why British Energy , which accounted for a third of Sellafield 's reprocessing work , decided to shift from that to waste storage was on economic grounds .
It was cheaper for them to store waste , and evidence published recently by the nuclear-free local authorities confirms this view .
So , with the problems of the environmental pollution and the effects on health , as well as the issue of cost and the debate about the cost , what justification is left for nuclear processing ?
It is not worth the risks associated with it and , as the resolution states , the Council , the Commission and Parliament must reconsider this whole issue , including the production of MOX fuel , in the light of recent events and in the interests not only of people in Ireland and Wales but also in the whole of Europe .
British Nuclear Fuels has an obligation to deal with the levels of waste that Mrs Ahern mentioned earlier in the safest way possible .
That issue too is one of great concern to me because an area of Wales has been mentioned as a possible site for storing low-level radioactive waste .
This is unacceptable .
A strategic approach is needed .
The nuclear industry has caused enormous damage already and we have to be certain that more and more communities and people 's lives are not blighted by its legacy in future .
Mr President , an essential requirement in parliamentary work is rigour .
For the sake of this rigour , I would like to remind you of four facts relating to the case of the falsification of manual measurements of the diameter of MOX fuel pellets at the British Nuclear Fuels installation at Sellafield .
Firstly , we are talking about secondary and superfluous controls at the request of a client , not a safety requirement ; secondly , no nuclear safety requirement was violated ; thirdly , there was no risk of radiation whatsoever ; fourthly , no safeguard clause of the Euratom Treaty was violated since the measurements of the weight of the pellets were correct .
We are therefore talking about a dreadful case of a lack of professional ethics , which has done enormous economic and public relations damage to the company concerned , but this case had no implications whatsoever in terms of the safety of workers or the public .
Nevertheless , a mishap like this reminds us , despite its trivial nature , of the need to give utmost priority to the constant control and improvement of the procedures in an installation such as the Sellafield reprocessing plant .
This is the view of the British regulatory authority .
This is clearly demanded in the resolution supported by our Group and we hope that this will be complied with in the future .
Mr President , we must not be under any illusion that the falsification of quality control data at Sellafield was not a most serious matter .
I suspect that the small number of Members of this House who have kept in touch with the plant , both the management and the workers ' representatives there over a good number of years , felt the issue more keenly than most .
It exposed a poor safety culture and an inadequate secondary control procedure in the manufacture of MOX fuel .
However , we should note that the response of BNFL to the nuclear inspectorate report has already resulted in very significant management changes . These have been welcomed both by the inspectorate and by the minister responsible .
I hope that in that regard they will not be accused of having gone native on this particular issue .
I would suggest that one of the roles of Parliament should be to monitor the ongoing management changes that are taking place .
We should also note that the chief inspector and the Commission made very clear to the industry committee that there were no safety implications at any of the Sellafield installations .
Nuclear safeguards were not an issue , nor were there safety issues in relation to transport of nuclear materials .
I am glad that the Commissioner has reinforced that view this evening .
The fuel can be safely used for the purposes for which it was manufactured .
But to say all this must not lead us to be complacent .
We seek to apply standards to the applicant countries in eastern Europe and , I would suggest , beyond the applicant countries in eastern Europe .
European Union standards applicable to all nuclear installations are still something that most of us want to see .
We know that the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association is seeking harmonisation .
I would hope that the Commissioner , as other colleagues have asked , will reconsider her position and actually support and encourage WENRA in this objective .
I am absolutely convinced , on the basis of my own experience in a number of countries that this is the way to reassure public opinion .
It is the reassurance of public opinion that must be our main objective as a Parliament .
Mr President , I have been a Member of this Parliament now for sixteen years .
I believe I am accurate in saying that literally in every one of those sixteen years the concerns of the Irish Government and the Irish people about the nuclear processing plant in Sellafield have been raised in this Parliament .
I am always conscious , as I look around , that probably every light bulb in this Chamber is lit by nuclear energy , which explains the reluctance among many of the major European nuclear powers to address seriously the concern we have in Ireland .
Our concerns have been expressed by successive governments to the British Government .
They have largely been treated - I regret to say - with indifference and indeed , very often with contempt .
There now exists in Ireland a total absence of any trust in relation to reassurances about the safety of the nuclear plant in Sellafield .
The recent information about the falsification of documents just added to the deep sense of unease that is shared by people throughout our island .
We are a country with all risk and no benefit from this plant .
We are aware that the Germans and the Japanese are sending their nuclear waste for processing to Sellafield because it is politically too uncomfortable for them to do it in their own countries because of concerns about this .
I ask the Commissioner to reconsider her point .
I also ask her another question : are any of the non-nuclear countries on the nuclear safety committee you mentioned ?
It is time that we realised that we must count the cost of processing the waste from these nuclear facilities as an intrinsic part of the cost .
It is , generally speaking , more comfortable to leave that out , but this is a matter of extreme concern to the Irish Government , the Irish people and happily , also to the Danish Government .
We are joined in our concerns by them as well .
Mr President , I asked to speak in this debate not just because I am a Member from the north-west region of England where the Sellafield plant is situated , not just because there could be 10 000 livelihoods at risk if Sellafield was closed , and not because I have any vested interest in the nuclear industry .
I do not .
I asked to speak because I want to try and help to get some truth into this debate .
The trouble is , when you talk about nuclear issues - especially Sellafield - it is dominated by a distortion of the truth .
When Mrs Ahern spoke , she spoke of the NII giving a damning indictment of the plant .
No , it did not !
She spoke of the damning indictment on safety checks .
No , it did not !
It made three safety recommendations and the checks were quality assurance checks , as other speakers have said .
She said the report came from a press statement in The Independent .
No , it did not .
The workers at BNFL raised the issue .
They were the ones who discovered it .
BNFL were the ones who told the nuclear installations inspectorate and their customers what had happened .
She spoke of contamination of the seas in Ireland and Denmark .
I quote from The Independent where seven prominent Danish scientists , who actually study as a professional interest the releases of radioactivity from Sellafield , said on 12 May : " There is no scientific basis for the claim that the present release of radioactivity from Sellafield causes an unacceptable contamination in the North Atlantic and Arctic regions " .
When your mind is made up facts only confuse the issue !
She spoke of the scandal of abuse of safety .
That is an absolute insult to the people who work there , and more so to their families who live near that site !
Those workers would not work in that plant if they thought it was unsafe .
They would certainly not put their families at risk it that was the case .
That is an absolute indictment of those people who work there .
Then she finished by talking about corruption .
That really is the last throw of the dice .
Finally , I say to the Commissioner : the one thing you should do , apart from listen , is to pay a visit to Sellafield and find out the facts for yourself .
That is the best advice that I can give you and many Members of this Parliament also .
Mr President , as a Cumbrian - born , bred and resident - and one of the representatives of north-west England , there is nobody in this Parliament who has been more affected by the reverberations arising from recent events at Sellafield than me .
Let us be clear . There have been real lapses in the way in which it has been managed .
Those lapses quite simply are not acceptable .
Speaking as a Cumbrian I know a lot of people in my home county - which I have the privilege to represent - feel let down by British Nuclear Fuels .
But as has already been pointed out , there have been no breaches of the law or of the regulator 's rules and guidelines .
In a society subject to the rule of law recent events cannot be used to close the plant .
I know that there are many people who would like to see Sellafield closed down .
In particular I know this is a very strongly held view in parts of Ireland .
In a free society , if that is how people feel , they must be allowed to articulate their opinions .
But that is no reason why the plant should be closed .
There can be no question of any lawfully established enterprise in any part of the European Union being closed by the public authorities without its breaking the law .
This true in Ireland , Denmark , the United Kingdom or any other Member State .
The owners - that is to say the United Kingdom Government - and the employees of Sellafield have legitimate interests which quite simply cannot be swept under the carpet .
This applies in this case just as much as to anybody else .
Finally , just as the recent crisis at Sellafield has been self-inflicted , so the solution to it lies in British Nuclear Fuels ' hands , as they themselves understand .
I wish them well .
But words are not enough .
They must be matched by deeds - their deeds .
From an Irish perspective we are witnessing the beginning of the end of reprocessing at Sellafield and we have allies .
The powers of the Commission in this area as the responsible Community institution remain hopelessly inadequate , embarrassingly inadequate .
No uniform standards for safety and discharges , no Community consultation procedure concerning power stations sited near frontiers , no clear Community provisions for the storage and transport of nuclear fuels or nuclear waste , no adequate Community system of information and monitoring in cases of nuclear malfunction .
Nuclear safety in the enlargement process is a major cause for concern .
As there are no prescribed criteria in EU law governing the design or operation of nuclear facilities , how do we judge their safety of operation ?
Realists accept and understand that life is full of risks .
Society usually accepts a certain level of risk in return for an advantage and proponents of nuclear energy almost inevitably remind us of the balance of risk and benefit .
What benefit accrues to Ireland for the risk of being exposed to the majority of Britain 's nuclear installations ?
If nuclear safety and nuclear energy are so safe , why are not the majority of these installations located near the population centres of the south-east of England ?
To minimise the risk to these population centres of course .
But seen from an Irish perspective , this stands logic on its head , we have counties Antrim , Down , Louth , Dublin , Wicklow and Wexford where the vast majority of the population of the island of Ireland , about 2 million people , live on or adjacent to the Irish sea where the majority of British nuclear institutions are sited .
Furthermore in recent years , we have all seen how consumer concern about the integrity of the food chain can devastate a once seemingly secure market .
Witness the BSE and dioxin problem .
We can only begin to imagine the effect of any kind of nuclear scare - just a scare - on these sectors of our economy .
Choice about exposure to risk for oneself or for one 's children is a very basic human right .
This right to determine , to control , to have any say about the risk of nearby concentrations of nuclear installations is denied to those of us who inhabit the western shores of the Irish sea .
In practice , nuclear decision-making in the UK falls far short of democratic standards .
Often questionable decisions are made behind a wall of secrecy .
I will conclude .
The reality of Sellafield goes beyond the contribution to the Kyoto targets on the dependence of the UK economy on nuclear energy .
It also includes a litany of unreported incidents , falsified quality control checks on MOX fuel rods resulting in the loss of confidence by the Japanese in safety standards at the plant and the cancellation by the Germans and the Swiss of mixed oxide nuclear fuel pellets .
The reality of Sellafield includes incidents last September and early this year of deliberate sabotage , allegedly by members of the staff .
Serious doubts are being raised about the long-term viability of reprocessing .
Their order books are full for a few more years , but no new orders are coming in due to the quality of control lapse at the MOX plant .
Even the new CEO , Mr Norman Askew , is reported as saying that reprocessing is not the big part of the business it once was .
A director has publicly stated the future of the plant is in doubt .
But a nuclear future for Sellafield can be justified : not mixed oxide fuel production , not thermal oxide reprocessing at the MOX and THORP plants .
The skills and the experience of the workforce and the major capital investment could and should be redirected towards waste management and the creation of a centre of excellence for decommissioning and that is what I suggest we concentrate the debate on .
Mr President , thank you very much for an interesting and valuable debate .
I hope that we can all agree on the need for confidence-building because , even though the conclusion is that this incident did not cause substantial damage or serious risks , we see that the price of the loss of confidence is very high .
It is in the interest of all of us to ensure that our citizens have confidence in our safety and security systems .
I am ready to come any time to any committee in Parliament to discuss those issues .
I can say that personally I would very much prefer to have Community rules .
But we must not give the impression that this would mean higher levels of safety in the European Union , because with the unanimity rule on the decisions on these issues , the end-result could be that we have minimum standard rules which would not live up to the expectations of our citizens .
We must be realistic , because we know the discussion and the position and attitude among the Member States : they are not willing to give the European Union more competence in this area .
That is also why the Commission 's responsibility in this area is restricted to control radioactivity - but no more than that .
We need European rules .
However , we must not give the impression that this will be achieved very easily and quickly .
I share the view that we ought to discuss it more thoroughly .
In reply to Mrs Banotti 's question , this European Nuclear Installation 's safety group brings together the power plant operators and nuclear regulators from both Member States and applicant states .
It is not a wider forum but they can cooperate in this specific safety group .
It is not the first time that Sellafield has been discussed and we need to look into the safety issues very closely because , you remember , there was an accident in Japan .
That was because of lax control and some of the staff thought they could make a mix of their own .
So even in highly advanced societies there are serious risks with nuclear and processing techniques .
I should be pleased to come to Parliament at any time to continue this discussion .
However , I do not want to give anyone false hopes about what can be achieved very quickly and with the help of Member States .
That is also why we have restricted competence .
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to make a comment in relation to yesterday ' s Minutes .
I do not appear amongst the signatories of the attendance register .
I was present all day yesterday and during the vote which took place at noon , but I do not appear in the Minutes .
I would be grateful if this error could be corrected .
We will check the list , Mr Valdivielso de Cué , and make the necessary correction .
Mr President , I would like to inform the House , under Rule 111 , that last Thursday , the offices of the Moss Media Group in Moscow comprising independent television and a number of newspapers and magazines were raided by so-called tax police , uniformed and armed .
Documents were taken away , the telephones were cut off and threats of legal action remain .
Mr President , this matter is one of the utmost importance .
It involves freedom of the press in Russia and further outrages are expected over the next two or three days .
Mr Robin Cook is in Moscow today .
He will discuss the matter with Mr Ivanov , the Russian Foreign Minister , and the 15 Ministers are thinking of a joint démarche .
But we in the European Parliament - what are we doing ?
Nothing .
The matter is , if you like , too urgent to take on board because it happened last Thursday and cannot be brought forward as an urgency .
Could you please refer this question to the Conference of Presidents so that some system can be found to deal with very urgent and important matters such as this one ?
We take note of your comment and your suggestion , Lord Bethell , and we will pass them on to the President .
Mr President , I would just like to make the House and the Presidency aware , as I believe it will be of interest to them , that yesterday , on the occasion of the Conference of Reconciliation in Vienna , an agreement was reached between the Austrian government representative , Mr Schaumeyer , and the American Deputy Finance Minister , Stuart Eizenstat , on compensation payments for the victims of Nazi forced labour in Austria .
The lawyers - and I feel I should take the opportunity to mention this as well - Michael Hausfeld and Martin Mendelson , who represent some of the governments of Eastern European countries , commented at the time that , in some respects , Austria is in fact providing more generous compensation payments than Germany , because in the first place , we are including the agricultural workers , and secondly , we are also paying compensation for children under the age of 12 and women who gave birth whilst in forced labour camps .
I believe this is worth sharing with the House .
Thank you for your statement , Mrs Stenzel .
( The Minutes were approved )
Broad outlines of economic policies
The next item is the report ( A5-0134 / 2000 ) by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission recommendation for the 2000 broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community ( drawn up pursuant to Article 99 ( 2 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community ) .
. ( EL ) Mr President , broadly speaking , the report tabled before plenary by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs contains a particularly positive appraisal of the Commission ' s recommendation for the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States .
The committee has worked with its usual efficiency and diligence and has supported its proposals with an impressive econometric analysis which I should like to praise here in public .
The recommendation for the year 2000 has been formulated at a time of favourable developments and optimistic prospects for the European economy .
The prospects of an increase in the national wage in Europe in excess of 3 % for 2000 and 2001 - 3.4 % according to the latest forecasts for 2000 - are much higher than the disappointing actual average rates of increase throughout the 1990s .
These results , provided that they are realised , offer a window of opportunity , a springboard from which the European economy can launch on to a course which will lead to a permanently high and ecologically sustainable rate of growth .
It goes without saying that permanently high rates of growth are the sine qua non for improving the employment situation and strengthening the competitiveness of Europe in the global economy .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs accepts that the requisite rate of progress is best expressed through a growth rate of GDP of 3 % or more , that this rate cannot be maintained over time without a substantial rise in the potential product of the EU economy and that there can be no increase in the potential product without productive investment . The Commission , however , has avoided specifying the ratio of investment to GDP .
The Committee on Economic Affairs takes the view that quantitative economic targets may be useful , but insists that the fixing of such targets must not undermine the goals established in the stability pact , which are the fundamental guide for the economic policies in the euro zone .
Despite this general reservation , the report by the Committee on Economic Affairs expresses the committee ' s satisfaction at the restatement in the Commission recommendation of the quantified target , set in the Presidency conclusions of the European Council at Lisbon , of raising labour force participation from 61 % to 70 % of the population by 2010 and of increasing the participation of women from 51 % to over 60 % by 2000 .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs maintains that the requisite economic growth must be based on price stability and budgetary discipline , reasonable wage increases taking account of price stability , productivity increases and a reduction in unit labour costs , even in the case of reductions in working hours .
It also believes in greater liberalisation of competition , strengthening national competition authorities , providing special support for associations of small- and medium-sized enterprises and further developing the single market - especially in the public utilities and financial services sectors .
As far as financial services are concerned , having reached a broad consensus of agreement , we shall be tabling a joint amendment calling for the action plan for financial services to be applied more quickly , i.e. by 2003 rather than 2005 .
The majority of the committee believes that mobilising the market will result in the need to increase investments using purely market instruments .
At the same time , however , it approves of the restructuring of government spending in favour of investment which must be justified - when it is justified - by the cost-benefit ratio , but rejects using public investments simply to manage the economy .
On a more general note , the committee approves of the challenges identified by the Extraordinary Council in Lisbon of full employment , a knowledge-based economy , modernisation of social protection systems and dealing with the impact of the ageing population , but expresses its concern at the gap between the key challenges and the often routine specific policy recommendations .
It therefore calls upon the Commission and Council to seriously consider the need for a drastic renewal of the intellectual apparatus behind the general guidelines .
The committee also reiterates Parliament ' s previous call for an interinstitutional agreement between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament on the subject of the adoption of the resolution , although it thanks the Portuguese Presidency for its willingness to cooperate on this matter .
This is ad hoc cooperation , however , not cooperation reflected in an interinstitutional agreement , and we consider this a shortcoming in our procedure .
Ladies and gentlemen , we achieved a significant degree of consensus in our work in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I should like to stress the general acceptance of the feasibility of the objective of achieving full employment within the next decade .
Of course , there are certain differences in our assessment of the best way of achieving these targets .
Some of us believe that setting quantitative targets , even without mechanisms for imposing them , would help Europe give concrete expression to its efforts to move in the right direction .
This comment applies in particular to the target investment rate , which requires us to increase the potential rate of growth of the economy to 3 % on a permanent basis .
This percentage is a familiar figure .
The Commission set it repeatedly in its studies and it would not have hurt to have included it .
We could also have given more categorical expression to the , I believe , general feeling that we need to relaunch the trans-European networks and address the need for new forms of financing for them and the issue of the involvement of private capital and public investment in this sector .
Without , in any way , giving the green light to squander public spending , we could have tried to give the public sector of the economy a slightly more positive role than merely that of ' guard-dog ' for price stability .
There are margins for all this , especially through the window of opportunity , if the main risk to our economy is from the probability of a crisis on the American money markets which could paralyse the private investment mechanism .
Just imagine , ladies and gentlemen , if that were to happen and we , in the meantime , had forgotten how to handle public investment .
The European economy has a huge margin for growth ; it is true that the European economy can become more productive , but we need to be bolder in the way we go about it .
Mr President , when drawing up this draft opinion for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the Committee on Social Affairs fully appreciated the importance of this resolution , Parliament ' s first resolution on economic policy guidelines since the Lisbon Summit .
In particular , it stressed the importance of the connection between these two priorities and considered that the common elements of the broad guidelines of economic policy should be fully exploited and the various implementing processes adopted by the Councils over the years coordinated , and by this I am referring to the objectives of the Luxembourg , Cardiff and Cologne processes .
In our opinion , the open method of coordination , which was introduced on an experimental basis in Lisbon , should allow for the full exploitation of the connection between growth and employment , which , we feel , cannot be ignored .
The subsidiarity principle needs to be steered in this direction with regard to the role both of the governments and of the decentralised institutions , without diminishing the decisive part played by greater synergy , greater coordination between the broad guidelines , and by placing greater focus on the European Community dimension with a view to developing an economic policy which can enhance the potential for development in Europe and allow us to effectively achieve the goals which we set ourselves with regard to full employment .
We have taken the chapters of the broad guidelines into account , in particular the aspects related to the introduction of flexibility and efficiency elements in the products market , the financial services market and the labour market , but we have also acknowledged the importance of the negotiations of the Social Partners and of social objectives .
A further consideration : we consider - and for the remainder we refer you to the text of the opinion - that Parliament ' s role in this matter must be consolidated by formal institution of the procedure laying down a specific interinstitutional agreement on the participation of Parliament in formal consultations on the economic policy guidelines and on the monitoring of their effects .
Mr President , the Liberal Group will support the Katiforis report on the broad guidelines for economic policies , which we are especially satisfied with since many of our observations were accepted during the debate in committee .
At a time when we are debating the weakness of the euro , at least in relation to the dollar , I think that we would do well to remember that the state of the European economy is solid and offers a framework for stability and solidity as well as excellent prospects for growth and employment . In short , we can look forward to very positive development over the next few years .
Therefore , the fact that , in some ways , the US economy is doing better than the European economy , at least in terms of growth forecasts , should not mask the fact that the European economy is doing well at the moment .
Furthermore , it is the European economy which is funding a good portion of US development .
However , we should not only be concentrating on the more positive aspects ; we should also be taking note of the fragility of continued growth and solidity in the European economy .
In order to overcome this fragility , in our view , we need the European economy to function better , since it is still subject to excessive corporate rigidity , in both the public and private sectors , and on the part of both economic and social operators .
We therefore propose greater adaptability and flexibility in the labour market .
This would clearly involve the removal of the existing obstacles to the proper functioning of the European internal market and a deep reform of the tax system , with the adoption of a tax package at European level . To sum up , we should overcome the conservatism which still exists in certain economic and social areas of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me tell you why the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance did not vote in favour of the Katiforis report as amended by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Obviously , we endorse the general thrust of the Katiforis report .
In particular , we approve of the ambition to achieve full employment as well as its ambition in terms of sound social and , above all , salary agreements .
On the other hand , we did not endorse a raft of amendments which we considered to be extremely dangerous .
We shall reject these amendments . Indeed , we shall reject them systematically , and we hope within the current parliamentary term to convince our fellow Members , including those in the Group of the European People ' s Party , how dangerous they are .
In the first place , we can no longer continue to call for the flexibility of wage contracts to be reformed and increased without specifying our thinking more precisely .
Endorsing the goal of a European society which is as competitive as possible in terms of know-how means maximising investment in human capital .
Well , enhanced human capital is not a commodity to be taken and then dispensed with , but rather something to be respected , something that is offered to an individual by allowing them time to be trained , to gain and enhance experience .
So if there must be structural reform in wages , then it must be in the direction of greater , and not less , stability in employment .
There is a second fundamental point of which I desperately hope to convince my fellow Members in the next five - now four - years , and that is that we cannot claim to wish to respect the Kyoto Agreement by the year 2008 .
We are aware , and the report acknowledges as much , that , at the moment , it is contradictory to attempt to reconcile an objective of 3 % annual growth with the rejection of the urgent requirement to invest in energy saving , transport systems , in improving accommodation , in such a way as to make the Kyoto objectives and the objective of 3 % growth compatible .
- ( EL ) Mr President , the Commission ' s recommendation for the broad economic guidelines for 2000 may well accept a return to full employment , but it has stood by the basic approach of previous years .
Although I recognise the contribution made by Parliament and our rapporteur in gaining acceptance once again for the concept of full employment , I think that the rapporteur himself , whom I congratulate on his efforts , would agree that we need to redefine what we mean by employment and by full employment .
What does employed mean when we have before us a policy which dismantles working relations , minimises employment and , as a result , makes general poverty a mass phenomenon .
As far as its general approach is concerned , the Commission ' s recommendation forms part of a more general neo-liberal economic and social policy which , with the support of the majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , finds expression in the report under discussion .
As far as we are concerned , the basic policy objectives should be to support public investment , stable , permanent and full employment , protect and improve the social security system and the system of social protection in general and strengthen active demand by improving the purchasing power of the workers .
This is the direction the broad guidelines should be taking .
The amendments which we propose to the European Parliament move in precisely this direction and we call on our fellow members to vote in favour of them .


Mr President , reading the broad guidelines for the economic policy presented by the Commission for the year 2000 leaves one with a strange impression that something is missing because nowhere is there any mention of the single currency , except in a brief and fleeting reference , stating the importance of the Maastricht criterion regarding the rationalisation of public finances or the need to gear monetary policy towards price stability .
There is not a word , however , on the current depreciation of the euro and its influence on the economy and economic policies .
This seems all the more surprising because every few pages the Commission document reiterates the idea that efficiency demands an overall strategy .
The same is unfortunately true of the European Parliament ' s report since , out of the 35 points raised in the resolution , not one relates to the single currency , and it is only briefly referred to in the recitals .
Apparently , the rule of silence is prevailing , as it did when the major groups within Parliament rejected the proposal from the Union for a Europe of Nations Group to organise , as of today , a debate on the implications of fluctuations in the euro .
This debate has been deferred once again , even though there is a great deal to be discussed .
For years , all the economic and financial advantages a strong euro was going to offer have been trotted out for our benefit .
Now the euro is weak , are we to assume that the loss of these advantages has no implications worth mentioning ?
This is surely some mistake !
The weak euro favours exports , as is often boasted .
It also , however , presents serious disadvantages which are concealed , such as the misappropriation of capital , third party buyouts of euro zone businesses or weakening of the incentive for structural reforms , even though these are so necessary .
Finally , the basic problem still remains .
This depreciation in the euro has occurred because it is perceived as an artificial currency , but until this is clearly stated it will not be possible to remedy the situation .
In this instance too , then , let us hope that the European Parliament agrees to organise a debate in the near future , before it is too late .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , having scarcely emerged from the dull 80s , Europe has been plunged into the throes of international speculation .
We were promised a euro-cum-mark that would be stronger than the dollar , and which would compensate for the weakness of economic growth by means of the on-going revaluation of assets .
We have an ersatz currency whose volatility is enhanced by its non-identifiable character .
Formerly , speculation on the exchange market involved the pound .
Now it is the euro .
This is nothing particularly surprising for us Members of the European Parliament who are accustomed to seeing Europe operating on a daily basis amid differences and antagonisms .
What will the situation be like after enlargement , when the markets will react to any event affecting any one of the thirty odd countries which make up the European technostructure ?
It would almost be like the United Nations issuing a currency .
This reduction in the value of the euro is not something that Mr Duisenberg can do anything about , as this European Central Bank , whatever they say , is the brainchild of the two main States in the euro zone , and the French and German Governments have given the order to do nothing .
In order to maintain the value of the euro in relation to the dollar , we should have to raise euro interest rates to a level which is slightly higher than that of the dollar , perhaps to a level in the order of 50 base points .
From my standpoint as a post-Keynesian , I see this as having little impact on economic growth , since this depends on various other factors , the most important of which are psychological .
Obviously , we cannot agree to all assets located in France being devalued if the downward slide of the euro continues beyond the short term .
If this should happen , and obviously we hope it does not , then we should have to point the finger at the parties responsible , and this would not mean Mr Duisenberg .
We shall judge the candidates in the French presidential elections according to the efforts they have made to get us out of this bind .
Mr President , the report is self-contradictory .
Paragraph 14 supports the Stability Pact ' s demand that price stability should always precede employment-related considerations .
Elsewhere , the desire is for higher employment and more democratic influence upon economic policy .
However , inflation should always , of course , be between zero and two per cent .
This is something that is supported , even though inflation has only stood at that rate for a period of six years in post-war Germany and Denmark .
It is now quite certain , however , that this state of affairs will always be best for all countries at all times .
We no longer have any need for elected representatives to devise the right policy mix .
We have a Central Bank which establishes interest rates on the basis of inflation .
In this way , the euro is allowed to depreciate and interest rates are increased with the result that there may be lower rates of growth and increased unemployment .
It is worse than the sacred cows in India , yet the report does not protest against this .
In paragraph G , on the other hand , a new sacred cow is to be found : that of high taxation .
Social security arrangements must be critically examined and social expenditure reduced , but savings can also be made on social expenditure by making higher employment the top economic objective .
In that way , people receiving cash benefits and unemployment benefit will be able to exchange these for proper wages .
That is an alternative recipe for economic policy , but one which is contrary to the Treaty .
The balance of trade deficit is normally to be no more than one per cent of GNP , irrespective of whether the money is used for investments , which can subsequently produce much larger deficits again . This would seem to be something which no amount of elections in the Member States or in the EU Parliament can change .
This is absurd . It runs counter to all experience and is a denial of the principle of democracy which unites our countries and which means that voters can go to the polls and vote in favour of higher employment , even if inflation might , as a result , occasionally rise above the two per cent mark .
Mr President , I enthusiastically support the further deepening of integration . Many matters are best dealt with at Community level , but when I read the report of my colleague Mr Katiforis - which provides several guidelines which are favourable to the market economy and therefore worthy of support - I cannot agree with some of the proposals in it .
The dynamism and desired growth of the European economy will not come about by creating Union-wide integrated programmes , whether they be applied with good intentions in the area of training or entrepreneurship or whether they be common support systems for the benefit of SME organisations .
I also have my personal doubts about the superiority of a European scientific community , if it is to be created from above , i.e. by the volition of the Commission and the Council , and not allowed to develop naturally through networking between the scientific communities , from one business or university to another ; financing , both at a national and European level , must naturally be secured .
Something which I have reservations about is the faith in the importance of top-level structures which stands out in this report ; a programme and planning from the top may actually put the brakes on development rather than make it dynamic .
At present , European dynamism will be improved by dismantling top-level structures , for example , barriers to trade , which are still hindering the creation of a genuine internal market .
This is what Mr Katiforis is also calling for , albeit of the Commission , when it should be demanded of those nation states , which - in a few individual cases - practice obstructionism , for example , in the areas of transport , public procurement or energy .
When discussing economic policies in the context of this report , we should not forget about competition policy .
Recently , the neutrality of the Communities ' competition policy has been called into question - justifiably so - inter alia in the case of Volvo-Scania .
The reason given for regional monopolies and concentration of power in regions with a small population base is rather lame .
It is clearly a real blow to the industry and trade of small and remote countries while they are making efforts to increase their competitiveness within the Union area .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Katiforis and Commissioner Solbes , both of whom have displayed a broader than usual understanding of what is necessary for a successful economy .
We must take advantage of the fact that we are in the European Union to do things collectively .
I wish to concentrate on research and development .
I regret that the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy did not draw up an opinion on Mr Katiforis ' s report - it should have done .
Compared to the US and Japan , we are woefully lacking in a proper research strategy in almost all Member States except Finland , Sweden and the Republic of Ireland - countries shown in the Commission paper to have had unusual success .
We need scientists in order to have research and development .
Let us stop young people choosing to do other things .
Let us encourage women .
Let us ensure that competence in widely-used languages is increased .
Above all , let us look at the salaries paid to scientists and technologists .
That is what makes them choose other careers .
Of course , we need infrastructure in science facilities and communications .
We need a strategy .
Jacques Delors spelt it out in his White Paper , so we do not need to reinvent his thoughts .
However , the big difference between us and the successful economies of the world - the US in particular - is that they spend far more money on investment in science , and it pays off .
Commissioner Busquin ' s communication on the European research area is very good .
However , what is important is the next stage : transferring that knowledge into goods and products and processes which can be sold .
Let us be innovative in the European Union .
Let us start by bringing the innovation unit back from Luxembourg to Brussels , where it can use its skills working with other departments of the Commission .
That would be a not very revolutionary but a sensible thing to do .

Mr President , as everyone is pointing out , the euro has just lost almost 30 % of its value in sixteen months , but the European Commission , like the Central Bank , does not seem to be in much of a hurry to learn the lessons of this experience , as that would be liable to challenge the current monetary policy which benefits only stock exchange transactions and speculation .
The ambition to achieve full employment and a modern economy , as declared in Lisbon , are indeed laudable objectives , but they are now effectively coming up against the liberal yoke .
In its document on the broad economic guidelines , the Commission pursues this liberal approach , and these guidelines now represent the reference text for the coordination of economic policy in the Member States .
The Commission , indeed , shows no compunction in issuing orders to this or that State with a view to drawing up its budget .
It clearly stresses the target of budgetary streamlining , even going beyond the requirements of the Stability Pact .
Following the example of the Central Bank , it demands wage moderation as well as structural reform of the labour market , especially in order to make it more flexible .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ' report is in line with this approach and with the continuation of the Lisbon decisions .
It advocates accelerating the liberalisation process as well as the process of applying pressure to wages .
It proposes increasing the flexibility of the labour market .
This is why I am unable to approve of the guidelines contained in this report , especially when made exacerbated by the many amendments introduced by the right wing .
The current economic situation , particularly with the decline in the euro , ought to lead the Union and the Member State governments to strive towards the reorientation of European policy , so as to enable it at last to fulfil expectations regarding social issues .
We must shake up the dogma of the Stability Pact .
We must reverse the current approach , which makes social policy nothing more than a consequence of economic and monetary policy , responsible only for making good the damage caused by the market by means of a policy of aid .
This new policy should be particularly based on support to investment that creates jobs by means of a selective policy of credit , the improvement in living and working conditions and a reduction of working hours without flexibility or increased precariousness , taxation on income and financial measures to curb speculation and to release new resources .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on the very points which so displeased the previous speaker , i.e. the sections of the reports which display a liberal approach .
In fact , as recent events concerning the euro illustrate , the European Union and the institutions are currently at a crossroads : we have the choice between the road to prosperity and growth , undertaking radical structural liberalisation reforms that Europe must implement boldly , and the road of preservation and the perpetuation of a corporate , statist vision of the economy which is condemning many European countries to levels of unemployment which are two or three times higher than those in America and to a marginal role in the most innovative and dynamic sectors of the economy .
Having said that , I cannot fail to welcome the Katiforis and Pomés Ruiz reports , which clearly stress the way in which the liberalisation and flexible nature of the markets - especially the labour market - the dramatic reduction in tax pressure , a thorough reform of state pension systems and the gradual separation of state and economy - first and foremost through the privatisation of public companies - are all choices which cannot now be put off any longer if we want to avoid building a Europe which may well be united , but united by unemployment , marginalisation of the most vulnerable , in particular women and children , and by the endless red tape surrounding the social initiatives of the society , a Europe , that is , which will fail to create either growth or employment .
This is one of the shortcomings of the euro , a currency which is suffering from a structural crisis and inflexible , excessively regulated markets .
Some say that political control of the economy at European level would be a way of resolving this crisis .
Beware !
If political control has to be a means of control which transfers the interventionism of national economies to Brussels , this would be a bad move .
We Italian Radicals are also in favour of political control , but federalist , liberal control , with a limited number of clear laws and no state intervention in the economy , even by the European State .
Mr President , the present draft resolution by Mr Katiforis contains many valid points .
We should , however , qualify one key point concerning a matter of principle .
Both the Commission ' s recommendation and the resolution claim high economically sustainable growth as the highest good and pursue this remorselessly .
This is odd , given the global relations in which the rich West is seen as an exclusive residential neighbourhood .
Do we want even more ?
Do we really need so much growth or can we combat unemployment by other means ?
The lopsided emphasis on material goods is bound to have a detrimental effect on our society .
It stimulates egocentricity , social exclusion , a blurring of moral standards and moral decay .
The corruption of society eventually harms economic development .
On a positive note , attention is paid to the effects of an ageing population on the sustainability of government funds .
Only since 1999 have both government expenditure and revenue fallen .
A further consolidation , a reduction in the debt burden , is desperately needed in many Member States , so as to ensure that funds are available in future for health care and provision for old age .
Taxes and social security contributions in the European Union are high compared to the United States , but the picture changes fundamentally when we consider the sometimes extortionate insurance premiums which American citizens have to pay .
The amendments which aim to shift the tax burden from labour to the use of scarce raw materials and minerals receive our support .
After all , the Kyoto Agreement more than merits compliance .
Mr President , I want to associate myself this morning with those people who have spoken in this debate and expressed some desire to challenge an atmosphere of complacency about the current state of the European economy .
I share the view expressed earlier by Mrs McNally that you can look to the United States and see that there has been investment in research .
That is one of the reasons why the United States is doing better than Europe .
But we must also emphasise that one of the other reasons why the United States continues to do so much better than Europe is because Europe has not yet properly addressed the issue of structural reform and market liberalisation .
I refer to the remarks made earlier by Mr Lipietz for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I am very pleased to engage in a debate with him over the next four years on this issue of market liberalisation .
The fact is that we have not yet seen the agreed market liberalisation within Europe applied in some Member States , not least his own .
I have a shared concern about the jobs of workers .
I would be very pleased to bring Mr Lipietz to speak to workers in the United Kingdom who may lose their jobs as a result of decisions made by a French owner of energy companies in the UK , when British companies are not allowed to gain access to the French market because the French have not applied agreed European policy .
That is a structural reform we must drive through .
It is not just in that area .
We see that the wealthiest states within the European Union continue to be the states that apply the strongest amount of state aid .
That is robbing the jobs of some of the poorer states who are represented here .
That is also one of the reasons why I do not share the view expressed by Mr von Wogau in relation to competition policy .
My concern , where decentralisation is concerned , is that there should not be a repatriation of competition policy .
Mr President , over the past few days , the debate on a European economic government has gained momentum once again in different quarters .
It is evident that more economic management is required at European level , but it is not so evident that only the 11 euro zone countries or the Ecofin Council will need to take on that coordination .
At the Lisbon Summit , a decision was made precisely in favour of a wider socio-economic approach in which employment , economic reform and social cohesion are seen as being interrelated .
In my opinion , the key conclusion that was reached at that summit was that the European Council will itself adopt an active , guiding and coordinating role .
Each spring , our government leaders will discuss the socio-economic policy on the basis of an integrated progress report from the European Commission .
Unfortunately , spring had already started this year .
The text for the broad economic guidelines for 2000 had already been drafted , very much along established lines .
Why did the Commission not take more time and , in line with Lisbon , draft the guidelines in an interdisciplinary manner , as prepared by the different DGs ?
Why do we not let the Commission continue with , and further develop , this type of cooperation , which also typified the preparatory work for Lisbon , in a socio-economic field ?
That seems to me a highly interesting challenge for the Commission ' s new Secretary General , David O 'Sullivan .
I would suggest taking into account conclusion 29 of the present report , which advocates a drastic renewal of the intellectual apparatus behind economic policy-making to bring it in line with the Lisbon conclusions .
I would also like to make reference to the conclusions of this Parliament ' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , compiled by Mr Cocilovo .
He proposes the drawing up of a single annual report on the economic and social state of the Union , and one set of annual guidelines for sustainable growth , employment and social cohesion .
One additional suggestion I would like to make is to include the socio-economic forum , which is scheduled for next month , earlier on in the annual cycle , i.e. at the very beginning of the year .
At the moment , it is just tacked on at the end .
Finally , I would like to draw the attention of the Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to the consensus-oriented cooperation which we have enjoyed in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in this sphere and add that we in this Parliament should break though the compartmentalisation and endeavour to rise above the hobbyhorses of this or the other side and to have an input in , for example , next month ' s forum , precisely on that basis .
The Commission ' s recommendation and report may be evaluated in the light of the euro system ' s most fundamental problems , and these are undeniably major and glaringly apparent .
I come from a country whose people enjoy the rare privilege of being consulted in connection with such far-reaching decisions as participation in the euro system .
Among Danes , there is a great deal of scepticism about , and opposition to , the national currency being swallowed up by the euro .
I have no doubt that this scepticism and opposition are shared by large and growing groups of the populations of the other Member States , who are not being consulted .
I only have time to mention a couple of points .
The first is one which is extremely important to the whole problem surrounding the euro .
Nobel Prize-winner Franco Modigliani points out that , in his view , unemployment has certainly been used by the European Central Bank as an instrument of economic policy designed to control inflation .
This is a crucial point .
The other absolutely crucial point I would mention is directly connected with the subject of the current motion for a resolution : the political weakness of the euro system .
What is missing , of course , is a political superstructure for steering economic policy .
This is the background to the French government ' s proposal that the EU ' s euro system should be equipped with a form of proper economic government .
It is these political consequences which are so crucial to the issue of the Danish people ' s consent .
I can predict that the question of whether or not the euro zone is to be enlarged to include Denmark , Sweden and Great Britain will be decided in Denmark in the referendum on 28 September .
The scepticism I have expressed here continues to grow .
Mr President , the Katiforis report is no more than a mundane vindication of the broad guidelines for the economic policies of the Member States .
Of its 29 paragraphs , 8 go in for approval and then 4 indulge in self-congratulation .
As far as the working population of the countries of the European Union is concerned , there really is not much to be pleased about .
What use is the economic growth that the report boasts about , if it is only going to recommend - addressing employees of course - adopting a reasonable attitude in wage negotiations , going so far as to claim that the pension system must be radically revised with a view to protecting their financial position ?
This is one way of admitting that there is no place in this growth for employed workers or for retired workers .
Once again , the Council and the Commission are acting as spokespersons for big business , asking Parliament to sanction it .
For our part , we have not been elected to offer congratulations to governments that come to the assistance of big business and major financial groups in order to enable them to accrue even greater wealth by exacerbating inequalities , leaving 18 million women and men unemployed , making flexibility at work and job instability more widespread , by making swingeing cuts in the total wage bill in order to ensure the continued growth of income from capital , including its most parasitic speculative forms .
If it is true , as the report states , that we have seen a return to growth , then it is all the more appalling that , throughout Europe , only a tiny minority benefits from it .
We shall therefore be voting against this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is having to compete with a series of challenges generated by globalisation and the creation of a new economy based on knowledge and new technologies .
The Union ' s strategic goal for the forthcoming decade must be to ensure economic growth and free enterprise , without violating the social question , with guidelines based on competitiveness , sustainable development and the creation of new jobs .
On the subject of this last point , as the Katiforis report stressed , there has been a slight fall in unemployment in Europe , but unemployment is still unacceptably high , particularly as regards the level of unemployment among women and young people .
The situation appears worse in certain regions of Southern Europe , in particular in the South of Italy , where 21.9 % of the workforce is unemployed , including 56.6 % of the 14-25 age group .
Consequently , in my opinion , broad guidelines for economic growth and a rise in employment should include measures to render the European market more competitive and increase job flexibility .
In order to bring about sustainable growth , we need to finalise creation of the internal market and remove all the remaining barriers by liberalising those sectors which are not yet totally open to free competition , such as transport , gas , electricity and the postal services .
We need to introduce the reforms which will have to be implemented by the Member States in order to alleviate the burden on firms , reduce labour costs , sustain actions supporting lifelong learning in the context of a knowledge-based economy and support research to close the gap between Europe and the United States and Japan .
We need to facilitate public administration structural reform in the countries where excessive red tape is a barrier to private investment and bring the social protection and taxation systems into line with the requirements imposed by the new economic rules and with the constraints established by the Stability and Growth Pact .
Mr President , we do not support the Commission ' s guidelines .
They are outdated and obsoleted by events and do not contain any prospect of a solution to the extremely serious problems which are both holding back economic development and , in particular , weighing down the citizens .
The proposed formulae will lead to ruin : flexibility at all costs , further dismantling of the Welfare State with pension cuts , the imposition of unjustified salary restrictions across the board , and even discrimination between regions , a decrease in public investment and obsessive recourse to the Stability Pact and the monetarism which have not only already caused irreparable harm in the past but have certainly not done anything to support a euro which is yielding increasingly to the supremacy of the dollar .
The acclaimed macroeconomic development for job creation is so tied up in the self-regulation of the free market that it has not yet created any jobs , rather it has destroyed stable jobs , while , in the worst of cases , contributing to keeping salaries low in precarious employment sectors .
This is not the way to fight unemployment , but it will heighten social poverty , increase the democratic deficit and feed public scepticism towards the democratic institutions .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur and the committee for their magnificent work , and all the speakers in today ' s debate for the additional ideas they have contributed , which will no doubt be useful to the Commission and the debate in the Council of Ministers .
Today , together with the broad guidelines for economic policies , other issues have been raised , particularly in relation to the euro .
When speaking of the euro , I would point out two things : firstly , I would ask that the problem be looked at in its entirety , not simply the exchange rate problem .
Secondly , I would point out that the Commission ' s position remains the same ; that is to say , clear growth and price stability must logically lead to an improvement in the euro .
This is not an issue we can go into today , but I wanted to make those points .
Today , we are discussing in particular the broad guidelines for economic policies .
The new broad guidelines differ from previous ones in that they partially incorporate Lisbon .
It has been said that they do not incorporate it fully .
This is true in the sense that Lisbon is too close to the presentation of the broad guidelines and the bulk of the work had been done previously .
Nevertheless , I believe that there were elements prior to Lisbon which anticipated or foresaw what was going to happen there and which have been incorporated into the broad guidelines .
Many of you have referred to the idea of full employment as a fundamental element .
Full employment , according to the Commission ' s initial document - which formed the basis of the Lisbon decision - is something which can be achieved as long as the proposed policies are implemented .
The problem of full employment is patently one of our primary concerns .
We can put a figure on both our employment objectives as well as on what we take the expression " full employment " to mean , as some of you have suggested .
It all depends on what we consider the objectives to be .
It is absolutely essential , in speaking of these objectives , that we know whether they are political objectives or whether they represent the possibility of achieving certain economic results , as a consequence of the policies we implement .
In any event , I would say to those who are concerned about this issue that the quantitative and qualitative assessment of full employment will become more efficient when we implement the indicators relating to the different policies .
Some speakers have shown a degree of concern about the Commission ' s habitual proposals on the flexibility of the labour market .
In our view , this flexibility will lead to a better balance in supply and demand in the labour market .
It will therefore lead to more employment , but also - as we have always argued - greater quality of employment .
This is something we have regularly stressed .
The flexibility of the labour market involves many other things : we can talk about regulating working time , but also the removal of all the obstacles which currently stand in the way of employment , such as tax-related issues .
A major point of concern throughout this debate has been the development of investment .
The central element of these broad guidelines for economic policies is trying to increase the European Union ' s potential for growth .
If we are not capable of doing so , it is blatantly obvious that the current positive growth forecasts of over 3 % will only last a relatively short amount of time and this trend will not be allowed to continue .
That is why public and private investment are absolutely essential .
Since 1997 , investment has been increasing progressively .
By 2001 , public and private investment should reach 21 % of GDP and , in 2004 , it should reach 23 % , which would bring us very close to that objective of 24 % , which was mentioned in the Commission ' s White Paper on Growth , Employment and Competitiveness .
I would like to raise a point here which seems to me to be essential .
In my opinion , there is no contradiction between greater investment , greater public investment , and the Stability Pact . On the contrary , I believe that since the Stability Pact has allowed for the rationalisation of public finances , it will bring greater public investment in the future .
I agree with the view that , in these new circumstances , an improvement in the quality of public finances must involve greater public investment .
This is a point which the Commission has highlighted in the different stability and convergence programmes and , clearly , it is a point which we must continue to stress .
Some speakers have also mentioned the importance of research and development and the new economy .
This is one of the key elements of the broad guidelines , but I would like to remind you - as I always do - that the main point of the introduction of the new economy is to improve productivity , which is the element which is most likely to bring future growth .
I would like to make an additional comment on two points .
Firstly , with regard to the interinstitutional agreement , which has been of concern to the Commission , and secondly , the problems of greater coordination in the face of greater subsidiarity .
With regard to the interinstitutional agreement , this is clearly one of Parliament ' s recurrent demands .
It is also true that its implementation raises legal problems , as well as problems relating to the status of its participants , but I believe that , in any event , we should be satisfied with the progress made this year .
I promised you some months ago , when we discussed this issue in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , that the Commission would try to make the greatest possible progress with regard to its cooperation with Parliament .
It does not take the form of an interinstitutional agreement , but the presentation of the document on the results of the broad guidelines for economic policies , which will permit a prior debate in Parliament , seems to me to be a positive thing .
There are other more profound elements , such as the introduction of the idea of broader economic discussions , with the participation of Parliament , and the famous entretiens économiques , which will , in the future , offer us new opportunities and ideas for our political debate .
In my opinion , the Portuguese Presidency ' s idea - which we support - of also establishing a debate with Parliament on these issues , not at an institutional level as suggested by Parliament , but of a different nature , is also clearly positive .
I believe that this is a good direction to take , and we must continue to cooperate in this regard in the future .
Lastly , I would like to point out that something has been raised which may seem contradictory between those who argue for greater coordination of economic policies and those who argue for greater subsidiarity in the way these policies are applied .
As you all know , economic policies are the responsibility of the Member States and , in this respect , subsidiarity is guaranteed .
In my opinion , the greatest possible coordination is essential .
I therefore argue that we should move ahead with the coordination of economic policies , making reference to the Member States ' obligations .
I realise that for some of you this may seem like interference by the Commission in the responsibilities of the Member States , but that is what is laid down in the Treaty , in the legislation which we have created for ourselves , and that is the Commission ' s mandate : to make specific recommendations .
I said that coordination is necessary , but I do not believe that this has to be incompatible with subsidiarity .
Greater coordination and greater definition of global policies does not exclude , however , the existence of an additional margin for action on the part of the Member States .
I would like to end my intervention by thanking you all for your contributions , your participation in the debate and for your majority support for the document presented .
Stability and convergence programmes
The next item is the report ( A5-0108 / 2000 ) by Mr Pomés Ruiz , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the annual assessment of the implementation of the stability and convergence programmes ( 2000 / 2041 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am very happy to reiterate your closing words in the debate on subsidiarity or coordination .
I agree with you , Commissioner , when you say that there is no contradiction between these two terms , and that they should both be perfectly achievable .
Perhaps this debate , on the 11 stability plans presented by the countries participating in the euro and the four convergence plans , is a good time to review the harmonisation between the subsidiarity and coordination required by the introduction and future of the single currency .
This , therefore , is the flip-side of the debate which we have just held on the report by Mr Katiforis , and we must firstly begin to think about the instrument .
This is the first time that this Parliament has debated the 15 plans presented by the Member States .
I suspect that , in subsequent versions , the report will not be a single whole , but rather a detailed study will have to be made of the solutions , the weak and strong points , which this Parliament detects in the economic policies proposed by the Member States .
We are therefore going to ask for more detail in the plans which are submitted , in the structure of expenditure and also of income , paying particular attention to investments .
We would ask that the projections they make in the medium and long term take account of different scenarios relating to the development of interest rates , demographic development and other variables affecting the stability of our accounts in the long term .
We also ask in this regard - and I am returning to the debate on subsidiarity - for greater political commitment from the 15 national parliaments .
We believe that this is a task which falls to everyone , and not just to the European Parliament .
Some Member States have subjected the stability and convergence plans to internal debate in order to seek political support for this idea of jointly building economic unity , and we should ask the Member States who have not done so to debate these programmes in their parliaments in order to try , firstly , to persuade those states and parliaments to participate in this common task and , secondly , to provide political support for the commitments which are agreed to regarding the necessary coordination of economic policies .
Turning to the report ' s proposals to the House , I am very pleased to note that all of the budgetary objectives established in previous programmes have been met , and even exceeded .
However , this cause for satisfaction is counter-balanced by the fact that , aside from the possible criticism that the objectives could perhaps have been more demanding and rigorous , we are seeing that the objectives have been achieved , not as a result of the interest and efforts of the Member States , but simply to factors such as the favourable development of interest rates or greater than expected tax revenue .
We therefore believe that , although budgetary consolidation must continue to be a priority , the economic environment - which has improved a lot - must offer us the possibility of speeding up consolidation and , at the same time , undertaking structural reforms in the medium term .
It is not acceptable for this relative economic boom to dissuade the Member States from making decisions - sometimes difficult decisions - on structural reforms .
These include , firstly , labour reform , which we discussed earlier .
It is clear that not all the states have implemented the labour reforms which we consider appropriate .
The improved performance of the labour market - which is clear - has been based on satisfactory economic growth , and not all the Member States have made the rigorous reforms that they must make , more radical reforms , to resolve the unacceptable problem of the high rate of unemployment in the European countries in comparison to other countries and which is not only an economic blight but also , and above all , a personal and family blight which cannot be permitted in the modern Europe of the 21st Century .
It is also crucial that we liberalise the telecommunications and energy markets , and not all countries are doing so in the same way .
With regard to tax reform , we should welcome the reduction in the high level of taxes in France , Germany , the Netherlands and Spain , and we should bear in mind that the high rate of unemployment often relates to the fact that we have high levels of tax .
In the long-term reforms , we should also include the serious problem of population .
In the programmes presented to us , we note that particular attention is given to the ageing of the population .
Perhaps it is time that we insisted that Member States resolve the demographic problem at source , through a suitable approach to both tax revenue policies and social expenditure , in order to protect families with children .
This is the way to tackle the problem at source , and not only its effects .
This is the only way we will prevent the old Europe from becoming a decrepit Europe .
Mr President , the Liberal Group supports the rigorous and demanding report by Mr Pomés Ruiz .
It lays out and highlights both the achievements and the shortcomings of the Member States in the way the stability and convergence programmes are applied , which , as I mentioned in my previous intervention on the Katiforis report , have brought satisfactory results for the whole of the European economy .
However , this current satisfactory situation must not mask a series of shortcomings and must lead to the implementation of the series of recommendations which the rapporteur , Mr Pomés Ruiz , correctly makes in his report .
He mentioned one of these recommendations in his speech : the need to take advantage of the current favourable situation , the healthy state of public finances - which on the other hand are disciplined by the stability and convergence programmes - in order to reduce the deficit , and possibly remove it completely , as well as to reduce debt levels , even to below the limits set in the convergence programmes .
This would mean that we could make far-reaching tax reforms which would contribute to a more favourable environment for our economy , for business initiative , to freeing up resources and promoting them by fiscal means in an area which is one of our priority commitments : to be up-to-date and competitive at the most advanced levels of the information society and in the application of new technologies .
I would like to conclude by arguing - and I believe this is one of the conclusions we must draw from Mr Pomés Ruiz ' s report - for greater coordination between the Member States with regard to the implementation of these programmes .
I would therefore like to insist once again on the need for a genuine direction for economic and monetary policy at European Union level .
- ( EL ) Ladies and gentlemen , the Pomés Ruiz report has the good fortune to assess the implementation of the stability and convergence programmes at a time when the economic climate has helped these programme achieve success .
The rapporteur complains that the objectives are more the result of higher than expected tax revenues and the favourable development of interest rates than of the Member States ' own efforts .
This perception betrays a rather narrow-minded budgetary policy .
In my view , there is nothing reprehensible about being able to achieve balanced budgets through development rather than by imposing fasting and prayer on the Member States .
To try and balance the budget solely by cutting expenditure , while , at the same time , wanting to reduce taxation , is something which goes beyond economic restructuring and the spirit of the Stability Pact , at least in my understanding , to limiting the involvement of the public sector in the economy .
It is something in addition to the Stability Pact .
This trend can also be seen from the reference to the fact that tax and social contributions in Europe account for approximately 46 % of GDP , while in the USA and Japan they only account for 30 % .
But they are higher in Europe because we have a social state .
If Mr Pomés Ruiz ' s group wishes to change the policy on the social state , it should table it clearly and not tack it on to the Stability Pact .
I did not find one single reference in the report which justified Greece ' s being singled out , as Mr Karas has done , but I should like to say the following , now that the subject has been raised : it is irresponsible to say that inflation in Greece has only fallen over recent months .
Inflation has fallen over eight years from 18 % to 2 % , thanks to constant and unstinting effort .
I had hoped that we warranted more generous support for this tremendous effort , which has required sacrifices on the part of the Greek people .
To say that Greece will be unable to sustain the criteria , I am sorry , but that is prejudging the facts .
How do we know that they cannot be sustained in Greece but they can be sustained in so many other countries of the European Union ?
The Greek people are determined to apply the criteria and they will show their determination in due course .
Mr President , we support the main objective of the motion for a resolution under debate , that is , the need for consistently transparent budget regulation on the part of the individual Member States in line with the objectives of the Stability Pact .
However , we feel that , precisely in consideration of these undertakings and in the light of the current situation , the precise nature of any interventions cannot be identified in advance just for the sake of efficient budget control .
In fact , in a context where there are varying degrees of interdependence between States , there are too many variables at work to be combined to produce more general indicators .
I refer to the constant pressure with regard to restricting welfare expenditure , structural reform of the labour market and privatisation of the telecommunications and energy sectors .
On the other hand , we are aware of the need for a more effective convergence process , for economic cohesion and , therefore , also for the approximation of the single currency , whose oscillation is no longer virtual but is in line with prices and taxes ; the need , of course , for more harmonious tax and fiscal policies , but also pricing policies ; for more harmonious investment policies as regards both research and the closing of infrastructure gaps , including within the individual States , but also for greater homogeneity in the action of public administrations .
The most representative variable is certainly the time frames and contents of the Treaty reforms and the process of constitutionalisation of the Union , i.e. of a greater or lesser European political presence .
Mr President , I understand that it is not always easy , in a debate such as this , to differentiate between those aspects of our policy which we normally raise in the broad guidelines for economic policies , the stability and growth pacts or the references to the convergence reports , which will be the subject of the third debate this morning .
In the debate we have just held we rather confused the three elements .
I would essentially like to refer to the one which seems essential today , that of the stability pacts , although I will mention certain other points which have been raised .
Firstly , I share Mr Pomés ' s view that we need greater coordination , which is not incompatible with subsidiarity , but I am also interested in his additional demands that we work in more detail on expenditure and income , the existence of different scenarios or greater commitments in terms of national policies .
However , I would like to remind him that , within the framework of subsidiarity , it falls to the Member States to define their own stability and growth programmes .
The Commission must judge them , but it is not our job to give instructions on this point .
Nor is it our job to give instructions on the stability programmes or structural reforms , which you have mentioned .
These structural reforms in fact fall within the broad guidelines for economic policies .
However , there is a point - the third which you referred to - which lies between the world of structural reform and the tax obligations relating to the deficit and , above all , the stability of public finances , in particular with regard to debt .
I am referring to the demographic problem and specifically the ageing of the population .
It is true that this is much more than a purely financial problem , but this is the concern which we highlighted in Lisbon .
I would say that , in this case - as in the case referred to by Mrs Randzio-Plath , of the need to compare the quality of programmes and greater harmonisation , or the reference by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , for example , to deepening tax reforms - in our current thinking there is the reasonable prospect of fulfilling the objectives of the stability and growth programmes , and we believe that we must pay more attention to what we call the sustainability and quality of public finances .
We will present a report in May on this specific point , in which we intend to consider not only the nature of income but also the nature of expenditure as well as how the reduction in public deficit has been achieved and what instruments have been used .
These are instruments of a permanent nature which have the same characteristics in each of the Member States .
We will also tackle the issue of our future obligations .
In many cases the Member States have obligations which are not classed as debt , but which do , in fact , constitute debt in one form or another .
All of this will allow us to hold the debate which you have mentioned .
I believe that that will be the time to carry out this type of comparison in more depth .
Having said this , I am grateful for the effort you have made to assess the work we have done .
I believe that the problems of stability and convergence are basically characterised - as you have correctly highlighted , Mr Pomés - by the fact that , firstly , the objectives set have been met ; secondly , because we are following the same line .
However , that fulfilment of the objective , especially with regard to the reduction of public deficits , has been less ambitious - surely as a result of an improved economic situation - and we must take advantage of that improved economic situation so that we do not move backwards , but that we make progress in the right direction .
I said that I wanted to make a couple of additional comments on two points that have been raised concerning issues which are not strictly related to this report , but with the previous report .
Mr Karas referred to the Greek problem and the problems of sustainability with regard to convergence criteria .
In the case of Greece , exactly the same criteria were applied as in previous assessments .
I understand that concern , mentioned in the Commission ' s report , about the sustainability of inflation , but I would also like to provide some information which may clarify the situation .
According to the latest figures of the harmonised CPI - published on 15 May and concerning the month of April - Greek inflation is improving considerably in comparison to the previous situation : it has decreased from 2.8 % to 2.1 % ; and the unharmonised index also shows better figures for April as compared with March .
Therefore , I believe that these concerns about Greek inflation are sometimes excessive .
Secondly , you will have to debate the problems relating to the amendments which you wish to raise in the Pomés report .
I will simply say , with regard to two amendments by your Group , that in one of them there is a small error relating to Greece ' s entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System . In my view , in Amendment No 4 , it would make more sense to adopt a more positive approach with regard to the Greek government ' s future obligations than it would to adopt an approach which raises doubts as to its capacity to fulfil its obligations .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Adoption of single currency by Greece
The next item is the report ( A5-0135 / 2000 ) by Mr Goebbels , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision for the adoption by Greece of the single currency on 1 January 2001 ( COM ( 2000 ) 274 - C5-0226 / 2000 - 2000 / 0110 ( CNS ) ) .

Mr President , Greece will be the twelfth country to sign up to the euro .
Greece does not have to beg to be allowed into the euro zone ; it is fully qualified to join the States that will introduce the euro as an effective and definitive means of payment in 2002 .
In Greece , the economic convergence criteria have been met , as a result of a stabilisation policy implemented most consistently by the Greek authorities since 1996 .
At the beginning of the 1990s , Greece was considered the sick man of Europe , economically speaking .
The rate of inflation exceeded 20 % .
The European Union officially described the budgetary deficit as excessive .
The public sector was notoriously mismanaged .
Almost half of the public debt was due to on-going transfers from the state to public undertakings .
Today , major international bodies such as the IMF , the OECD , the Commission and even the ECB generally speak very highly of the efforts which the Greeks have made .
It must be noted that private operators have also discovered Greece .
In recent years , it has become a significant net recipient of foreign capital .
The stock exchange has undergone rapid expansion . International rating agencies have improved their rating for Greek loans .
The situation is far from perfect , of course .
There are still problems , particularly regarding the restructuring of the public sector .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs stresses the following points . Greece must continue to make efforts in order to ensure that the progress achieved in terms of disinflation has a lasting effect .
The government must step up the anti-inflationist bias of the economic policy instruments available to it , particularly in the fields of the budget and income policy .
Cooperation between the two sides of industry seems essential in order to maintain a situation of non-inflationary growth .
Even if considerable progress has been achieved in terms of the implementation of structural reforms , Greece must step up progress in the reforms which are still necessary , including the effective transposition of European legislation into national law .
Parliament has been consulted , in the context of a political decision to be taken by the Economic and Financial Affairs Council , after deliberation by the forthcoming European Council .
Parliament ' s response can therefore only be a political one , in favour or against , like any final decision in a genuine democracy .
Greece ' s entry into the euro zone does not entail any political risks .
Greece is entitled and , indeed , obliged to join EMU .
There are probably some economic risks but these are more significant for Greece than for the countries in the euro zone .
In joining the euro zone , Greece will be forced to maintain the culture of stability which has been established since 1996 , and this involves pursuing a responsible economic policy .
This has , however , already created a virtuous circle leading to sustainable , non-inflationist growth , proving that stability is not an end in itself but that it must serve the purpose of healthy growth .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , by an overwhelming majority , therefore urges Parliament to vote in favour of Greece ' s accession to the euro zone in 2001 .
Mr President , let me add a few more personal observations .
I should like to congratulate the Danish and Swedish governments on having decided to consult their citizens regarding accession to the single currency .
I hope that the results of these plebiscites will be favourable . In the same way , I should like to see the United Kingdom opt for the single currency in the very near future .
The shared objective of the fifteen Member States to create a European Union which is ever more closely bound , particularly comprising an area without internal borders , could not be achieved in full without a single currency .
The United Kingdom , as one of the financial capitals of the world , will not be able to claim all the advantages of an ever more integrated European financial market unless it becomes part of it in its own right and takes on all the joint responsibilities and obligations required under Economic and Monetary Union .
There are some Members of Parliament who will vote against my report tomorrow , or who will abstain .

Some are opposed to the euro , as is their right , while others are attempting to make political capital out of the real concerns which our fellow citizens have regarding the dollar-euro exchange rate .
It must be stressed that the euro is a stable currency .
Citizens ' purchasing power within the euro zone has remained virtually unchanged since inflation has been , and remains , at a very moderate level .
Of course , the value of the euro has fallen in relation to the dollar and , to a lesser extent , in relation to the yen and the pound .
Such fluctuations are inevitable in a floating exchange rate system . Even so , the euro has not become a weak currency .
In the last twenty years , the Deutschmark has experienced much more extreme variations in relation to the dollar .
In 1985 , the dollar stood at 3.5 DM .
In order to reach such a low level in relation to the dollar , the rate of the euro would have to fall below 0.6 to the dollar .
Some people claim that the financial markets do not value the euro because of Europe ' s tardiness in implementing structural reforms .
What structural reforms did Germany undertake after 1985 in order to ensure that the Deutschmark returned to a rate of 1.7 or 1.8 DM to the dollar ?
The fact is , the economic position of the European Union is very sound , and is much more favourable than it has been over the last decade .
The only grey area is a rate of unemployment which , although falling , is still excessive .
A return to full employment is certainly not calculated to please the financial markets most of all .
Generally speaking , good news regarding employment makes the stock exchange nervous , as it makes them afraid of a rise in inflation .
Financial markets operate according to their own particular logic .
They look for immediate returns , and currently this is a safer bet in the United States , particularly because of its higher interest rates .
This trend looks set to continue , as the Federal Reserve has just hiked up its interest rates .
With their sheep-like behaviour , however , the markets will ultimately come to realise , Mr President , that , in the medium term , the euro will be a more secure currency than the dollar .
Mr President , on behalf of the Liberal Group I would like to welcome Greece into the euro and say that we shall certainly be voting in favour of Greek membership .
For those other ' out ' countries , including my own , I very much hope that they will be able to join the euro soon .
I very much regret too that there are so few British Conservatives here in the Chamber today because it shows , with Greece now the twelfth member of the euro zone , how far from reality British euroscepticism about the future of the currency is .
The euro has successfully delivered low inflation , rising growth , falling unemployment and protection for the euro zone economies from the ups and downs of the foreign exchanges .
Indeed , the British perception of the euro as a failure , because of its fall against the dollar , simply misunderstands the whole project .
The key test of a currency is price stability within the economy , not the value of the currency against other currencies outside the economy .
On the test of internal stability , with inflation at less that 2 % and growth higher at 3.1 % in the euro zone than in Britain , the euro is clearly succeeding .
Indeed , research at the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi recently calculated the euro ' s value as if it had existed over the last few decades , weighting each predecessor currency 's value to create a synthetic euro .
Historically , that research found that the euro actually swooped between a high of USD 1.70 in December 1979 and a low of just USD 0.69 in February 1985 .
In other words , the euro could stay within its historic trading range and happily now either fall by a further 23 % or rise by 188 % .
Certainly that synthetic euro included currencies such as the Italian Lira , but the same point applies even to the mighty German Mark on its own .
If the euro is a weak currency , than the Mark was positively anaemic .
It plunged to DEM 3.45 against the dollar at the end of February 1985 , which is a third below its current rate of DEM 2.16 to the dollar .
Within three years , and a dollar crash , the Mark was back to DEM 1.57 during December 1987 .
The truth is that the history of foreign exchange is a history of gross misalignments , of overvaluations and undervaluations , each inflicting either depressive pain or inflationary costs on the economy and , as Greece has rightly recognised , the euro is a way of regaining control over a key part of our economic environment .
- ( EL ) Mr President , the report under discussion contains accurate information and an objective assessment .
Greece is being judged , just as the first countries in EMU were judged , and this judgement accords Greece the position which it deserves , the position which it could have taken up back then , when it could have become a member of EMU along with everyone else , but which it failed to take up because of the weakness of its government .
In all events , this moment is an historic moment for Greece and , may I say , for Europe too .
I hope that we shall see other such historic moments when other countries join and , even more so , when we proceed , as we must , with the policy to complete unification .
The euro restored politics to Europe and it is incumbent upon us to pave the way so that politics in Europe can be institutionalised and globalisation , which is progressing blindly , without any historical or political plan , can be politicised at a later date , through a unified Europe ,
For Greece and the other members of EMU , the problem of sustainability is crucial .
The problem of whether or not they will be able to act together on economic policy , as if they had already achieved political unification , is a political problem par excellence .
It is a problem of development choices and changes and , of course , it is a problem of public finance management .
Greece has a tax reform problem .
A large part of the economy pays no taxes and the basic taxes which exist in other Member States do not exist in Greece .
The average Greek taxpayer pays more than other Europeans but total tax revenues in Greece are much lower as a percentage of GDP .
This structural change is pending , while our government is confining itself mainly to privatisation .
Other important structural changes are also pending , such as the need to strengthen regional authorities and their financial independence , reorganise cooperatives in all sectors from the bottom up and liberalise and strengthen the social economy and the third sector .
These are the areas which need to be strengthened immediately if sustainability is to have a future .


Mr President , the European Parliament report on Greece ' s adoption of the single currency on 1 January 2001 is remarkable , more by virtue of the political will it expresses to enlarge the euro zone than by its concern for technical exactitude .
It is , however , true that Greece has made considerable efforts in order to meet the Maastricht criteria and has achieved good progress , except in a few areas , such as public debt , but on that subject there are some countries within the euro zone that are doing no better .
These minor failings , which would have had little impact if the euro had been strong , are now liable , against the background of the euro ' s depreciation , where the slightest ambiguity serves to detract from the image of the single currency , to have a much more negative effect , for psychological reasons .
Nonetheless , the European institutions did not feel that they should postpone Greece ' s accession so as not to give the impression that they had anything to fear and , from that point of view , the position seems perfectly logical , albeit somewhat risky .
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group almost agrees with their conclusions , but as a result of a very different logical argument .
Our initial impulse , obviously , would be to refrain from participating in a debate which a good number of us think is nothing to do with us .
But , on the other hand , we think that extending the euro zone may , in the end , provide the stimulus for beneficial reforms .
The fact is , the more the euro zone is extended , the harder it will be for the single currency to represent nations which are very different , and the more it will be recognised that it would be much simpler to make the system more flexible by having the euro develop into simply a common currency , overlapping with the national currencies with a degree of flexibility but not replacing them .
This solution , of progress towards a shared currency , would probably attract the support of the countries within the European Union which , until now , have remained outside the euro zone , creating a shared point of reference for everyone , and putting an end to the current schism , which is disastrous for the credibility of Europe as a whole .
- ( EL ) Mr President , the Council ' s legislative proposal on the adoption by Greece of the single currency on 1 January 2001 is a positive proposal which responds to the objectives of the European Union to strengthen social and economic cohesion through Economic and Monetary Union .
The New Democracy team within the European People ' s Party has always vigorously supported the policies needed so that Greece , which was outside the first round of Member States , could honour the obligations needed in order to join the euro zone .
The truth is that Greece now meets the convergence criteria , with the exception of the public debt criterion .
However , this also applied in the case of Italy and Belgium and Greece should not suffer adverse discrimination in the present case .
In fact , economic development and convergence policies started in Greece at the beginning of the 1990s , as both the Commissioner and the representative of the European Central Bank stressed during the meeting of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and they concern various governments and various political powers .
However , they are due mainly to the efforts of the Greek people as a whole .
Policies in Greece need to focus today on further structural changes , while maintaining an anti-inflationary line , with the aim of achieving a real social market economy in conditions of healthy competition , so that Greece can keep comfortably to the Dublin Stability and Development Pact .
EMU will be a real success once it succeeds in uniting all the Member States , far more Member States such as Sweden , where convergence is proceeding exceptionally well .
I hope that soon the verdict of the Swedish people will take the completion of the euro zone one step further .
For the time being , we call on the European Parliament to vote in favour of Greece ' s accession to the euro zone and we assure you that , as far as we , the main opposition are concerned , we shall use our policies to support the efforts being made to apply the rules of the Stability Pact and to honour joint European obligations within the framework of a unified country without borders .
Mr President , Greece meets the convergence criteria according to the European Commission ' s verdict , which is based on a very nominalistic interpretation .
Every self-respecting economist knows that Greece , despite the impressive achievements of the past couple of years , does not yet have inflation and government debt sufficiently under control or in order .
The Greek government has major financial interests in an extensive number of government enterprises which are mostly loss making .
In 2001 , the derogation for the liberalisation of various sectors will lapse , at which point the large hidden government debt - half the size of the current one - will become public .
Why did the Commission not take these skeletons in the cupboard into consideration during the assessment ?
On 17 January last , the Greek drachma was revalued by 2.5 % , mainly to push down inflationary trends .
At the moment , the short-term interest rate in Greece is about 600 basic points above the European Central Bank ' s level .
Participation from 1 January 2001 means that the short-term interest rate must come down by the end of this year at the latest .
As a result , the credit facility will expand considerably and Greece will be unable to meet the inflation criterion .
Why does the Commission turn a blind eye to this ?
In the interests of the Greek citizens and a more flexible development of the Greek economy , we are forced to decline our support for this Commission proposal .
- ( EL ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for his serious and objective approach to Greece ' s candidacy .
I wish to thank him because he dealt with us just as strictly as all the Member States which preceded us in forming the single currency .
This is the biggest compliment which he could give a country which , for a while , gave the impression that its economy was on the slippery slope towards general disintegration .
The world has many examples of where such a slippery slope can lead ; however , there are relatively few examples of a country which has found the strength not only to stop but to reverse the decline and manage to satisfy the extremely stringent stability criteria of today ' s world .
This success is particularly significant because it was built on the basis of an economy which was not rich and not particularly strong .
We do not need you to remind us that the Greek economy is weak .
We know it is .
For a nation to build monetary stability on such a basis requires greater effort and sacrifice than in a richer economy .
The fact that the Greek people agreed to make these sacrifices is proof positive of their determination to break away once and for all , by their own efforts and taking advantage , of course , of the support of the European Union , from the fate of economic backwardness .
And we shall make the same effort in the future , not because you are strict and we have to , but because it is in our interests to do so .
This effort is dictated by our wish to have a better standard of living , to run a modern economy and to prosper with the rest of Europe .
We are here not because we wanted to conceal our weaknesses , but because we wanted to fight and we fought and we won .
As far as we are concerned , we are a small country , but we are fighters and our accession to the single currency is a vote of confidence in this huge European venture ; it is a sign of the fact that we support the European endeavour and we hope that other , far richer countries will see this and follow our example .
No one should rejoice prematurely at the present vicissitudes of the single currency .
In joining , we have shown our trust in Europe , in monetary union , in the prospect of economic unification and in the success of our common economic fate .
That is the meaning of Greece ' s accession , that is the meaning of its acceptance .
Europe has become stronger today , not weaker , as the result of Greece ' s accession .
Mr President , the Commission ' s and the ECB ' s convergence report deals not only with the Greek , but also with the Swedish , convergence programme .
So too does Mr Goebbels ' report , even if the part about Sweden is limited .
The Swedish economy is doing well - very well .
Mr Goebbels also points this out .
In common with Mr Karas and Mrs Randzio-Plath , he also issues a reminder that the EU would be that much stronger if all the Member States were to participate in EMU .
This is a timely reminder of something which is self-evidently the case .
If one is going to join the EU , one should not do so by halves .
Even if the economies of Great Britain , Denmark and Sweden are going well , it must be clearly pointed out , as it was by Commissioner Solbes Mira in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , that , if the spirit of the Treaty is to be complied with , no Member State can , in the long term , place itself outside so strategic an area of cooperation as the common currency .
This could have been brought out more clearly in the report .
The euro has provided greater stability . This has benefited companies , especially small companies .
Price competition has increased , and there has been greater transparency .
The euro is not weak . Instead , it is the dollar which is extremely strong .
Allow me to remind those countries outside the euro zone that there is a danger of their influence declining further .
Last week , we learned that France ' s prime minister wants to see a Euro 11 - soon a Euro 12 - with more influence and power when it comes to economic and financial policy .
At present , the economy is on the way up in Europe , but the clouds are gathering - in the United States and in Europe .
You do not buy an umbrella once it has begun to rain .
Instead , you buy an umbrella when the sun is shining so that you are prepared for when the rain comes .
The euro provides Europe with economic stability and competitiveness .
There are very strong economic and moral reasons why Sweden should join EMU .
Sweden should also have an obligation to help increase Europe ' s economic competitiveness .
I should therefore have liked to have seen my home country , Sweden , being able to join with Greece today .
- ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our reservations about Greece ' s accession to EMU are not a matter of principle ; they are based on actual facts , as regards both EMU in general and the Greek economy .
As far as EMU in general is concerned , we are in favour of real economic and monetary union .
Unfortunately , this union is only monetary , not economic .
It is MU , not EMU .
We know that EMU was created prematurely for political reasons which date back to the events of 1989 and 1990 , which is why the child , the euro , has been delivered early and is languishing in an incubator .
This is the opinion expressed by the Nobel prize-winning economists Friedman , Tobin and Modigliani .
The creation of EMU was not preceded by an agreement on the economic policy which the Member States had to follow .
Only now are the Commission and Council trying to outline common policies for certain economic problems such as unemployment and competitiveness .
But the road is long and full of adventures , as the poet says .
The Goebbels report tells us that Parliament ' s reply cannot but be a political one and assures us that Greece ' s accession to the euro zone does not involve any political risk .
However , the report adds that there are economic risks and that they are greater in the case of Greece than in the case of other countries belonging to the euro zone .
We agree .
There is no danger to the economies of the other 14 Member States .
Of course , I have trouble understanding how anyone can distinguish so easily between political and economic risks , but we shall let that pass .
As far as Greece is concerned , our reservations concern the economic risks mentioned in the report .
The sole aim of the economic policy pursued by Greece over recent years has been to satisfy the convergence criteria .
Efforts have focused on improving indicators , not real economic quantities .
The competitiveness of the economy has not improved and unemployment continues to rise .
The structural changes needed have not been carried out and privatisation has been presented as the new panacea for development and prosperity .
Wage differentials have been sacrificed to indicators and are increasing , and , as a result , the figures are doing well while the people are suffering , however .
In all honesty , the Goebbels report says that , as regards convergence , all EU governments are required to produce results but are free to choose the means of achieving it .
It is therefore the Greek government ' s choice of means which we object to .
The means chosen were neither economically suitable nor socially just .
The rich got richer and the poor got poorer .
In joining EMU , we are jumping in at the deep end and hoping for the best .
Mr President , firstly my congratulations to Mr Goebbels on a very professional report and an excellent presentation .
Some government finances are indispensable prerequisites for economic stability and economic progress .
Securing budgetary discipline strengthens price stability and creates conditions which are conducive to creating much needed employment within the territories of the Union .
The Stability and Growth Pact States provide the 15 Member States of the Union with a comprehensive surveillance procedure to monitor their budgetary policies .
The Stability and Growth Pact calls for Member States to reach , in the medium term , a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus .
It must also identify the adjustment pacts adopted to reduce the general government debt ratios .
The Commission and Parliament monitor submissions made by each Member State of the Union to ensure compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact .
We must also remember that there are wider provisions for closer coordination of economic policies in general between the Member States of the Union .
The principle of the Stability and Growth Pact is also a logical progression from the criteria laid down in Maastricht for the Member States to comply with economic conditions for participation within the new European single currency .
The one comment I would like to make about the state of the single European currency is : Why do so many Member States want to join such a regime ?
It is clear that Greece will shortly join the existing 11 Member States who are participating in the economic and monetary union , and I wish to congratulate Greece on its economic recovery and wish it well in the future .
I welcome Greece into the euro zone .
It is also clear that Sweden and Denmark will accede to the single European currency regime over the next couple of years .
It is known that the vast majority of countries from eastern and central Europe want to sign up to the process of economic and monetary union in as short a time as possible , but I believe that the European Central Bank has to outline a clear strategy as to how it intends to bolster the value of the new euro .
The 290 million citizens within the existing 11 EMU countries have the right to know what the European Central Bank intends to do to maintain and enhance the value of the euro now and into the future .

We shall adjourn the debate on Mr Goebbels ' s report , which will resume at 3 p.m. today , as we are now going to start the voting , which will run from 11.30 a.m. to noon .

It will be adjourned for a formal sitting and will resume immediately after the formal sitting .
I therefore urge the Members not to leave the Chamber at the end of the formal sitting .
Agenda
As regards the report by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Council framework decision on combating fraud and counterfeiting of non-cash means of payment , currently scheduled for Thursday 18 May , the rapporteur , Mr Gerhard Schmid , has just noted that the text which is to be submitted to the Council on 29 May is substantially different from the text submitted to Parliament , on which the report in question was based .
This means that Parliament must be consulted afresh . In order to avoid debating the subject twice over , the rapporteur wishes to wait until the Council ' s recommendation has been updated in order to draw up a new text .
The Socialist Group has therefore asked that this matter be referred to committee and that the item be removed from the agenda for next Thursday .
( Parliament gave its assent ) I must inform you that due to the late submission of the report by Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the equal treatment of persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin , this report was not available in French , Spanish or Swedish for the meetings of the political groups last night .
I therefore propose that we keep the debate on the report on the agenda as it currently stands , as the first item on Thursday 18 May , but that we defer the vote on the report until the next part-session .
Are there any objections ?
Madam President , it would be much more coherent and in keeping with our Rules of Procedure if we voted , as long as we hold the debate , on Thursday evening or Friday morning .
Mr Barón Crespo , the problem is that the text is still not available in French , Spanish and Swedish , thus presenting a problem in terms of our Rules of Procedure .
That is why the Bureau proposed this solution .
Madam President , I respect what the Presidency has said , but I have different information : that this morning all the versions are available .
I accept the President ' s words , but I must point out that there is some inconsistency here .
Mr Barón Crespo , I quite understand your objection .
I am informed by our services that the other reason for making this proposal was related to the limited time the groups have to table amendments .
Having said that , following your request , I suggest that we put to the House the sense of the proposal which I have just made .
Perhaps Mrs Buitenweg can give us her opinion , as rapporteur ?
Madam President , I would very much regret it if my report were to be taken off the agenda and if the vote were not to take place this week .
We have an agreement with all political groups in this Parliament that we would accelerate proceedings for this directive .
This is necessary to put through this directive swiftly and within the time in which the Portuguese Presidency , which has shown exceptional commitment in this respect , is in office .
The Council will be convening before our next plenary sitting .
This means that if we do not adopt a resolution here , the Council will be unable to adopt its position either , and everything will be shelved long term .
I would like to point out that the group which has the most problems and seizes upon administrative issues as an excuse to postpone dealing with these , is also the group which voted against this report in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
I therefore do not rule out other motives which might be at play here .
This has a bearing on the speed at which anti-discrimination can be translated into legislation in Europe and at which people can therefore be protected from racial or ethnic discrimination , and I do not appreciate the fact that Parliament is arguing in favour of postponing this protection .
Ladies and gentlemen , I appreciate the importance of this discussion , but I propose entering the debate on the agenda for tomorrow , as the Bureau wished .
I suggest that the Conference of Presidents or , at any event , the groups , should come to some agreement on the procedure to be adopted regarding voting after the debate , and that our final decision on the timing of the vote should be postponed until tomorrow .
May I take it that the various group presidents and Members of Parliament agree in principle , as I am afraid that if I give the floor to every Member who requests it we shall be starting the whole debate up again ?
Mr President , as you know , I am the co-rapporteur with Mrs Buitenweg on this important directive on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I hope that you will rule that the vote , as per our agenda agreed on Monday , will go ahead and I have two points to make to our colleagues in the PPE in that respect .
The first is this : since this directive was first proposed , the whole furore across the European Union because of events in Austria and elsewhere , where the extreme right has come forward , has caused us , as a Parliament , with the widest possible across-party support , to work with the Council and the Commission to agree an accelerated timetable to enable this directive to go through to provide the strongest possible response to the racist and extremist threats that undermine our combined values .
That deal with the Council and with the Portuguese Presidency said that we would agree in this Parliament this week prior to the Council of Ministers ' meeting in June .
If we fail to meet that commitment , what does that say to the racists ?
And my second point : we talk about the dignity of Parliament .
What about the dignity of black and ethnic minority people subject to racial harassment , victimisation and discrimination ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make things quite clear .
The debate is indeed going to take place as scheduled on the agenda and , like everyone in the House , I appreciate its importance .
Nonetheless , I suggest that you accept my proposal , which is this : that the debate should take place as scheduled on the agenda and , tomorrow , the sovereign Assembly , after consulting the groups , shall decide whether or not to vote on this report during the present part-session .
I think it would not be right to vote on it immediately .
Madam President , I do not see why the Conference of Presidents should make the decision .
Surely it is up to all of us here at the plenary sitting to decide whether or not the vote should take place during this part-session , not the Conference of Presidents ?
We wish to decide right here , either today or tomorrow , whether the vote on this directive and this report should take place this week .
We do not wish to leave the decision to the Conference of Presidents .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , I think you have not been listening to my suggestions carefully enough .
I did not suggest that the decision was referred to the Conference of Presidents , which does not have the authority to decide .
I suggested reconciling points of view within the groups and then tomorrow , in the House , discussing the timeliness of voting this week .
It goes without saying that only the plenary assembly has the right to make this decision .
I should now like to put an end to any further speeches on the subject , as I am afraid that discussing the matter ad infinitum is not going to lead to a clear decision .
I shall just give the floor to Mrs Ludford , whose group has not yet had an opportunity to comment .
Madam President , I just wish to emphasise on behalf of the Liberal Group the desirability of debating and voting this report this week .
Despite the short timetable for the consideration of this matter , it has been dealt with very fully in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and there has been every opportunity for amendments to be tabled .
It is regrettable that there have been administrative delays in producing all the language versions .
However , I feel that there is a touch of opportunism in the PPE Group ' s objections to a vote this week .
After all , if it were technically impossible , the services would never have proposed that it be voted on tomorrow .
Therefore , we should debate and vote on it tomorrow ; otherwise there is a danger of obstruction by one group .
Ladies and gentlemen , I put it to you that we decide as follows : we shall carry on the debate as scheduled on the agenda and tomorrow , the House will consider whether the vote should be retained as scheduled , after consultation with the various groups .
Vote
Mrs Muscardini , I suppose you wanted to speak on the next item , but , quite frankly , I would urge you not to take the floor .
I cannot deprive you of your freedom of speech , however , but I do appeal to your sense of responsibility .
Madam President , my responsibility is that I have worked in this Parliament for 11 years and I have seen it deteriorate with every passing day .
I will not go back to the previous debate although I had requested the floor in order to speak on the previous matter .
I am afraid that this is not the first time that the Presidency has ignored this area of the Chamber and so I am going to speak on the House ' s agenda .
Would the Presidency please organise the Secretariat and herself in such a way as to accord all Members the same right to speak on the matters over which they wish to take the floor .
It is deplorable to talk of democracy and human rights and then not give Members the right to read the texts in their own language or to speak in the Chamber .
Joint motion for a resolution
on the appointment of senior Commission officials
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Simplified procedure
Common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the front underrun protection of motor vehicles and amending Council Directive 70 / 156 / EEC ( 5378 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0179 / 2000 - 1999 / 0007 ( COD ) ) ( Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market )
( The President declared the common position approved )
- Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 70 / 220 / EEC concerning measures to be taken against air pollution by emissions from motor vehicles ( COM ( 2000 ) 42 - C5-0091 / 2000 - 2000 / 0040 ( COD ) ) ( Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy )
( Parliament adopted the Commission proposal )
Report without debate ( A5-0120 / 2000 ) by Mrs Jackson , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion , on behalf of the Community , of the new Convention for the Protection of the Rhine ( COM ( 2000 ) 61 - C5-0168 / 2000 - 2000 / 0037 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0128 / 2000 ) by Mrs González Álvarez , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a scheme to monitor the average specific emissions of CO2 from new passenger cars ( C5-0105 / 2000 ) - 1998 / 0202 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the joint text )
Report ( A5-0129 / 2000 ) by Mrs Smet , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 93 / 104 / EC concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time to cover sectors and activities excluded from that directive ( C5-0183 / 2000 - 1998 / 0318 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the joint text )
( The sitting was adjourned at 11.55 a.m. for the formal sitting and resumed at 12.30 p.m. )

Report ( A5-0117 / 2000 ) by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down rules for the prevention and control of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( COM ( 1998 ) 623 - C4-0025 / 1999 - 1998 / 0323 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0113 / 2000 ) by Mr Savary , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system ( COM ( 1999 ) 617 - C5-0301 / 1999 - 1999 / 0252 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0112 / 2000 ) by Mr Savary , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation and effects of Directive 96 / 48 / EC concerning the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system ( COM ( 1999 ) 414 - C5-0207 / 1999 - 1999 / 2165 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- González Álvarez report ( A5-0128 / 2000 )
Madam President , I voted for the González Álvarez measure on the regulation on the monitoring of carbon dioxide emissions from new passenger cars .
Why am I in favour of this measure ?
It goes without saying that I support the monitoring of new passenger cars when they are first placed on the market , but my vote in favour of the motion also contains a call to make greater efforts in the monitoring of second-hand cars , for , in actual fact , I would argue that new cars are never to be found on the road due to the fact that the very act of driving them along a road ages them by definition .
It is , above all , ' old ' cars , the cars which have been in use for a number of years , which cause atmospheric pollution .
I call for monitoring of these ' old ' cars , to ensure that they are always in a state of good health and to prevent them from harming the earth ' s atmosphere .
I therefore support the use and preservation of pensioner cars as well .
- ( FR ) The González Álvarez report deals with reducing CO2 emissions , a necessary goal , particularly with the fight against global warming at stake .
An objective like this would require Europe to provide itself with effective resources in order to limit such emissions , either by binding standards , as is the case for other pollutants , or by incentives , with checks and penalties .
Furthermore , the increase in the number of vehicles plays a major part in the increase in CO2 emissions .
This aspect of the problem must be tackled as well , by implementing a transport development policy involving rail and waterway transport , combined transport , and public service which is capable of offering an effective alternative to the private car .
According to the explanatory statement , the Commission is still at the stage of a ' monitoring scheme ' , i.e. collating statistics but without undertaking effective checks , and , apparently , excluding light commercial vehicles ( vans ) and heavy commercial vehicles ( trucks ) .
It is better than nothing , but not much !
Despite its limitations , we nonetheless voted in favour of the González Álvarez report .
Smet report ( A5-0129 / 2000 )
Madam President , I voted for the report on the conciliation process concerning the organisation of working time , first and foremost in support of the article on doctors in training .
It is , in effect , appropriate for them to be able to rest in-between operations , particularly during their training period , also in consideration of the fact that , during the rest of their careers , it is above all - not exclusively , but for the most part - the elderly who will fall victim to their scalpels .
The doctors will need to have learnt their trade well , free from considerations of working time .
Above all , however , my vote for the motion is an invitation to consider reducing not just the working time in a worker ' s day but the time he spends working over his entire lifetime .
It would , in fact , be appropriate for a person not to have to work for 80 years if he is going to live to be 90 years of age , but to work for a period of 30 years if he is going to live to be 60 or 70 .
Madam President , I voted for the amendment of the directive on working times because this directive has been extended to include certain categories which had not been covered . I refer , in particular , to categories of the transport sector .
Furthermore , I hope that the approval of this directive will prompt a decision , at last , to approve the regulations on flight times and working times for pilots and cabin crew .
This is not solely a social matter of worker protection - although it does include this factor - but it is also a question of flight safety .
. ( EL ) It is a fact that man ' s strength and capabilities are limited .
Working times may be harmful to the physical and the mental health of both individuals and families , which is why working times need to be organised so that the safety and health of workers are not put at risk .
However , 7 million workers in the EU , in transport and fisheries and doctors in training are exempted from Directive 104 / 93 / ÅC on the organisation of working time .
This intolerable situation and the abuse of workers in the above specialist sectors as regards their working times is of a nature and is taking on dimensions which are such that rules must be imposed without delay , given that workers such as doctors in training in Great Britain work up to 72 hours a week .
Extending the directive is essential , but it is not enough .
The provisions proposed will be unable to protect the safety and health of workers effectively , given that there are still numerous exemptions and long transitional periods for implementing the directive .
We must also bear in mind that the original directive did not stipulate the length of a working day ( it stipulated a working week of 48 hours - an implied violation of the measure ) .
- ( NL ) My Group eventually accepted the compromise reached by the Conciliation Committee to apply the working time directive to the excluded sectors .
It is now crucial that these sectors can , at long last , look forward to a regulation so that they too come under the scope of the directive .
We struggle greatly with the long transitional periods for the junior doctors sector .
After the directive enters into force , the Member States have a total of nine years before they are obliged to have transposed the directive into national legislation .
Under certain conditions , this period can be extended by another two or three years .
Needless to say , we feel for the many Member States which struggle with inadequate staffing levels in their health sector .
However , the Member States have known for a long time that they will need to adapt to the working times directive in the long run .
It looks very much like this serious problem has been shelved , as a result of which , in our opinion , the arguments used to support the long transitional periods do not so much signify powerlessness as unwillingness .
In the light of the above , when this directive and the ensuing national legislation is implemented , close monitoring will be required to ensure that the weekly working hours for junior doctors meet the statutory standards .
- ( FR ) I can only recommend that this text be adopted , which is the product of a long and difficult conciliation process between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
This favourable vote is of capital importance as it concerns the health and safety of some 7 million workers in Europe .
Workers in the transport sector and offshore workers , sea fishermen and doctors in training will at last be entitled to benefit from European working hours regulations .
As a French member of the Parliament ' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , at second reading , I supported Parliament ' s position which , in particular , provided for a four-year transition period for doctors in training , with a maximum working week of 54 hours , over a four month reference period .
The conciliation process produced an agreement whereby doctors in training will be covered by the directive , as far as its scope of application - a maximum 48-hour working week over a four-month reference period - is concerned , after a period of nine years .
The nine-year period is to be subdivided as follows : a four-year transposition period and a five-year transition period .
In the first three years of the transition period , the number of weekly working hours shall not exceed 58 , or 56 during the last two years .
For some States , however , this sort of nine-year period will not be sufficient to carry out the necessary adjustments .
These States may therefore be permitted an additional period of two years .
The Commission will make a statement on the notification of the relevant Member State , after consulting employers and workers at European level , as well as representatives of the Member States .
The notification , the opinion of the Commission and , if this opinion is not acted upon , the Member State ' s justification , shall be published in the OJ and sent to the European Parliament .
If there are specific problems , then the two-year period may be extended for a further year , but the Member State must incorporate the procedure in full .
The maximum number of weekly working hours may not then exceed 52 .
. ( PT ) I have voted against this report because , as a doctor by profession , I think that the excessive working hours that it proposes for junior doctors are unacceptable .
- ( FR ) The text before you , after years of negotiations seeking to define the maximum limits for weekly working hours , is symbolic in more ways than one of the ambiguities and inadequacies of European social policy .
Firstly , as regards the very principle of a European social policy , the Treaty of Maastricht restricts this to minimum social standards , and only on condition that they do not " hold back small- and medium-sized undertakings " .
These restrictions are no longer acceptable today . That , then , is one urgent question to be raised for the forthcoming revision of the Treaty .
Ambiguities and inadequacies are , however , just as evident in the proposal before us .
Are we sufficiently aware that , in 1994 , when the Member States came to an agreement on the maximum 48-hour working week , they excluded several million workers , such as transport workers , offshore oil rig workers or junior doctors in training ?
Mrs Smet ' s proposal extends the general rule of 48 hours to some of these sectors .
It still does not , however , settle the matter of long-distance road haulage workers and puts forward a frankly ridiculous timescale for implementing the directive with regard to junior doctors !
The position of these doctors in training is similar in many countries : working weeks of 70 and 80 hours in conditions that are occasionally disgraceful and sometimes dangerous to patients .
The recent strike by junior doctors in France showed that such a situation was not acceptable , either for the doctors , the patients or the public health service .
But , even though , last November , the European Parliament proposed almost unanimously that the 48-hour rule should come into force within four years , it is now suggested that we alter our position radically .
We should adopt the joint proposal of the ministers and the parliamentary delegation allowing Member States up to twelve years ( ! ) before they apply the 48-hour week directive to doctors in training .
Please think about what this means exactly . The first doctors in training to benefit from these conditions have just started secondary school !
I do not know of a single other area - the euro , the free movement of persons , goods or capital - where a timescale of this order is tolerated .
In such circumstances , how can we expect the European Union ' s social policy to be taken seriously ?
Especially as the proposal divides this twelve year period into several distinct periods , each with their own rules for the maximum working week :
until 2004 there will be no change , there will be no restrictions on working hours ;
between 2004 and 2007 the maximum working week will be 58 hours ;
between 2007 and 2009 it will be 56 hours ;
between 2009 and 2012 it will be 52 hours .
In adopting this text we are sending out a worrying message .
This is the first directive on social matters to be adopted since the Lisbon Summit on employment .
I would like to express the hope that the Commission , Parliament and the Council will , at last , take European social policy more seriously .
Social Europe will not make progress , nor will it convince our countries ' citizens with proposals such as this .
Roth-Berendt report ( A5-0117 / 2000 )
Madam President , I voted for the Roth-Behrendt report , although , as before , my vote in favour of the motion is also a call for improvement of European legislation in the field of the implementation of the precautionary principle .
It is , of course , right for us to consider our health as human beings and to slaughter the huge number of animals at risk ; it is right for us to adopt this measure and thereby establish rules to bring farmers and stock breeders into line , but we also need to keep our feet firmly on the ground .
What I mean is , right now , I can imagine farmers running along behind their cows - Daisy or Buttercup , maybe - and fussing over feeding them hay , fodder and products from their fields , whereas they may well not have had time to have their animal ' s health checked .
So let us combine practical action with a desire for improvement .
- ( FR ) I should like to express my satisfaction with the content of this report .
Let me remind you that in presenting this proposal for a regulation , the Commission is fulfilling the undertaking it gave in 1997 to the European Parliament ' s Temporary Committee of Inquiry to put forward measures for effectively monitoring transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( TSEs ) .
This proposal seeks to create a standard legal basis for the monitoring and prevention of TSEs , of whatever type , and for all animal-based products .
It incorporates all Community regulations in force in the field of TSEs .
Like the rapporteur , I endorse the general strategy adopted by the European Commission , but I think the text before us needs tightening up in order to guarantee maximum consumer safety .
I have therefore supported the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
These amendments were intended to introduce the possibility of systematically implementing rapid diagnostic tests , and to reintroduce the European Parliament ' s request in the context of the follow-up to the recommendations on BSE , i.e. withdrawing the entire herd from the food chain , banning any movement of animals defined as at risk , and advocating the slaughter and destruction of such animals , with the exception of animals intended for scientific research .
The proposal also had to be extended by inviting the Commission to present proposals for the inclusion of some cosmetic products and medicines , and to draw up a procedure for determining the epidemiological status of countries or regions in relation to BSE , i.e. a classification of countries according to contamination levels .
I shall conclude by stressing the fact that the European Parliament must continue to be involved , under the codecision procedure , in fundamental decisions on the prevention of TSEs .
- ( FR ) The problem under discussion this morning was first identified a long time ago .
It is all very laudable to attempt to prevent the risks of BSE at Community level today , but it was almost 15 years ago that our researchers clearly established that one of the causes of mad cow disease was the consumption of cattle fodder containing animal-based meal made from ingredients taken from the carcasses of sheep suffering from ovine scrapie .
This is why , when we contributed towards setting up the Parliament ' s Temporary Committee of Inquiry into BSE , we pointed out most forcefully that any regulatory instrument should necessarily cover all transmissible spongiform encephalopathies .
Why has it been necessary to wait so long to effect the necessary changes in the regulations ?
Why is there this time lag between scientific discoveries and Community proposals ?
Fortunately , as far as the protection of the citizens is concerned , reactions at national level and in a number of Member States were rather more rapid and effective , compared with the incredible slowness and the usual paradoxes of Community bureaucracy .
Let me remind you that some countries , in effect , in order to ensure consumer food safety , have had to deliberately contravene Community regulations .
It is a perfectly good idea to make the use of rapid diagnostic tests more widespread .
They will be a significant component of BSE monitoring at Community level .
Let us not , however , treat them like a universal panacea .
These tests can only detect the affected prion protein above a certain level .
They are therefore no substitute for , in particular , the withdrawal of specific high-risk materials .
Above all , it would be an outrage if Member States which have set up a screening programme based on tests far stricter than the Community programme were to be penalised , in terms of classification with regard to BSE-related risks , in comparison with States which have confined themselves to the minimum Community programme .
Community regulations should never represent a brake on , or obstacle to , the action of Member States that wish to offer their citizens more stringent protection .
It has been clear since the start of the BSE crisis that the most appropriate and effective level of protection for our citizens is directly linked to the vigilance of the national authorities , with Community procedures , when they finally come to be drawn up , being able , of course , to play a useful complementary role .
Savary report ( A5-0113 / 2000 )
Madam President , I should briefly like to pay tribute to the work done by our fellow Member , Mr Savary , who has once again shown himself to be a staunch defender of the railways and of public services .
Next I should like to tell the people who voted in favour of this report that I , of course , agreed with saying that it is no longer possible to accept the share of rail transport increasingly losing out to road transport , and that nor is it possible to accept the technical , and even regulatory , obstacles from a bygone age that stand in the way of the much-needed freedom of movement throughout the whole of Europe ?
All the same , for future reference , I wish to state today that making this observation and supporting this determination to make progress must not lead to untrammelled liberalisation and privatisation , as this puts our safety at risk , and we can see many examples of this today in some countries of Europe , and it is destructive as far as our public service is concerned .
This is not the purpose of today ' s report but , in view of debates we will have in future , I wished to state this publicly .




Madam President , although we are in favour of completely harmonising European rail networks and making them compatible , since this is a necessity , and although we are in favour of developing this type of public transport , both on major international routes as well as on regional and local networks , we abstained from the vote on this report , since nowhere did it mention the need to operate rail networks as a public service , i.e. as a system designed and put into practice in order to respond to the needs of users and not to be a source of profit for private companies .
Madam President , I voted for the measure contained within the Savary report , on the trans-European conventional rail system .
How could I do otherwise ?
This is a clearly a matter in which the European Union must intervene on account of the subsidiarity principle .
Long-distance transport can only be regulated at European level .
Nevertheless , there was room for improvement in this measure , but I hope that this will be achieved over the next few years .
We should use this as a springboard to create , at last , a European department of transport links , but , first and foremost , we should make it easier for pensioners and the elderly to travel between the European capitals .
Pensioners love to travel and could have the right to a free travel card for journeys between their capital city or their own town and the capital cities of the other 14 European States .
We must give our support to the interoperability of European railways as a means of revitalising and developing the sector at international level , in order better to meet users ' needs , and also as an instrument for protecting the environment .
Nevertheless , we do not feel that adequate solutions to the problems arising for those working in the sector as a result of this process have been provided in the texts before us .
We are also aware , and are therefore bound to express our concern about this , that the proposals currently being discussed are part of a package of measures designed to liberalise the sector , and that the experiments that have already been carried out in this area have certainly led to a deterioration in safety and social conditions for workers .
Savary report ( A5-0112 / 2000 )
Madam President , I voted for the second Savary report , which differs from the previous report in that it refers to a trans-European high-speed rail system .
My point , this time , is that there is also room for improvement in this high-speed European transport system , in that it should be designed for use by ordinary citizens as well as businessmen who want to travel from Madrid to Copenhagen or somewhere even further away in as short a time as possible : businessmen can always go by plane .
High-speed links must , first and foremost , be designed for tourism , leisure and the enjoyment of all European citizens , especially the elderly , who would be avid travellers if conditions were more luxurious and rail travel a more pleasurable experience .
- I voted against the report on the trans-European high-speed system ( A5-0112 / 2000 ) .
It is most enlightening to compare the two reports presented by our colleague , Mr Savary , even if these documents have different legal bases .
The high-speed sector and the conventional rail system respond to quite different philosophies .
The former report received unanimous support in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
Only half of the Members of the very same committee voted for the latter .
This fact is , in itself , expressive enough .
On the high-speed rail system report the Environment Committee , astonishingly , did not deliver any opinion , even if the environmental aspects are not mentioned in it at all .
It seems that most people in this House do not really care about the need to rebalance the different modes of transport in favour of the railways , to reach a significant rise in the volume of goods and passengers that nowadays overwhelmingly use the roads .
- ( FR ) First of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work on the Commission ' s report on the implementation and effects of Directive 96 / 48 / EC concerning the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system .



Creating the technical conditions for the interoperability of the European railway networks involves harmonising , between the various networks , the many different systems and components involved in rail transport .
The objective is a threefold one : to gradually create the conditions for the uninterrupted movement of trains on the 15 national networks - the free movement objective ; to eliminate current high costs and delays in order to improve the competitiveness and reliability of the railways vis-à-vis their competitors - the sustainable mobility objective ; and to create the conditions for a single European market in railway rolling stock by harmonising the elements that make up the railways - the economic and technological objective .
The objective of the directive before us today was to publish the technical specifications for interoperability ( TSIs ) for six sub-systems - Maintenance , Infrastructure , Energy , Rolling Stock , Operation and Control-Command - beginning the work of standardising components in collaboration with CEN , Cenelec and ETSI , and establishing in each Member State a list of notified bodies instructed to assess the conformity of the components produced by the relevant industries .
This report , drawn up pursuant to Directive 96 / 48 / CE , gives an initial assessment of the progress made .
It must be noted that four years after the directive was adopted , not one single technical specification for interoperability ( TSI ) has been drawn up even though interoperability is deemed to be fundamental to the mobility of persons and the effectiveness of trans-European rail systems .
The majority of Member States have not , to date , transposed the provisions of this directive into their national legislation .
We are a long way from debating the priority to be given to rail !
It would , however , be unfair to say that no progress has been made .
For one thing , a tripartite body , the EARI ( European Association for Railway Interoperability ) , has been set up and has undertaken the work of identifying and specifying existing technologies , components and procedures , which should culminate in two TSIs in the near future .
Moreover , the latest high-speed network investment projects , designed along the lines of Thalys , have , for the first time , made efforts to achieve convergence and technical coherence .
Even so , these achievements are still inadequate in terms of the issues at stake .
National disparities are a considerable obstacle to the development of rail transport in Europe , in spite of the many advantages of this means of transport in terms of sustainable development , pollution and safety .

The figures speak for themselves : in 1970 , the railways had a 21 % share of the goods transport market ; today they have only 8.5 % .
The trend is the same for passengers , where the market share has dropped from 10 % in 1970 to 6 % .
Where freight is concerned , the railways could quite easily disappear altogether from large areas of the goods transport market .
There is no doubt that the closure of large parts of the European network would lead to significant job losses .
It is therefore essential to give a fresh boost to interoperability .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Adoption of single currency by Greece ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A5 ­ 0135 / 2000 ) by Mr Goebbels , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision pursuant to Article 122 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty for the adoption of the single currency by Greece on 1.1.2001 .


Mr President , allow me first of all to congratulate Greece on its extraordinary economic progress .
The Commission has now concluded that Greece fulfils all the convergence criteria .
I am convinced that Parliament will take the same view .
It is quite an achievement to meet the convergence requirements and , at the same time , as Greece is doing now , to achieve increases in growth and employment .
Europe , especially the remaining convergence countries - Sweden and Greece - are now showing that it is fully possible to fulfil the stability requirements of the convergence process and still maintain a dynamic economy with growth and falling unemployment .
Against that background , I have no reservations about recommending that Greece join the euro zone as from 2001 .
Sweden , too , fulfils the basic economic requirements .
The Swedish economy is now one of Europe ' s strongest , with low inflation , high growth and a balance of payments surplus .
However , Sweden still does not fulfil all of the more formal requirements .
It has not joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism ( ERM ) and Swedish legislation concerning the Bank of Sweden still does not completely fulfil the requirements of the Treaty .
However , the Swedish Parliament has instituted a number of changes to the legislation concerning monetary policy in order to facilitate Sweden joining the euro .
The remaining changes will be made when Sweden actually applies to join the euro , partly by applying to join the ERM .
I am very well aware of the implications of the Treaty .
But in a Euro-sceptic country like Sweden , which still feels itself to be a new Member State , there is a democratic imperative for a change as major as that of joining the euro to be preceded by a careful democratic process .
At the Committee hearing , Commissioner Solbes declared that it is the individual country which applies to enter the ERM .
Where Sweden ' s entry is concerned , it is therefore my and , as I understand it , the Commission ' s judgement that to want full status in EMU by entering the ERM is to adopt a political position .
Commissioner Solbes said in the Committee that he respects the Swedish government ' s desire to allow the people to decide the question in a referendum .
We are therefore also grateful for the phrases in Mr Goebbels ' report in which he welcomes this democratic process .
I , who am working hard in favour of Swedish ' euro membership ' , am convinced that , in a few years ' time , we shall also make the same decision for Sweden as we are now making in the case of Greece , i.e. to welcome and approve Sweden as a fully-fledged member of the Economic and Monetary Union and of the single currency .
I look forward to that day .
Mr President , I would like to make a brief comment concerning Sweden .
Sweden joined the European Union without an opt-out , certainly not in respect of monetary union .
Only on points such as legislation , which is in Sweden ' s remit , does the country not meet the criteria .
There is talk of a referendum coming up .
I would like to know when exactly that will be as I am sure there is not a date for this yet .
How long will it be before the Commission does its duty and reminds Sweden ' s Social Democratic government of its signature under a very important contract ?
The Swedish government sets an extremely bad example for the candidate countries which are , at this moment , waiting to join .
Mr President , I would now like to move on to Greece .
I have a problem with that country .
The Greeks have produced a fantastic achievement .
I only wonder how long the effects of that achievement will last .
But I am acutely aware that by punishing Greece for achieving something positive , we will let the actual guilty party off the hook .
Greece probably does not meet the criteria any more or less than other countries did .
The euro zone should be able to carry a relatively small economy such as the Greek one quite easily .
At the moment , however , this sends out the wrong psychological message to the markets and citizens who , to use an appropriate metaphor , look upon the euro descending Mount Olympus with sadness in their eyes .
This is why Parliament , on behalf of the citizen , has to send out a signal to the Union ' s large Member States .
But the Central Bank , for example , is not concerned with the euro ' s external value .
The true culprits are the governments of Germany , France , Belgium and especially Italy .
These countries , however , are making a mess of their own responsibilities vis-à-vis the currency and vis-à-vis the European citizen , let alone their own citizens .
They do not introduce the required structural reform within their own markets .
Governments are far too accommodating when agreements are not met , under the motto : you meet the agreements today , I might meet them tomorrow .
Why is Italy not called to task when it makes a shambles of its good intentions ?
The large Member States and Belgium are trifling with the interests of all European citizens .
It is said time and again that the European citizens are not adversely affected as long as they stay in Europe .
But surely , Mr President , we should not make that decision for them ?
In the Netherlands , many farmers are emigrating to North America .
A weak euro lets them down badly .
Businesses within the European Union have become 25 % cheaper for the United States to buy .
I think it is time for some changes .
I will be abstaining from the votes today .
Mr President , I am wholly and unequivocally in favour of Greece ' s adoption of the single European currency , the euro .
As Mr Goebbels stated in his report , the European Parliament ' s task is not to assess practical adherence to the Maastricht criteria , for that has already been done , item by item , by the Commission and the bodies whose task it is to monitor these indicators and keep us informed .
The European Parliament must express a political opinion ; it must speak from the heart and not on the basis of figures ; it must listen to its soul instead of numbers .
What sort of European Union is it in which one of the 15 States , which wishes to accede to the most committed and most important level of European cohesion , is still left standing outside the door ?
When , as the report maintains , we consider that all the Maastricht criteria are fulfilled and that , in addition , this country is called Greece - an enchanting name in itself - we cannot fail to realise that this cannot continue and be moved to remedy the situation .
And I refer , in particular , to the Greek pensioners .
You may wonder why , as representative of the Italian Pensioners ' Party , I am interested in Greek pensioners .
But Mr President , if we have to ask Greece to reduce its State deficit - and , unfortunately , we know that , nowadays , this is only achieved by reducing pensions - instead of avoiding wastage - which , as the previous speaker said , in socialist governments , especially , is due to poor budgetary allocations - we must not make the pensioners and elderly citizens of Greece pay the price for its accession to the European currency .
Mr President , the euro was born two years ago .
For me , as a Europhile , it was a great day when monetary union was brought to a successful conclusion , exactly as planned and with as many as 11 Member States .
For me , as a Swede , it was disappointing that Swedish Social Democracy had not been able to deliver a result then and there .
Now , two years have gone by - without any response or progress on Sweden ' s part .
We are , unfortunately , the country without an EMU strategy .
For my part , I can only congratulate Greece as the twelfth country to adopt the euro .
Now that our discussions are focusing upon Greece and we are carefully picking over the Greek economy , all EU countries ought to join Greece in also adopting the euro .
Many people are to be heard explaining the fall in value of the euro with reference to the fact that the United States ' s economy is stronger than Europe ' s .
That is indisputable .
It is amazing , however , that more is not being done by Europe to reverse this trend .
For me , the reason for this is clear .
There is a lack of confidence in the European governments .
It is time to implement the structural changes which are often talked about but which are still not being carried out .
With lower taxes and a more flexible labour market , Europe can enter the new economy .
There needs to be more rationalisation of the budget , more exposure to competition , more deregulation and a more rapid phasing-out of monopolies .
If the governments of Europe give priority to this work , we shall immediately find confidence in the euro increasing .
But many of the EU ' s social democratic-led governments are visibly unable to take action .
There is a lack of leadership .
It is not the President of the ECB who can ' talk up ' the euro .
Instead , it is the Member States which can make the EU and the euro competitive .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Goebbels for his report and also the various participants in this debate .
Today we are studying the report on convergence , which deals with the Swedish and Greek problems .
With regard to Sweden , the situation has hardly changed since 1998 .
The economic situation is positive , but the legislative adaptation of its Central Bank is not being carried out and it is not a member of the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the EMS .
With regard to Greece , the situation is radically different .
Greece did not fulfil the convergence criteria in 1998 but now it does .
By that I mean that it fulfils them in the strictest sense , using exactly the same criteria as in 1998 .
Greece has clearly made a great effort and I therefore have nothing to add to the positive results highlighted by Mr Goebbels in his report .
I would like to talk about some of the points which have been mentioned today , given the concern about the Greek model .
I understand that concern because Greece offers a precedent not only for the new candidate countries but also for the current Member States who , in the future , may join the single currency .
In this respect , it is quite clear that the way we deal with Greece will be crucial but I want to insist that Greece has been treated in the same way as all the other countries when their situation was considered back in 1998 .
There have basically been two issues of concern : debt and inflation .
Are they sustainable ?
Is this inflation situation sustainable , or durable , as you call it ?
In the case of Greece , debt stands at more than 100 % of GDP , practically the same as in Belgium or Italy .
I do not think it is reasonable to compare the current situation in Greece with that prevailing in Italy or Belgium .
We must not forget that Belgium and Italy have benefited from the fall in debt resulting from the reduction in interest rates , which is due , in particular , to the approximation of the interest rates of their Central Banks with those of the European Central Bank .
In comparative terms , the Greek situation is similar to the Italian or Belgian situation at the time of their accession to the single currency .
The second point of concern is inflation .
I understand this concern on the basis of two arguments : firstly , it is true that the level of inflation necessary to comply with the criteria was achieved relatively recently ; secondly , there will also be a reduction in the interest rates and this will have a positive effect on speeding up the reduction in deficit and debt , but which may generate tensions in the market .
With regard to the first point , concerning whether Greece has achieved this inflation rate in a manner which is unsustainable , I must make a few comments .
Greece has been complying with the inflation criteria for some months and the situation is improving considerably .
This morning I had the opportunity to discuss the Greek figures which were issued a few days ago by the Greek national statistical service .
The Eurostat figures were also published this morning .
At the moment , the harmonised CPI , in the case of Greece , stands at 2.1 % , a drop of 0.7 % on the March figure ; this is a better situation , for example , than certain countries of the monetary union , such as Belgium , Spain , Ireland , Italy , Luxembourg and Finland .
In comparative terms , therefore , Greece ' s current situation is quite sound .
If we abide by the strict criterion of the last 12 months , we will see that inflation currently stands at 2 % .
This is clearly better than the situation in Spain and Ireland , and practically the same as Italy , Luxembourg or the Netherlands .
Therefore , in terms of figures , I believe that we should not worry about the Greek situation .
However , the Commission also shares the concern which certain MEPs have highlighted .
We have therefore insisted on two points in discussing both the broad guidelines for economic policies and the convergence report .
Greece has to do two things , and the Greek Government is prepared to do them and has committed itself to doing them : Firstly , it must continue with its liberalisation policies and structural reforms which will improve the inflation situation ; secondly , Greece must continue with its policy of reducing the deficit , but in a context of combining policies , a ' policy mix ' , which will allow it , in the event that an increase in demand , resulting from a reduction in interest rates , may create tension in terms of inflation , to reconsider its tax policy so that it will not have negative effects on the process of integration into Monetary Union .
I am convinced that all of that will happen , and the Greek Government has committed itself to ensuring that it does .
I therefore believe that the entry of Greece into the euro will help rather than hinder it .
The euro has shown that it is still an attractive currency which some countries want to join .
I hope that the path being taken by Greece will be followed by other Member States in the next few years .
This is the end of a process .
We must wait for its culmination with the decisions in June , but I am convinced that , by welcoming Greece into the euro when the time is right , we will generate more confidence in the face of any other type of arguments against the future progress of the single currency .
Mr President , I have asked the Commissioner when he will do his duty as far as Sweden is concerned and remind the Social Democratic government of a signature which was placed here by Sweden .
When will the Commission enforce the Treaty ?
The Commission always respects the Treaty . It is obliged to comply with it .
Please do not forget that it is a fact that Sweden is not participating because its Central Bank has not adapted to the European requirements , a decision which falls to the Swedish authorities .
Secondly , we should not forget either that participation in the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the EMS is a voluntary decision .
You may ask whether this is contrary to the spirit of the Treaty of Maastricht , but it is clearly not a point which we can debate at the moment .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Solbes Mira .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings
The next item is the report ( A5-0109 / 2000 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on a proposal for a Commission directive amending Directive 80 / 723 / EEC on the transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings ( SEC ( 1999 ) 404 - C5-0102 / 2000 - 2000 / 2065 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Article 86 of the Treaty captures the very essence of the resolution .
Paragraph 1 stipulates that in the case of public undertakings and undertakings to which Member States grant special or exclusive rights , Member States shall neither enact nor maintain in force any measure contrary to the rules contained in this Treaty .
Paragraph 2 adds , in summary , that undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest shall be subject to the rules contained in this Treaty .
It is up to the Commission to monitor the observation of this Article and to provide fitting directives or decisions to the Member States .
The amendment to the directive to which this resolution pertains must enable the Commission to carry out this task more effectively , which is certainly necessary given the ever growing liberalisation of recent years .
Public undertakings and former public undertakings increasingly embrace the commercial world where they , partly with government funding , engage in competition with private undertakings , i.e. their own citizens .
Let it be clear , then , that the much desired level playing field no longer exists .
The present situation promotes money wasting , distorts international trade and , as such , forms a threat to the internal market .
It is surely only logical and reasonable that public undertakings , at the time when they enter into the market , should abide by the same rules as private undertakings .
As a means of guaranteeing a level playing field , the Commission has decided that undertakings with a net turnover in excess of EUR 40 million should keep separate accounts which should illustrate the different activities , the costs and profits pertaining to each of the activities , the method according to which costs and profit are accounted for and the way in which the net profits generated by each activity are used .
These are the considerations with regard to the proposal .
In short , what is the origin of investments in the commercial field ?
Initially , the Commission proposal met with a great deal of resistance from EMAC and the Commission .
In actual fact , there was only a handful of PPE-DE Members and the Liberal Group who were in favour of the planned transparency .
This caused me concern .
We , as MEPs , are elected to exercise democratic control over the executive , in this case the Commission .
The Commission is , in turn , responsible for observing Article 86 .
We thus have the duty to ensure that the Commission carries out the assigned task properly but , at the same time , some of us would prevent it from doing exactly that .
I wonder how we must come across in a situation like this .
We make it abundantly clear that we strive for fair competition and utilisation of our internal market but , when the chips are down , we are once again looking solely after our own interests .
In the report on the adoption of the single currency by Greece , I blame the governments for not doing what needs to be done .
Those against this directive are thus giving the governments a helping hand .
As Parliament , we cannot do anything else but to ensure that the markets operate clearly and transparently and that we do not give preferential treatment to certain undertakings and not others .
This directive may seem tedious , but is , in reality , the acid test .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make three points regarding this directive , and the consultation , on which I should like to congratulate our rapporteur .
I think she has managed to come up with a reasonable balance within our committee in what almost became , on occasions , an ideological debate .
In your proposal , Commissioner , you quite rightly exclude a number of sectors , and we can only be pleased at this .
Secondly , as our rapporteur pointed out , I should like to draw attention to the fact that the jurisdiction of Member States in this field must not be disregarded .
At the present time , there is no definition of services of general economic interest at European Union level .
We must therefore bring subsidiarity into play , and we are well aware that in such areas , national sensibilities may be expressed in diverse ways .
I can therefore only urge you , Commissioner , to show as much drive and determination in making full use of all the terms of the Treaty , particularly those which , following the Treaty of Amsterdam , grant you new scope for action , especially with a view to defining the ability to provide services of general economic interest .
I would urge Mrs Peijs to read again the latest version of the Treaty with regard to what she considers to be the last word on the law on competition within the European Union .
My third observation , Commissioner , is on public broadcasting services .
Once again , I cannot ignore what we incorporated into our Treaty when we amended it in Amsterdam .
This sector is very clearly covered by specific conditions .
This shows the determination of the Member States to treat this sector as a sector in its own right falling outside the rules of competition which exist in other areas .
I therefore feel that the proposals on transparency that you are putting forward cannot be applied to that sector under the same conditions .
I think it would be rather difficult in such a sector to implement the notion of separate accounting systems making it possible to draw a distinction between competitive activities and public service activities in the broadcasting sector , especially as , I might mention in passing , there is no single harmonised European accounting system .
I just wanted to complain about the quality of sound reproduction .
There is a bad echo in the Chamber , as a result of which we can hardly hear those speaking in their original languages .
Can something be done about this ?
We will try to resolve the problem you have raised in your speech , Mrs Maes .
Mr President , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party welcomes the Commission ' s proposal , which will lead to increased public scrutiny of public undertakings and to increased competition .
We want to thank Mrs Randzio-Plath for cooperating so well .
State aid distorts competition and is unfair to both consumers and companies .
In principle , the Treaty prohibits all types of state aid , including cross-subsidies .
The Treaty does not , however , prohibit the existence of public undertakings providing services in the public interest .
Whatever one may think about this , it is for the Member States themselves to define what is meant by services in the public interest .
The Member States should not , however , themselves decide what kinds of aid they will be granting these undertakings .
The Court of First Instance in Luxembourg stated as late as last week that state support for TV and radio companies may only be provided once the Commission has said that this is compatible with the Treaty .
The rules must be applied in the same way to all parties .
All aid which is not used to finance services in the public interest is prohibited and is to be opposed .
State radio stations and TV companies now often provide services which are outside the scope of what we call services in the public interest .
An example is Internet connection .
Those resources which the State has injected into companies to finance their basic activities ought not , of course , to be used to finance the provision of Internet connections .
In that case , competition is distorted , to the disadvantage both of consumers and of private companies .
The Commission ' s proposal requires companies to openly account for the resources provided to them as public undertakings and for how these have been used .
Companies must also show what costs they have , where their income comes from and how this is derived from their various activities .
These are very reasonable demands .
Both these obligations are simple means of upholding the rules governing relations between private and public undertakings .
This is important for the purpose of maintaining proper rules in the internal market .
Mr President , Commissioner Monti , on the subject of the proposal before us , I should like to make four remarks or observations on behalf of my Group , but not without first congratulating our fellow Member , Mrs Randzio-Plath .
First of all , I should like to thank Commissioner Monti for having had the courtesy to consult the European Parliament .
A Commission directive has been referred to us , even though , I believe , it is not legally mandatory to consult Parliament , although the subject is clearly a crucial one .
This leads me to reiterate the hope that the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference will propose subjecting all legislation on competition policy to the codecision procedure , thereby enabling us legally to work on a more equal footing .
My second comment concerns the actual purpose of this proposed directive .
It has an extremely specific aim , which is to prevent , subject to monitoring by the Commission , any legitimate public aid to services of general interest being misappropriated to the benefit of activities which are themselves open to competition .
Having said that , the problem is by no means easy to solve , as the previous speaker made clear .
Indeed he states - and I would be curious to know Mr Monti ' s response to this - that Internet connection does not , for example , come under the heading of universal service .
I think that this runs quite counter to the objectives of the European Council in Lisbon , and that it is necessary , on the contrary , to have a comprehensive vision of universal service .
One might go so far as to imagine , even if this is a matter for subsidiarity , that the Community as such should at least define the minimum standards of what the universal service may be .
Otherwise we are heading towards a relatively chaotic situation .
Thirdly , I should like to know the Commission ' s reaction to Recital No 4 of our report , in which the rapporteur and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs effectively ask the Commission to specify how important it considers services of general interest to be .
I await the Commission ' s response on the matter .
Fourthly and finally , there is one amendment , Amendment No 3 , which is explicitly intended to exclude the broadcasting sector from the scope of the proposed directive .
I think this amendment is an improvement on the current text . Paragraph 6 is a masterpiece of diplomatic language but is relatively incomprehensible .
I should therefore like to see the Commission expressing its support for Amendment No 3 as proposed in plenary .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
I would like to join my colleagues in thanking Commissioner Monti for consulting Parliament on this matter and in congratulating our rapporteur for her great job .
The tenor of this report relates to analysing which public undertakings can receive financial aid from the Member State governments operating within the EU .
There are clearly opposing views in this House on this subject matter .
There are those who would like to see undertakings which are only in direct competition with the private sector to be subject to the terms of this directive , whilst others would propose that public undertakings which are clearly of a general interest could fall within the exceptions in this directive .
It can be said that the right reserved to Member States to determine what constitutes service of general interest is preserved , and the one area that I would like to deal with specifically is the question of broadcasting .
I would like to remind this House that the protocol attached to the Treaty of Amsterdam of the EU recognises that the system of public broadcasting within Member States of the EU is directly related to the democratic , social and cultural needs of our society .
We must ensure that with the advance of new technology the public service broadcast ethos is not undermined .
I would argue that it is more essential , now that we have a strong public service broadcasting sector , to ensure the maintenance of that democratic , social and cultural sector .
In conclusion , Mr President , this is why I believe the role of public service broadcasters must be maintained , and while I welcome the fact that the right must be reserved to Member States to determine what constitutes ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I also wish to add my congratulations to Mrs Randzio-Plath for the work on this report , which has been difficult at times .
This directive sets out to identify and prevent subsidies which distort competition .
In order to do this , the directive proposes to require public undertakings and private undertakings that perform public tasks to carry out separate accounting procedures .
I obviously agree with the rapporteur that competition rules must be applied rigorously in order to prevent cross-subsidies that go against the purpose of the aid .
However , in the sphere of public broadcasting it is essential to remember that , in accordance with the Amsterdam Protocol , in the system of public broadcasting in Member States , it is up to each Member State to specify the financial and organisational structure of public service broadcasting .
This has , as I said , been a difficult report ; it has been fraught and often very tense in committee and , more specifically , at the committee votes .
However , I believe the final outcome will work and is a practical and correct approach .
Mr President , despite this discussion in Parliament concerning the changes which the Commission would like to make to the directive on the transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings , we will not have much of a say in it because it will be the Commission , and the Commission only , that will make decisions without further involving the European Parliament or the Council , much to our regret .
In our opinion , on the basis of its autonomous powers concerning competition policy , the Commission approaches some sectors from a purely economic angle without taking into consideration other social aspects .
For example , in the dossier on financing public broadcasting , the Commission still overlooks the cultural aspects and the aspect of media-pluralism , to our mind .
Admittedly , an exception is made but then this exception accommodates further exceptions .
For example , it is very difficult for public broadcasting to survive in an increasingly commercialised environment .
I am against the commercialisation of culture .
In my opinion , culture is above these market laws .
The Commission has thus overstepped the mark . With this amendment to the directive , it is trying to change the Treaty of Amsterdam , namely the public broadcasting protocol which was attached to it .
I am , therefore , of the opinion that the IGC should apply the normal legislative procedure for codecision by the Council and Parliament to general competition policy legislation .
I can already tell you that I will be here once again when you produce a directive on film .
Mr President , I congratulate the European Parliament on the major work accomplished during the debate on the Randzio-Plath report .
I would particularly like to thank Parliament for the support it has shown for the Commission ' s initiative and I welcome its approval of the steps to increase transparency in the use of public resources and thereby guarantee fair competition .
You welcomed the Commission ' s consultation of Parliament , despite the fact that it was not obliged to do this under its institutional statutes as Mr Jonckheer and other speakers recalled .
Moreover , the way the debate went reassures me that it was useful for the Commission and in the best interests of the initiative for Parliament to be consulted .
As it stands , the directive on transparency gives the Commission the authority to carry out inquiries into financial relations between Member States and their public undertakings .
In short , the draft amendment to the directive is intended to ensure the introduction of separate accounting procedures for specific types of firms .
The firms affected by this measure are those which , on the one hand , provide services of general economic interest in exchange for various different types of compensation , which may be special dues or payments , and , on the other , also perform normal general activities , thereby operating in competition with other firms .
Clearly , the profits generated by the continuation of reserved activities or by compensation provided for reasons of general interest or public service are not intended to finance competitive activities , and must therefore not give rise to internal subsidies .
However , in recent years , the Commission has had to examine a growing number of claims related precisely to such internal compensation .
As Mrs Peijs mentioned , in the course of its inquiries , the Commission has had to examine these cases of internal compensation and it was frequently unable to obtain sufficient information regarding the costs and profits generated by the various activities .
Therefore , the Commission now proposes to introduce a system of separate accounts for these types of companies which will allow them to perform their role as surety for competition properly .
I would also like to stress that the obligation to keep separate accounts also benefits the Member States , in that it provides them with the necessary information in order to avoid granting state aid which does not comply with the Treaty and to notify the Commission of the aid envisaged .
The directive requires that companies which provide general services and which , at the same time , operate outside that public service mission , keep separate accounts .
This requirement applies to both private and public companies .
The directive does not apply to companies which only provide general services and do not carry on any other activity , nor does it require the separation of different activities which all come under the heading of general services .
In other words , ladies and gentlemen , the directive is intended to make the areas around the line between services of general interest and other activities transparent with the minimum of disruption .
I would like to emphasise the fact that the directive makes no changes either , of course , to the provisions of the Treaty on the awarding of general services , or to the awarding of the management of these services to specific companies .
The directive lays down the principles for the introduction of greater transparency , although , in observance of the subsidiarity principle , it leaves the Member States free to adopt appropriate national measures .
I would now like to turn to some of the comments made .
Mr Jonckheer wondered whether Internet access was to be included in the universal service .
On this point , I can only say that the last Telecommunications Council did hold a debate on this matter .
As regards the doubts expressed by the rapporteur , Mrs Randzio-Plath , I would briefly like to summarise them .
On the subject of the definition of general services , I would stress once again that the directive does not make any changes , it does not reduce the current competences of the Member States - Mrs Berès and Mr Langen - regarding the definition of public interest .
This also applies to the public broadcasting sector , in respect of which the Amsterdam Protocol confirmed the competence of the Member States in the definition of the admission of public service .

Mrs Berès , Mr Jonckheer , Mr Crowley , Mr Skinner and Mrs Maes remarked that it might be possible to exclude broadcasting .
I have to say that this sector could well be among the fields where the directive is most frequently applied , where this directive on transparency is of most service , for , even taking the Amsterdam Protocol into account , of course , this nevertheless leaves the Commission with the task of verifying that aid granted for the provision of public services is not excessive in respect of the costs .
A requirement for verification therefore remains , and this directive should be useful for this purpose .
The size of company is irrelevant , and I am now addressing Mr Langen et al : the EUR 40 million threshold excludes small- and medium-sized businesses .
If we were to raise this threshold we would be excluding companies where , due to their size , we cannot suppose that the aid does not affect trade between Member States .
In any case , in order to give an idea of the size , only 0.2 % of all non-farming enterprises in the Community are above this threshold .
Finally , I would like to say - and it appears that this has been perfectly well understood by the Members of Parliament - that this directive is not in the slightest an attack on public companies .
Quite the opposite , to be honest , I see it as a great show of support for public companies .
This is because it provides clarity and therefore does not expose public services to the attacks which would otherwise have been levelled at them .
As Mr Olle Schmidt stressed , this transparency is essential not only for a proper application of competition policy but , indeed , if I may say so , it is also crucial for there to be a proper relationship between the authorities and the taxpayers , the citizens .
I therefore feel that , although , as Mrs Peijs stressed , this directive may appear extremely tedious , it actually allows us to get to the heart of the issue , not only of competition but also of civil coexistence and economic democracy .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Poor countries ' debt
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Tajani , Mr van Velzen and Mr Poettering for their valuable , substantial contributions to this debate .
I also welcome the mandate conferred on me by the European People ' s Party to present such a major topic as the poor countries ' debt , which is stifling the economy of the world ' s poorest developing countries .
The scale of this issue is global , and it involves all the civilised , democratic countries which are helplessly standing by , watching the constant growth of the debt of poor countries , which now have to set aside an average of 40 % of their annual budget to finance it .
Every year , the debt increases by approximately 12 % , and it has risen from USD 110 billion in the 80s to its present value of USD 350 billion .
Parliament has attempted to deal with the issue on more than one occasion , but it has never appeared to find satisfactory solutions .
This year , on account of it being a Jubilee Year , the Holy See and other quarters are calling for the substantial reduction , if not total cancellation , of the international debt in such a way as to facilitate the integration of the most indebted countries into the world production and commercial trade circuit .
The UN Secretary-General also fervently appealed , on 3 April last , to the donor countries and international financial institutions to cancel all the official debts of the highly indebted poor countries from their accounts as a millennium gesture .
A similar appeal was made by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund , but the time for appeals has passed .
It is facts that are important now .
If we analyse the situation , we realise that , on the one hand , we are talking about an almost irrecoverable debt and , on the other , that in return for cancelling that debt , we can demand greater respect for human rights , greater democracy and social actions benefiting poor communities - improving conditions for children , the elderly and the disabled .
In addition , we would be stemming migration flows , which , quite apart from being a problem for the migrants ' countries of origin , are , above all , a problem for the host countries .
Therefore , I would ask whether the Council is aware of all the initiatives which have hitherto been adopted by each individual country of the Union to reduce or cancel the debt of highly indebted poor countries , and whether it would be possible for a résumé to be produced showing the practical actions which have been undertaken by these countries and the commitments made , to prove that these initiatives are not just mere political vote-winning manoeuvres , as they all too often appear to be .
Finally , considering that there is a clear need for a common foreign policy displaying Europe as a coherent system capable of undertaking united initiatives , does the Commission not feel that it would be appropriate to create a structure to study this issue , which would work together with the local Churches , NGOs and civil society and act upon the conclusions reached ?
This would , I feel , be a different way of interpreting the meaning of the millennium , this time in the name of solidarity between communities .
Mr President , resolving the problem of the external debt of less developed countries is undoubtedly an essential factor in the stability , security and development of these countries , in eradicating poverty and in stemming the migratory flows that affect and weaken them .
We are all aware of the situation .
These countries ' resources - and even resources that they do not have - are used up to service their debts ; for some of these countries , interest and capital repayments account for 40 % of their budget .
In spite of this , the debt continues to grow exponentially , and there is consequently an ever-widening gap between these countries and the industrialised countries , which often behave like unscrupulous moneylenders .
The imposition of unsuitable structural adjustment programmes by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund and inadequate cooperation and development aid actions by the industrialised countries , which fall considerably short of the 0.7 % of GDP recommended by the United Nations , both contribute to this gap .
There is an erroneous , trade-based concept that has also made matters worse . This concept suggests that , under the auspices of the WTO , the market can regulate and resolve everything , whereas the opposite is true : economic globalisation has greatly contributed to accentuating disparities , increasing injustice and holding back development .
It is obvious that this situation must , therefore , be resolved by adopting a worldwide project and by a new world order that puts the development of these countries at the top of its priorities . This must be based on the idea that everyone , and I mean everyone , including the rich countries , will benefit from this development .
A project of this kind can only succeed through debt relief , which cannot be reduced to a process that is merely full of good intentions , as recommended by the G7 countries , whose contribution represents no more than 1 % of Third World debt and which is today limited in practice to partial debt relief for just three or four countries .
The European Union and its Member States can , and must , speak up on this issue , abandoning their limited outlooks , which are full of conditions , which often accompany shamefaced announcements about debt cancellation , and end the aid cuts that have been taking place and which are proposed for the future .
Instead , they must put forward a broad and resolute plan that will make a decisive contribution to ending a situation of this kind and help to put the development of such important parts of the world into perspective .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , initiatives in favour of cancelling all or part of the third world debt are proliferating in the year 2000 .
On this subject , the Cairo Summit did not , any more than other summits , come up with any even remotely clear conclusion .
This step is , however , a matter of simple common sense , and one is tempted to ask the Council whether they intend one day to refer the matter to their common sense .
The whole thing verges on the ridiculous .
Not only do the countries of the south not have the financial resources to pay back their debts but , on top of that , the international economic order , which has foisted a demented concept of liberalism on the world , is preventing the majority of our partners in the south - I am thinking in particular of those in Northern Africa and sub-Saharan Africa - acceding to the conditions for development that is even remotely sustainable .

Such conditions are continually demolished by the blind application of free trade , accompanied by the obsessive , ideological privatisation of the exploitation of most of their wealth .
The rich countries , foolishly falling in line with the imperialist rules of the IMF and the World Bank , were nonetheless the first to realise that this cannot damage economic take-off since their own development did not fail on occasion to resort to the rules of protectionism , ensuring , moreover , a privileged place for the state and for public intervention in all its forms .
Peace between nations can only be achieved if there is balance .
Political and economic balance are , on the other hand , devastating to a world which is increasingly unipolar .
As we well know , despite the head-in-the-sand policy practised by rich countries with no thought for the future which takes the world down some highly dangerous roads , and while this House gets bogged down in details and side issues , it is high time that we were able to look at the world as a whole .
Instead of leaving our only reasonable policy , i.e. the Lomé agreements , high and dry , we ought to be forming genuine economic and , more importantly , political partnerships with the Mediterranean and African countries .
But , for that , Europe would have to have an authority legitimate and clear-sighted enough to get out of the trap of all-out liberalism and , of course , it has no such authority worthy of the name .
Mr President , hearing the other speakers , I note that we all agree on the facts .
The harsh and tragic figures are there for all to see .
The 50 poorest countries spend twice what they receive in aid in order to pay off their debt .
An average of 40 % of the budget of poor countries is dedicated to debt payments .
Not only does that undermine their economic development , not only does that significantly reduce their ability to provide basic social services , such as health or education , but it creates a sort of slavery which benefits Western societies .
In fact two thirds of the debt is generated by interest on earlier loans , loans taken out to pay for the things we sold them , which multinationals sold them .
This is highly reminiscent of the exploitation of agricultural workers in some countries who are forced to buy from the boss ' s shop at inflated prices and who are then forced to work for the rest of their lives for scant wages in order to pay off their debts to this shop .
What action are we taking to prevent this ?
The G7 countries announced amid much publicity a debt reduction programme , but conditions are such that it cannot be applied .
This initiative remains subject to macroeconomic reform programmes under the aegis of the IMF or the World Bank , which run counter to the objectives of eradicating poverty , due to their restrictive effect on the ability to spend on social services and job creation .
Some major countries have announced that they are going to cancel debts , but this is selective , linked to the interests of certain parties , and is achieved to the detriment of development budgets .
The indebted countries were expecting a strong message from the Conference between the European Union and Africa held in Cairo recently .
They were given plenty of fine words , but no practical action .
What initiatives do the Commission and the Council propose to take at European or international level in order to further relieve or cancel the burden of debt in order to aid the poorest countries ?
How does the Commission plan to ensure that the appropriations made available by cancelling the debt are properly invested in eradicating poverty and in sustainable development ?
Finally , what is the Commission ' s reaction to the requests presented by some civil society organisations in the countries of the south for improvements in monitoring the macroeconomic adaptation plan , by organising conferences on national development , in order to give public opinion in these countries an opportunity to define national priorities and projects ?
The Commission 's contribution to debt relief can be seen in the HIPC initiative .
This was launched in September 1996 with the aim of helping to relieve the debt burden of the poorest countries that make adjustment efforts in a concerted way .
It represents a coordinated effort by all donors including , in particular , multilateral creditors .
It was the first time ever that the multilateral aspect had been addressed directly .
In 1999 , on the occasion of the G7 Cologne Summit , ministers agreed to an expanded and more flexible initiative that will provide faster , deeper and broader debt relief .
As a result of the proposed changes , the costs of this HIPC II Initiative are expected to increase significantly to some USD 27.4 billion from a previous estimated level of some USD 13 billion of HIPC I. In fact , the original estimate of the cost of HIPC I was around USD 8 billion only .
For the record , the Commission has already made a large contribution to HIPC I. The Council adopted , on 6 July 1998 , a decision on the Community ' s participation in the HIPC Initiative with regard to its claims , special loans and risk capital managed by the European Investment Bank for eligible ACP countries .
As mentioned before , the Community , as a creditor , is only a small player in this discussion .
Fortunately , we are mainly a provider of direct grant assistance and not loans .
We set aside EUR 40 million of interest accumulated on EDF funds which should cover the cost for the first six country cases .
Community assistance for Uganda and Guyana was delivered in mid-1998 and early 2000 , amounting to EUR 4.59 million and EUR 6.44 million respectively .
The Community has since decided to considerably enhance support for the HIPC II Initiative .
At the annual meeting in Washington in September 1999 , it was announced that the Community ' s contribution would be in the order of EUR 1 billion .
The Commission subsequently submitted draft proposals for decisions to the Joint EU / ACP Council and the EU Council which were adopted by the General Affairs Council on 6 December and by the Joint EU / ACP Council on 8 December .
It has to be borne in mind that the ACP countries ' agreement is required because it is EDF money that is being reallocated so their consent is needed as part of these decisions .
At present , the Commission is in the process of finalising discussions with its Member States , the European Investment Bank , the World Bank and the African Development Bank about the main principles of the actual implementation of the Community support for the HIPC II Initiative , both as a donor and as a creditor .
In June , it will present the relevant financing proposals .
The Community ' s global contribution to the HIPC Trust Fund in its capacity as a donor will amount to EUR 680 million for qualifying ACP countries .
EUR 670 million will be earmarked for the African Development Bank in order to cover its financing gap in the HIPC Initiative and EUR 10 million for the only non-African HIPC ACP country , Guyana .
The EUR 680 million Community contribution originating from the EDF will be channelled to the HIPC Trust Fund in 3 tranches taking into consideration effective financing needs as well as support from other donors .
According to the information available , needs for the first tranche this year will be in the order of the magnitude of EUR 250 million .
The first EC tranche will be paid in July .
Besides these contributions to be financed from uncommitted EDF funds , a EUR 54 million contribution to the HIPC Trust Fund will also be made towards non-ACP HIPCs drawing on resources from the budgetary lines for Latin America and Asia .
We want , in other words , to make sure that the EU participation in HIPC is global and in accordance with the figures in HIPC .
Finally , it must be stressed that the ACP / EU Council decision to reinforce the EC Structural Adjustment Facility by EUR 250 million will partly be used to provide interim relief to eligible HIPC countries belonging to the ACP .
It is important to stress that the Community contribution to debt relief should not be seen as a substitute for contributions from bilateral donors .
These are still needed in order to fully finance the initiative announced at the G7 Summit in Cologne .
The expectation created a year ago was that the G7 countries would come up with additional resources .
As regards other contributions to the HIPC Trust Fund , it may be worth noting that the draft budget by the US administration suggests a US contribution of USD 600 million which follows on from pledges made earlier and which corresponds to the share of HIPC calculated by the World Bank for the US .
This draft budget needs to be passed in Congress and this is definitely facing some difficulties .
In fact , it seems very doubtful that the US will deliver its share as planned .
The funds released by the Commission for the HIPC Initiative are subject to the same principles as other funds originating from the European Development Fund and the Commission is carefully involving the EDF Committee , that is Member States , at all stages .
Article 366 ( b ) of the Lomé Convention in its present form imposes strict conditions on the possible use of EDF money .
Politically speaking , it would not make sense to stop EDF financed projects in Article 366 ( b ) countries and to provide them with EC quasi direct non-earmarked budget support , for example through HIPC debt relief mechanisms .
It is the responsibility of the Commission to ensure that EDF money does not facilitate a coup d 'état or provide additional budgetary room for manoeuvre to enable dictators to oppress their people .
It is the very purpose of Article 366 ( b ) in its present form to make things more complicated for countries breaching elementary human rights and good governance principles .
This view has also been clearly expressed by the European Court of Auditors when commenting on these issues .
Our hands are somewhat tied in this discussion on how we can accomplish these things in practice .
In the discussions , which led last year to the agreement on enhancing the HIPC Initiative , there was a strong consensus in the donor community that poverty reduction needs to be re-emphasised as a main focus of development efforts .
The concept of the poverty reduction strategy papers was launched to provide a framework for mainstreaming poverty reduction in government and donor policies .
It will require a country-specific approach to assessing a country ' s position in development , poverty strategies and institutional capacity .
The Commission has expressed its strong support for this radically new approach initiated by the World Bank and the IMF .
Country ownership is paramount for the development of these ideas and governments will have responsibility for both the design process and the final product .
The Commission attaches particular importance to an open participatory process involving civil society , parliaments and all relevant international institutions and donors .
Policies that address issues of social justice and equity are as central as economic policy to growth and poverty reduction .
The Community is maintaining and stepping up its commitment to support macroeconomic reforms , social sectors , regional integration and sound economic management .
This is all needed in order to make sure that fighting poverty remains the central theme when we are actually improving the situation of these poor countries through the enhanced HIPC Initiative .
I think that it is quite good that the Commission and the EU in general clearly stand out as the single most important contributor towards making this initiative actually work .
Mr President , when one hears of the horrendous debt that has built up in many African states , the first reaction is one of deep sympathy .
However , I have had the privilege of visiting many of these countries in the past year and I have to say that , in many cases , one ' s sympathy turns to anger when one sees the abject poverty that people in these countries live in while their leaders and ministers revel in wealth and prosperity and one begins to question the distribution of aid and debt relief .
Despite all the help given from Europe , individual nation states and institutions , Africa ' s external debt is growing by about 12 % per annum and some countries are repaying more in interest than they are receiving in aid .
That cannot be allowed to continue , but neither can the historic reasons for causing it to happen .
I will be criticised by some honourable Members for saying it , but conditionality must be built into not only development aid but also debt relief .
I have always maintained that good governance was more important than pure democracy if you are going to stamp out corrupt practices , and if we cannot wipe these practices out we are only pouring good money after bad .
We must therefore be in a position to monitor the effect of debt relief and make sure that all of it is spent on civil society to give better health , education and employment prospects to the people who are being denied it .
There is a secondary effect of bad governance and that is the lack of external investment into these countries which denies them the chance of improved prosperity , better employment prospects and a higher standard of living .
The fight against fraud and corruption should be made a condition for allocating debt relief and development aid - not my words , Mr President , but the words of President Obasanjo of Nigeria in Abuja at the opening of the 13th session of the ACP-EU Assembly .
If only that could be echoed by every other president in Africa , the resistance to giving debt relief would diminish and some real progress could be made in alleviating the misery and poverty of millions of people .
Mr President , while we are talking , in Sierra Leone the latest episode in a ten-year long tragedy is taking place . This civil war has been responsible for 50 000 deaths , 2 million refugees and the brutal mutilation of 40 000 men and women of all ages in a systematic campaign of terror .
Most of Africa is affected by similar tragedies , including the tragedy affecting the Sahrawi people , with which we came face to face this morning just outside here .
The other side to globalisation is poverty , the indebtedness of the poorer developing countries and the extension of those conflicts which reduce potential for development whilst exacerbating other conflicts and causing fresh poverty .
This is why the recent EU-Africa Summit held in Cairo was so important .
It reopened global dialogue with the countries of the African continent and , for the first time , associated the development aid policy with the upholding of democratic principles , rights and the fight against corruption .
A long-term strategy is essential , and cancelling the debt is the starting point for such a strategy .
As the resolution tabled by the European Socialist Party states , it is therefore important to increase the percentage of resources set aside by industrialised countries for the poorest countries , but , at the same time , the quality of our undertaking is also crucial .
The resolution puts forward two major options : new sustainability criteria and greater flexibility for the more indebted countries , and the bilateral cancellation of the debts of the least developed ACP countries .
These are initial , tangible recommendations , although , in future , we must avoid the repetition of the spiral of debt , with no checks on the choices made .
Indeed , we are aware that it is not sufficient to cancel the debt if the other mechanisms determining all the policies remain unchanged .
Cancellation of the debt must be conditional upon the use to which the resources thereby released are put . These resources must be invested in schools , hospitals and the human development of communities , not wasted , as still often occurs today , due to corruption or , what is worse , used to boost the arms trade and support ruinous wars .
The global economy must be accompanied by a global policy ; growth must go hand in hand with the upholding of human and civil rights and the consolidation of democracy .
In order to avoid the spiral of debt , we therefore need to supplement the means for action : there must be greater cooperation , increased trade exchange , an increase in initiatives to prevent conflicts and more coherent opposition to corrupt , indebted governments which visit upon their citizens the hardship caused by crises and poor development .
Our commitment to cancelling the debt is a precondition for the introduction of all the policies for reducing poverty .
Resolution of the debt issue must be accompanied by actions promoting local development .
In order to succeed , we need to harmonise national policies and supplement them with greater opening up of the markets .
The recent EU-ACP agreements follow this rationale and provide assistance for the 31 least developed countries over a period of time which should end in 2005 .
In this context , it is essential to involve the private sector in order to boost trade exchange and , in addition to transferring resources , to create the necessary conditions for the growth of an internal market for developing countries , and provide incentives as well as laying down conditions .
Mr President , there is no point flogging a dead horse .
This is why the disastrous vicious circle of loans , debts and new loans must be broken .
The immense repayment costs prevent any form of development .
There is hardly any money left for education , health care or for building well-functioning government machinery .
Debt relief is therefore a matter of extreme urgency .
This should be facilitated in a joint effort involving all creditors , the Union , the States , especially the United States , international institutions and banks .
However , a very broad strategy will not get us much further .
The debt cancellation programmes must be tailored to the specific circumstances of each individual country .
It is essential in this respect to tackle not just the social problems , but also to lay a firm foundation for sustainable economic development .
If this fails to materialise , then foreign investments will not be forthcoming either .
A prerequisite for relieving debts is sound financial housekeeping within the governments concerned .
We should not be naïve about this .
We can no longer write out blank cheques .
In the past , billions never reached the intended causes .
A great deal of money got into the hands of corrupt regimes which allowed Swiss banks to benefit from the large-scale theft of development aid .
When will the civilised world finally realise that countries which maintain banking secrecy are accessory to huge crimes at the expense of the poorest population groups .
The IMF and the World Bank started an initiative back in 1996 to relieve the debts of the poorest countries .
Last summer , the conditions were amended , with good reason .
Aid was made conditional upon tangible results .
It would be wonderful if the European Union and the Member States were to take a generous stance if the conditions were met .
Let us do everything possible to help the poorest countries fight poverty .
This can work if the victim is involved in his own rescue .
Mr President , I think we all agree how completely absurd it is that many of the world ' s poorest countries sometimes pay more in interest and for debt management than they receive in aid .
There are at least two questions which I think must be answered .
The first is : how can the EU and the G7 nations , together with other Western countries , comply with their commitments so that these do not merely become empty promises ?
In spite of what the Council and the Commission have said , it is , of course , a fact that , notwithstanding the praiseworthy initiative that has been taken , the G7 countries have not so far , unfortunately , taken measures to comply with that initiative .
All that has happened so far is that the debts of a mere three developing countries have been written off to the tune of 0.25 per cent .
That is naturally not enough .
Even those EU countries which have said that they wish to write off the debts have not appropriated funds in their budgets for this purpose .
On occasions , the funds concerned have been taken from the areas of cooperation and development .
The most important question of all is : how can it be ensured that the resources are properly used in developing countries ?
The Council responded by saying that it was not in favour of that kind of control .
However , the EU , the IMF and the World Bank have , of course , established criteria in other contexts , so why should we not be able to establish criteria to ensure that , for the people , the result of debt cancellation really will be ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are 800 million Africans today and there will be twice as many in 25 years ' time , and obviously they are not the only ones to be living in developing countries .
Many people in Africa are sinking into poverty and increasing numbers of them are immigrating to European countries , which are in the throes of a demographic depression .
It must be remembered that this poverty coincides with the botched decolonisation of the 1960s which plunged many of these countries into poverty and ethnic conflict , related also to the establishment of dictatorships which were corrupt and , more often than not , it must be acknowledged , Socialist .
What we would like to say is that cancelling poor countries ' debt is no doubt a laudable intention and we are in favour of staggering payments , but we would like to see the root of the trouble being tackled with the same seriousness .
We may note , for example , that until the 1990s , the African states which were still linked to France by means of economic , monetary and military cooperation agreements represented a haven of stability and relative prosperity .
The same is true of the states which have maintained links with western powers by means of economic agreements of this type .
We think this is a more serious solution to the problems of the third world than the outrageous recommendation which the UN made on 4 January to the effect that , in order to offset its falling birth rate , Europe should prepare to accept 159 million immigrants from African countries over the next 25 years .
Turning Europe into a third-world country is not , we feel , the way to help the third world achieve a genuine degree of economic development .
The real solution is in Africa in the form of a development policy which enables Africans to live in their own countries , which raises the question of the alleged benefits of free trade .
Our opinion is that there are no real benefits or , if there are , then only for countries at a comparable economic and social level , and that it is only when protected by secure frontiers and customs rights that these countries will gradually progress from the cottage industry phase to that of industrialisation .
Mr President , this year is 2000 AD , a jubilee year .
It is a year in which , based on the concept of the biblical Holy Year , we need to think seriously about relieving the debt of the poorest of the poor .
In the Holy Year , each fiftieth year , debts were cancelled , slaves released and the land was left fallow in Israel .
Such a year created the opportunity to start the future with a clean slate .
In analogy with this biblical reference , the year 2000 should become a Holy Year for the world ' s poorest of the poor .
We therefore welcome national and international initiatives to reduce debts with open arms .
However , I cannot refrain from making a number of critical remarks in respect of the proud announcements made by a number of G7 countries over the past few years .
These rich countries boast about the fact that they no longer make a fuss about the gigantic amounts which these poor countries owe them .
Experiences with the HIPC initiative dating back to 1996 , however , have shown that debt reduction has not always had an altogether positive effect on the development of the poor .
In the best-case scenarios , 100 % debt relief only yields an actual 40 % reduction in the debt .
The reason for this is firstly that the conditions tied in with the debt relief are such that only few countries qualify .
Moreover , room for debt relief is often found in national and international budgets for development policy .
As such , it is not a matter of making available additional financial resources but more a matter of shifting funds .
Poor countries may spend less on repaying their debts , but they also have to cope with a drop in foreign aid .
If we really want to take the fight against world poverty seriously , debt reduction should be accompanied by an active policy to combat poverty .
In this respect , it is desirable to deploy local governments and NGOs .
These minor observations , however , do not detract from the fact that concessions made must be met and new initiatives have to be launched .
A careful and generous stance is a welcome bonus in this respect .
The Commission , Member States and international donors must make every effort to turn the year of Our Lord 2000 into a Holy Year in the true sense of the word .
Mr President , fine words have been spoken about cancelling the enormous debts of a large number of developing countries to mark the millennium , as Mr Van Dam mentioned a moment ago .
These speeches were given at the G7 meeting , at the European Summit in Lisbon and at the recent Euro-African Summit in Cairo .
The question we are left with today is : what will come of this ?
We have heard a few examples from the HIPC-I and HIPC-II programmes and I understand that 1 billion is tied up in this second programme .
The total debt burden of all developing countries comes to 350 billion .
This means that , in comparison , this 1 billion is really peanuts .
Many of those countries pay 25 % to 40 % of their national budget on interest and repayment into banks in Western Europe , the United States and Japan .
The harsh reality is that the billions which are paid to repay debts far exceed the development aid .
That is a disastrous situation because we often ask ourselves why our development aid does not work .
Well , here is one of the most important reasons .
If a sum of money comes in and subsequently a sum has to be repaid which is three or four times the original amount , then those countries will not make any headway , of course .
One question which remains is : should you cancel debts unconditionally ?
I do not share the view of Mr Miranda or other MEPs who think one should .
In my opinion , conditions should very much be part of the deal .
The countries involved should be the poorest ones , to start with .
They should have a democratic government and a pluriform parliament which keeps the government in check .
The country must fight corruption actively .
The countries concerned should not be at war or participate in wars , and an agreed proportion of the budget must really be spent on social schemes for the poorest citizens , and must be invested in education , health care and social security .
I do not agree with Mr Da Costa who said a moment ago that this might be somewhat neo-colonial .
It was even agreed in Copenhagen , at the Social Summit for developing countries which was held there a while ago , that a proportion was to be spent on those costs .
Mr President , we should really call for something to be done about this .
We should simply spend 10 % of the total development budget on cancelling these debts .
If we do nothing , the countries will remain trapped in a downward spiral .
Mr President , I have listened with interest to both the Council and the Commission .
The Socialist Group considers that the debt which blights the development of the world ' s poorest countries cannot be dealt with in isolation , as a purely financial problem , but it must be dealt with within the framework of a broad and coherent strategy which , through the eradication of poverty , leads to development .
To this end , firstly , the cancellation of debt must not involve the removal of other sources of finance , but cancellation must be one more measure in a coherent development policy .
Secondly , the funds made available through the cancellation of debt must be used for human development funds , particularly for investment in health and education .
I do not agree with the Council when it says that this may mean a new form of colonisation .
I do not believe that to be the case .
In order to be effective , in development terms , the cancellation of debt also requires , as we request in the resolution , a global strategy implemented in unison in and by the international financial institutions .
The European Union , as a major contributor of development aid , must coordinate its action in this regard and make the elimination of poverty the common objective of its Member States , one aspect of this being the cancellation of debt in the poorest countries .
This is therefore an example of the need for coherence and coordination between Community policies .
The common foreign and security policy , which we too often treat as just a security policy , must address this issue as well as commercial and development policies .
The highly-indebted poor countries , who are the beneficiaries of this debt cancellation strategy that has already been adopted by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund , must commit themselves to suitable macroeconomic policies , to social development objectives , to increase the credibility of the state , which is the only way to attract foreign investment , and to strengthen their institutional capacity .
By uniting the actions of debtors and creditors in a global strategy aimed at the elimination of poverty , it is possible that we will achieve objective 15 of the Copenhagen Summit on social development , which is an objective which we fully identify with .
We therefore strongly urge all Member States and the Commission to support the international financial institutions ' HIPC initiative for highly indebted poor countries .
Mr President , it is commendable that the international community is apparently serious about reducing debt .
Unfortunately , this inspired policy comes too late , far too late .
As early as the late eighties , UNICEF stated that the rich obtained the loans in the Third World and the poor were saddled with the debts , and UNICEF was right .
According to Oxfam , there are 19 000 children who die daily in the developing countries as a result of the debt burden and as an indirect result , admittedly , of the IMF programmes which require certain countries to cut down their health care expenditure by one third .
Is it not mind-boggling that countries sometimes have to spend up to 40 % of their budget on paying off debts , which have often been accumulated by irresponsible and avaricious dictators , with the unspoken collaboration of the World Bank and private western banks ?
Let us learn from past experience .
I am in favour of debt reduction but not on a level repayment or unconditional basis .
It should feature as part of an integrated and multi-lateral strategy .
It must be accompanied by proper management requirements .
These requirements must be followed by hard guarantees from the countries involved : guarantees that the funding made available by cancelling debts is used to fight poverty ; guarantees that the funding will no longer be used to finance arms deals and other military activities .
Mr Da Costa , that is not neo-colonialism in my book .
It is making sure that the funds of the European taxpayer are not misused to fund wars - crazy wars - in Africa .
Conditionality requires courage and - you will have to forgive me - more courage than the Member States and the Commission have displayed so far .
Mr President , as others have said , many promises have been made on debt relief but in fact very few have been delivered .
After all the headlines that we heard at Cologne last year , less than $ 13 billion of the $ 100 billion promised has actually been cancelled and as the Commission and the Council have told us , contributions to the HIPC Trust Fund are still way below target .
As the Commissioner rightly says , the burden deserves to be shared .
The fact is that despite a $ 1 trillion budget surplus over 10 years , President Clinton is not able to squeeze $ 210 million for HIPC out of Congress .
That is an appalling fact for us to take on board .
It is also the case that we are still waiting for the World Bank and the IMF to come up with something similar to the European Union .
All G7 countries have promised some form of 100 % debt cancellation , but many of them are very slow and disinclined to do it in the way that we would like .
Also , to qualify for debt relief , each country has to complete a long and often contradictory ' HIPC ' process , and only 5 countries have so far managed to go through the hoops that they are being asked to go through .
So far , the United Kingdom is the only country that has offered 100 % debt cancellation .
France , Germany and Japan only include pre-cut-off debts and so ignore a significant portion of debt .
Japan , incidentally , ties its debt relief to responsibility to buy Japanese exports .
On Mozambique , for instance , it is very significant that the IMF , the World Bank and the Paris Club only postponed payments from Mozambique and then actually lent more money .
So , what I would say , finally , is that we in this Parliament urge all the creditors to stop delaying and to start working really hard towards fulfilling full debt cancellation for the poorest countries .
Of course , I agree with all my colleagues , the poorest countries who fulfil the criteria of delivering debt relief to those countries that show a commitment to social sector and human development support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that it has become quite clear today that the situation referred to in the question is of great concern and has attracted the Council ' s attention .
This is essentially an issue on which there is a degree of agreement , particularly within the European Union .
The Portuguese Presidency of the European Union has furthermore taken care to include this issue in its working programme and has ensured that it was a key part of the agenda of the Cairo Euro-African summit .
This issue must , however , be considered calmly and carefully , without any histrionics , given the serious situation that the populations of the highly indebted countries find themselves in .
The fundamental issue of debt is not the central issue for these countries - the main issue is their development , and this is the key point behind all this .
We must all be aware that what is currently at stake is the global debate on general development policy and , in particular , on the role of the European Union and its Member States in defining this policy at world level .
This is the crucial issue : debt is a symptom but underdevelopment is the disease .
There are indeed problems of inequality and of the uneven distribution of wealth in these countries , but these problems must be overcome through political solutions .
I spoke just now about the temptation or tendency to adopt a neo-colonial approach , but I was by no means implying that some aid conditions - a subject which is in fact influenced by the current philosophy behind ACP-EU cooperation - are not perfectly legitimate and acceptable .
What we must not forget is that there is a code of conduct for the internal management of resource allocation , and in particular for resources released for these countries as debt relief .
We must be reasonably careful to find a way to respect the right of these countries ' governments to manage these funds .
We must understand that we have to endeavour to ensure that political conditionality and the strengthening of democracy in these countries are the key factors underpinning our action .
Working towards good governance and working towards strengthening democratic structures and political participation are vital factors in creating free societies which provide for better management of internal resources and more appropriate management of wealth distribution and , in particular , which do not encourage corruption and the siphoning-off of funds .
It is our opinion that these issues are fundamentally linked to development .
As I said , the issue of debt is a symptom of a much more global issue , namely development .
I think that the European Union and the Member States have demonstrated that they are mindful of the problems in this field and that they have concrete measures to propose in order to address them .
Mr President , I wish to begin by commenting on the necessity of conditionality .
I agree with a number of the contributions here .
I would also say that what we are facing here is not a tighter regime of conditionality than what Member States are actually pursuing in their bilateral development cooperation , as nowadays it is necessary to ensure that the use of resources corresponds to the goals that are set .
If we look at the substance , it is also the link to focusing better on social aspects in the HIPC countries - that is the key to what they have to do .
There is also evidence of this being taken up by the World Bank and the IMF , with those institutions coming on board in terms of giving priority to these aspects .
In a way , one could say that we are witnessing a move from the Washington consensus to the Copenhagen consensus .
The good part of this is that the IMF , with the poverty reduction strategy papers , is aligning itself with the goals the World Bank set a few years ago .
All this shows that the fight against poverty is at the centre of this effort .
So the combination of keeping the focus on perhaps narrowly defined HIPC countries and looking at the social consequences inside those countries is quite reasonable .
I turn to the matter of whether too few countries are part of the initiative .
It would be wrong to think that we could simply broaden its scope and welcome all developing countries to it .
There would be a number of adverse effects if we did so .
Firstly , the cost of the HIPC initiative would increase dramatically because the wealthier these countries are , or the less poor , the bigger the debt they have acquired .
So it must be borne in mind that this has to do with helping the poorest countries to determine those areas in which they can manage the remaining debt .
The idea was never to cancel all debt from the Third World countries because that was totally impracticable .
We are at a level of 0.22 % or 0.23 % for official development assistance , far from the 0.7 % target that in principle everybody has agreed to and which only a limited number of countries have actually reached .
The 350bn would not be a manageable figure , and also the value for the poorest countries would be watered down if it were shared amongst the less poor middle-income countries .
I would say to Mrs Schörling that almost all money for HIPC is found from the existing development budgets .
This is also the case for the billion of EDF money we are reallocating .
The nice thing about it is that the ACP countries accepted it , and this is a reallocation that moves money from the relatively better-off to the poorest countries in the ACP group .
So we are doing something very concrete by improving the poverty focus of our general activity in this reallocation .
That part of it is highly welcome .
The good thing is that we had the money so we were able to do something of real value as the only donor around , except for a few elite donors who are trying to shame the rest by moving forward and setting a good example - the usual gang .
Otherwise , the European Union is the only one able to do something of real value .
Finally , I welcome very much the way this debate has gone .
Parliament 's interest is an important asset for the European Union .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I have received five motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Situation in Zimbabwe
The next item is the statements by the Commission and the Council on the situation in Zimbabwe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the present pre-election campaign period in Zimbabwe continues to be marked by a climate of intimidation towards the opposition and a lack of respect for the law and for citizens ' rights , sometimes with tragic consequences .
The situation has been growing worse despite considerable international efforts , particularly by the European Union , to persuade President Mugabe to order the so-called ' veterans ' to leave the farmers ' properties that they have invaded immediately , so as to guarantee the safety of all citizens , and in particular foreign nationals resident in Zimbabwe .
The European Union is deeply concerned at the situation in Zimbabwe and the Council has published two Presidency statements , on 13 March and on 7 May , in which it expressed its grave concern at the situation .
All of the European Union ' s candidate countries , as well as the countries of the European Economic Area , have given their backing to these statements .
Various meetings have also been held with the government of Zimbabwe , at the Council ' s initiative .
As for the fundamental issue behind the current crisis - land - the European Union has continued to state its willingness to help Zimbabwe to implement a redistribution of farmland which is compatible with respect for property rights and , in particular , with the principles and conclusions of the Donors Conference on Land Reform and Resettlement in Zimbabwe , held in Harare in 1998 .
With regard to the forthcoming parliamentary elections in Zimbabwe , which have been set for 24 and 25 June , it is more vital than ever for them to be held in a free , fair and transparent way and within the deadline that has been set .
International observers should be present at these elections so that they can observe how the elections proceed and vouch for the final result of the vote and for the legitimacy that the elections need , and guarantee that the result is accepted by the international community .
To this end , the European Union is prepared to send a mission of election observers , but must , of course , warn the Zimbabwean authorities of the need for satisfactory guarantees that the observers will be safe and that they will have freedom of access to all relevant premises .
The Troika of European Union Heads of Mission in Harare will personally convey this message to the Zimbabwean authorities .
The Commission representatives will travel there on Friday 19 May to prepare for the mission of election observers in order to verify that the appropriate conditions have been met .
Next Monday , the General Affairs Council will consider the Commission representatives ' report on their visit .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me remind you that Zimbabwe is a partner of the European Union under the Lomé Convention , and that Zimbabwe must respect the principles enshrined in that convention , which form the basis of the European Union 's cooperation policy .
The European Union will continue to follow developments in that country in the light of these principles and will not fail to draw the necessary conclusions in the event that these principles are not adhered to .
The Commission is concerned about the evolving situation in Zimbabwe .
Zimbabwe , for decades a stable country , is now going through an increasingly severe economic and political crisis .
Parliamentary elections have now been announced by the government for 24 and 25 June .
This is a good sign .
The pursuance of illegal farm occupations , continued violence , death , injuring and intimidation of the opposition are being interpreted as part of the ruling party ' s electoral campaign .
Recent weeks have witnessed a series of international initiatives to facilitate the holding of free and fair elections .
The General Affairs Council of 10 April urged the government of Zimbabwe to create the conditions to hold free and fair elections .
The Commission continues to urge the government of Zimbabwe to hold elections , free of intimidation .
I had a very direct conversation with President Mugabe at the EU-Africa Summit .
I followed this up with a letter to him this week .
Following the EU Member States ' agreement in the Azores on 6 and 7 May , the Commission this week has a mission in Zimbabwe to look at necessary arrangements for an EU observer team and to coordinate with other election observation initiatives by SADC , the Commonwealth and the US .
The Commission has already provided EUR 220 000 for the training of 1 440 Zimbabwean election observers and has made available another EUR 6 million to support initiatives from civil society , including on good governance and democratisation .
The Commission electoral assessment mission now in Zimbabwe is discussing with Member States arrangements to deal with the logistical and operational aspects of this exercise , in particular , funding , freedom of movement and security of service .
EU observers are not being sent to legitimise an electoral process so far marked by intimidation and violence .
However , international observers could play an important role in deterring violence and building confidence , especially in the rural areas .
A preliminary EU proposal currently being developed would see the deployment of 150 observers , 100 of whom would be deployed in the first week of June to observe the electoral campaign and the rest to augment the EU ' s observation of the vote and the count .
Consultations with the government , coordination with other international observer missions , such as the Commonwealth , US and Norway , and with local observation initiatives are on-going .
Acknowledging the long experience of the European Parliament in election observation , we invite representatives to participate .
With respect to development cooperation , the Commission is maintaining its European Development Fund poverty alleviation aid directed through the social sectors of health , education and rural development and , in particular , to combat the HIV / Aids epidemic .
These poverty alleviation programmes facilitate the pursuance of dialogue with civil society and provide an appropriate political signal .
The international community , while condemning certain governmental actions , still supports the people of Zimbabwe .
Given the government ' s poor macroeconomic performance , the EU , like the IMF and the World Bank , has already frozen structural adjustment support .
On the question of the possible suspension of Zimbabwe 's privileges under the Lomé Convention , there could be grounds for suspension if the Commission considers , after consulting thoroughly with Member States , that this would not be counterproductive at this stage before the elections .
We fear it would be manipulated and interpreted as a collective reaction orchestrated by what are polemically called ' former colonial powers ' against Zimbabwe and its government .
In the worst scenario , if respect for the rule of law further deteriorates or if the elections were to be flawed , the Commission would have to consider whether Zimbabwe merits the privileges accorded under the Lomé Convention .
Suspension of these privileges would be economically crippling for Zimbabwe and would aggravate the crisis .
But so far I believe we have followed the right course .
Mr President , I suppose I can start on a note of slight optimism in that President Mugabe has now named the days for the election as 24 and 25 June .
But on the down side , he is increasing all the army and civil servants ' pay as a straight bribe .
I sincerely hope that Members of this Parliament will have the chance to act as observers , as these elections must be seen to have been free , fair and transparent in the atmosphere of fear that President Mugabe has created .
Only last month we passed a resolution in this Chamber condemning violence , calling for the return to full democracy and for free and fair elections to be held .
Some of these demands have now hopefully been implemented , but not before another white farmer had been murdered .
We all accept that there must be a redistribution of the best land in Zimbabwe , but this must be done through round table negotiations , and not with the violent acts we have seen over the last few months .
President Mugabe has now set up a committee of white farmers and Mugabe supporters , hopefully to reach a sensible agreement on land redistribution .
President Mugabe should never forget the economic damage that will be done to Zimbabwe ' s economy if land redistribution simply means the land goes back to subsistence farming in small blocks .
There are few people in the rabble we have seen invading farms who could afford the employees , the machinery , seeds and fertilisers to farm these units to give a potential export output .
I have seen some of the farms that were reclaimed some years ago by Mr Mugabe and most of the fertile productive land has reverted to bush and the buildings and farmhouses are now crumbling ruins .
What a waste in a country dependent on agricultural exports !
Over the last few years , there has been a move to persuade political leaders in African regions to carry more responsibility for conflict prevention .
It was , therefore , gratifying to hear Nelson Mandela criticising the policies of the Zimbabwe president who is destroying his country .
I am sorry that President Mbeki , his successor , who is probably the most powerful leader in Africa , has not in public condemned the violence in Zimbabwe .
We in Parliament are right to call on the Commission to review its development cooperation with Zimbabwe if transparent elections are not held or if the opposition wins and the violence continues .
The use of Article 366 should be considered .
The World Bank has now cut funding because of debt arrears and Zimbabwe , as a country , is in liquidation .
We can but live and hope that a peaceful conclusion can be reached in Zimbabwe as it is the people themselves who are suffering most in this unstable situation the country finds itself in .
I have to say at the outset that I am extremely encouraged by the fact that the Commission has worked out such a very clear strategy for dealing with these very critical weeks before the election takes place .
I particularly welcome the fact that we are training domestic observers - I think that is very important and will offset the likelihood of Mugabe criticising us for coming in in a neo-colonialist way to interfere in his election .
I also welcome the fact that we will be supporting civil society ' s objectives in these next few weeks .
I very much hope , Commissioner , that we will disseminate this kind of information in Zimbabwe because those people trying to mount an opposition campaign will be heartened by the kind of information that we have had from you today and I think that would be important .
One of the things I want to talk about briefly is the role of the state-controlled media in the run-up before the election .
The Commissioner did not mention this , but it would be sensible to do so because TV , radio and state-owned newspapers in Zimbabwe are acting now as if they were the agents of Zanu-PF .
All reporting of opposition parties is negative , with the MDC a particular target .
I would really like to know what we can do from the European Union to try to ensure that the opposition groups - and there are 26 parties standing in the election - have some access to the media .
State-controlled media , Commissioner , is refusing to take paid advertising even from the main NGOs who are just working to support the electoral process and democracy in Zimbabwe , or from any opposition parties .
Only three independent newspapers are carrying any kind of adverts from parties other than Zanu-PF so that only the claims of the government are being read or seen by the people and that has to be a contradiction if we are talking about providing democracy .
The fact is that the independent press does not have the print capacity to deal with demand .
People in Zimbabwe are afraid .
The deaths and injuries in the rural areas and increasingly in the towns are deeply worrying .
Zanu-PF has the government resources , and the MDC supporters are too afraid to donate money .
I even read in the British press that Kabila and Qadhafi are giving money now to Mugabe ' s campaign , which is a bit frightening .
It is deeply worrying that the opposition are fighting their campaign on Zanu-PF grounds .
They have no control over the electoral roll , they have no control over the polling stations that will be run by government civil servants .
This is wrong because the role of these government civil servants in the last referendum was very dubious indeed .
The people understand that and are aware of it .
There is evidence also of this Fifth Brigade being involved in pre-election crackdowns .
The Fifth Brigade were responsible for the brutality that Mugabe perpetuated in Matabeleland in the 80s .
That also is something that worries me and I would like the EU to look into it .
Finally , President , let us be sure that we work as a European Union to create the conditions which will allow the people of Zimbabwe to express their choices in this election in June and express their choices in secret and without fear .
Mr President , why have so many African freedom fighters who we admired so much ended up as power-crazed potentates ?
Why have so few former colonies turned into constitutional states ?
Where anarchy and lawlessness rule , the law of the most brutal party applies .
In Zimbabwe , this takes the form of Mr Mugabe .
Where this country used to be a model for the Third World of how things should be done , it has now degenerated into its own opposite .
It is ruled by a dictator who deems his own power and privileges more important than the lack of stability of his country and the suffering of his own people .
Land reform is necessary , of course .
The possession of land in Zimbabwe still reflects the old colonial relations and this will , needless to say , cause tension .
But for years , Mr Mugabe himself had the opportunity to carry out this land reform , even with foreign help .
The question is therefore : what mala fide reasons are behind Mr Mugabe ' s doing nothing initially and then , just before the elections , getting his cronies to cause havoc in the farms of the white people ?
According to the Zimbabwean election monitors , the incessant violence renders free and fair elections impossible .
As long as this is the case , the election date has to be postponed .
A situation whereby Mr Mugabe legitimises his position through violence and intimidation must be avoided at all costs .
It would be a positive step if MEPs acted as observers during these elections and included Mugabe ' s pre-electoral machinery in their assessment .
If the elections are not conducted fairly , European aid will need to be postponed .
But the cooperation according to Lomé cannot continue if Mugabe also renders elections impossible .
A further deterioration of the situation in Zimbabwe could have far-reaching effects on the African continent in general , and on South Africa in particular .
The Zimbabwean population deserves a far better government than it has at the moment .
It is high time that the European Union spoke very clear language .
Our patience with African leaders whose heroic deeds only take the form of abuse of power is running out .
Mr President , I too would like to start by welcoming the Commission ' s strategy for the run-up to the election that has just been set out by the Commissioner and , in particular , the training of the Zimbabwean election monitors .
The black people of Zimbabwe are still suffering under the legacy of colonialism .
Cecil Rhodes , one of Britain 's most successful colonists , said the purpose of colonialism was : " To find new lands in which we can easily obtain raw materials and at the same time exploit the cheap labour that is available from the natives of the colonies " .
The legacy of this barbarically successful strategy can be seen in the chaos that is happening in Zimbabwe today .
Today , just 4 000 white farmers still own over 70 % of the arable land while more than seven million black Zimbabweans scratch a living from overcrowded communal areas .
We condemn the violence but we also see that black Zimbabweans have a compelling case .
This makes President Mugabe ' s refusal to proceed with the lawful land redistribution programme even more deplorable .
It is a fearsomely difficult problem when Mugabe will not negotiate .
But I call on the UK Government to do all they can to persuade Zimbabwe to set up an independent arbitration board fully representative of the landless people and , once it is set up , perhaps with the assistance of the Commonwealth , to resume financial aid as soon as possible .
The British Government must recognise the moral debt owed for crimes of slavery and colonialism and continue to do all in its power to support a peaceful and progressive settlement to the land issues in Zimbabwe .
Mr President , the story of Zimbabwe is one of hope turning to despair - hope that in 1980 Zimbabwe could have realised its full potential and become a leading country in Africa ; despair now because the father of the nation has reduced his creation from being one of the richest and most educated of African countries to being one of the poorest .
It is a truly remarkable achievement and a case study of mismanagement in recent history .
I am sure Mr Mugabe ' s place in history books is now secured for all the wrong reasons .
Today the country is suffering from 50 % unemployment and 60 % inflation ; he is spending USD 1 million a day on a foreign adventure in the Congo ; the foreign exchange reserves have gone and the World Bank has suspended funding on projects .
I was astonished to hear the speech just given by my colleague from the Greens .
Yet out of despair comes resolution , determination and hope .
The country is one of the most educated in Africa and the European Union should be proud of its role in helping to set up that educational support structure in the past 20 years .
It has a functioning civic institution and culture .
Elections are due and voter rolls are being prepared but those voter rolls must be verified before the election .
The opposition parties want more transparency .
Twenty people have been killed and more than 1 200 farms illegally occupied .
Mr Mugabe has lost control of the country , presiding over lawlessness and corruption .
On 24 June elections are going to be held .
Yesterday , the Commonwealth Secretary-General said that it is still possible to have free elections .
The future of the country lies with the young people of Zimbabwe .
They demand the elections .
They must be given a chance .
It is their future .
One thing we must do is to change the culture that is prevalent in Africa today that the winner takes all .
We must stop this winner-takes-all culture that every African country has , and I mean every country .
We must be seen to have free and fair elections and to demonstrate that they have been fair and free .
Mr President , the view shared by virtually all speakers is that the only ray of hope at the moment in Zimbabwe ' s anarchy is the fact that elections will be held soon .
I agree with all speakers who said that we need to ensure that those elections are held as fairly as possible , which will not be easy .
I found the words of Commissioner Nielson encouraging when he said that , as early as the beginning of July , observers will be sent to Zimbabwe .
I think that this is vital because those who are not kindly disposed towards the Mugabe regime , those in opposition , will clearly need protection .
I would therefore like to back up the Commission in this opinion .
Observers need to be sent to Zimbabwe at the earliest opportunity , today if possible , rather than tomorrow .
Another worrying development is the reaction of the neighbouring countries .
From Europe , we have fought for years to establish racial equality , equal opportunities , democracy , etc. in Southern Africa .
At the moment , there is a deadly silence in the neighbouring countries which , in my opinion , is a very ominous development .
I therefore hold the view that , if the elections in Zimbabwe were not fair , for whatever reason , the Commission should continue with the course it set a moment ago .
If there are clear signs of large-scale fraud and Mugabe remains in power illegally , then , according to the provisions of the Lomé Convention , aid must be halted .
If the Commission were not to do this , the illegal dispossessions of land could spread to the rest of Southern Africa and this would be a disaster , not only for the area concerned , but also for the rest of Africa .
We must avoid this at all costs .
Mr President , I want to address the President of free Zimbabwe , Robert Mugabe , personally , together with his government and socialist-oriented party , Zanu-PF .
Hatred , President Mugabe , is not something upon which a society can be built .
Threats can never create confidence and social harmony .
Lawlessness can never create security and human solidarity .
Violence and murder can never be reconciled with the Christian view of human beings which I know that you , President Mugabe , have grown up with and embraced .
The churches of Zimbabwe , the Lutheran World Federation and the World Council of Churches appeal to your conscience .
My home country of Sweden has supported Zimbabwe very persistently and in very concrete ways , both in developing its economy and in its struggle to be a free and democratic country founded upon the equal , unique and inviolable value of human life , irrespective of the colour of a person ' s skin .
Since independence in 1980 , Sweden has provided a total of SEK 2 billion in aid , corresponding to USD 220 million .
Twenty years ago , the Church of Sweden ' s youth movement , which I myself was active in , embarked upon a special venture which we called ' Be a Friend of Zimbabwe ' .
Enthusiastic young people from our two countries met .
We believed in you , President Mugabe , and in your country ' s future because you wanted to uphold the Christian view of human beings in Zimbabwe .
We want to believe in you again , even though a lot of bad things have happened .
Put away hatred .
Do it for the sake of your own reputation , both now and in the future .
Do it for the sake of Zimbabwe ' s citizens , and do it for the sake of Africa .
First in answer to Mrs Kinnock - we are indeed in close contact with civil society .
Civil society represents a hope of achieving a civilised society .
But there is some way to go right now .
We are also in direct contact with the opposition .
We make a point of getting in contact with all players in a very visible and clear way .
We are urging the Mugabe government to accept that pluralism must be there to stay , and this is also the point of sending in the observers .
I hope we can solve the problems of funding of the observer mission .
I have to tell Parliament that this once again demonstrates the inadequacy of our system .
We cannot just push a button somewhere in our system and the funds appear .
It is highly complicated to find the money for this in time .
This is the kind of system we have .
Yesterday ' s discussion about the external relations reform is even today relevant .
At least we have excellent coordination on the ground in Zimbabwe with the Member States , which is very helpful .
Let me finally explain to you what we are doing on the ground even in this situation .
We are deciding on a EUR 19 million grant for very targeted poverty alleviation in Zimbabwe via a microproject scheme , part of which will be used to support resettlement of the poorest people on legally acquired land .
This will demonstrate in practice how land should be redistributed - in marked contrast to what is going on in Zimbabwe right now .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I have received six motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0220 / 2000 ) . We will examine questions to the Council .
I would like to remind you that we are 20 minutes behind schedule .
It is not possible to extend work beyond 7.00 p.m. because the representative of the Council has an official meeting at 7.05 p.m. with the Parliamentary contact group to discuss the statute of the MEPs .
That is very important work , it is already scheduled and we must work as quickly as possible so that the maximum number of questions can be answered .
The rest will be replied to in writing .
We will begin Question Time .
Question No 1 by ( H-0350 / 00 ) :
Subject : Undesirable persons in Turkey The Turkish newspaper ' Sabah ' has published a list of 56 persons considered undesirable in Turkey .
The list includes numerous political representatives from several European Union countries ( Denmark , Italy , Greece , Sweden and Spain ) and also from non-Member States , together with a large number of journalists , clergymen , members of humanitarian organisations etc .
Despite the uproar caused by this list , the Turkish Government has not denied its existence .
As maintaining a list of undesirable persons constitutes an unacceptable and undemocratic act on the part of the Turkish Government , does the Council intend to look into the issue and to intervene with the Turkish Government at once to ask for the list to be scrapped ?
Mr President , I shall try to answer the questions as briefly as possible , although the brevity of my answers does not reflect the Council ' s genuine desire to give answers to this House that are as comprehensive as possible .
It is indeed true that information has appeared in a Turkish newspaper about a list of people considered to be undesirable in Turkey .
This issue was specifically raised by the Presidency at the Association Council meeting between the European Union and Turkey on 11 April 2000 .
I would like to say that the Turkish Foreign Minister , Mr Schem , has stated officially that no such list exists , which is why , in the light of an official statement like this , we feel that we should not continue to insist on this point .
If , by any chance , the Turkish authorities were to take any action that might suggest a contradiction of what the Turkish Foreign Minister has told us , the Council would , of course , act accordingly .
- ( EL ) I should like to thank the President-in-Office , both because the question was raised and for his reply .
I hope that this is in fact the case .
I should like to use the opportunity which I have to ask a second supplementary question and the occasion of the presence here of the husband and son of Leila Zana , who was awarded the European Parliament ' s Sakharov prize , to ask the minister the following question : does he not think that before assuming the Portuguese Presidency , he should have raised the matter of the release of a lady member of parliament honoured by our very own House with the Sakharov prize for her fight for human rights now that Turkey wishes to draw closer to , and integrate into , the European Union ?
Should the Council and the presidency not have made a move to help Leila Zana ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the decisions of the Helsinki European Council led to Turkey being considered as a candidate for accession to the European Union .
It was agreed that , following this decision , an accession strategy would be established , which naturally includes strict monitoring of what the European Union regards as essential reforms . This relates in particular to the area of human rights , which , in the light of the Copenhagen criteria , are essential for the accession of any country to the European Union .
The Council will monitor all of these issues and will not fail , whenever necessary , to convey any information to this House which is relevant to progress with this accession strategy and , in particular , its views on Turkey ' s compliance with requirements for the future opening of accession negotiations by the European Union .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I attend Question Time nearly every time and every time the first question or two are from our colleagues in the Greek Communists and , in particular , Mr Alavanos .
You will notice that the date on this question is 30 March 2000 , which was two weeks before the last part-session .
Therefore , in my view , it should not have been number one on the list but should have been on the last part-session ' s list of questions .
There seems to be some system whereby Mr Alavanos and his colleagues always get the first and second questions , and they always attack Turkey .
I should like you to investigate why this should be .
Mr Purvis , I believe that we should not enter into any judgement of intentions .
I would like to point out - although you already know - that the President , together with her office , decides on the order of questions .
I do not know whether Mr Alavanos has so much influence with the Presidency of Parliament .
What I can tell you is that it is not the Greek Communist Party but Synaspismos .
That I do know about .
However , we shall continue with our agenda .
I will take good note of your question .
Question No 2 by ( H-0361 / 00 ) :
Subject : Dispute between Armenia and Turkey On 11 December 1999 the Council accepted Turkey ' s application for accession to the European Union .
Paragraph 3 of Parliament ' s resolution of 18 June 1987 ' Calls on the Council to obtain from the present Turkish Government an acknowledgement of the genocide perpetrated against the Armenians in 1915-1917 and to promote the establishment of a dialogue between Turkey and the representatives of the Armenians ' .
Turkey has not acknowledged the genocide in question and is still imposing its economic blockade on Armenia .
What action has the Council taken to encourage the development of political relations between Armenia and Turkey ?
Is the Council considering lifting the embargo as one of the indispensable conditions for Turkey ' s accession to the European Union ?
Mr President , I should also like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his answer .
I must , however , regretfully inform him that his answer was still particularly vague , as my question referred to a European Parliament resolution adopted in 1987 , in which , effectively , we officially recognised events such as the genocide of the Armenians between 1915 and 1917 .
We do not , however , know today what measures have been taken by successive Councils in order to attempt to establish relations between both these countries , given that today Turkey is still imposing an economic blockade on Armenia .
My question is therefore as follows : in the context of negotiations with a view to Turkey ' s accession to the European Union , has the issue of this blockade been raised , and could lifting this blockade be counted a precondition to Turkey ' s accession ?
The honourable Member has asked two questions .
The first concerns the 1987 resolution on acknowledging the genocide in 1915-1917 and the second question basically concerns political relations between Armenia and Turkey .
With regard to the first question , these issues are obviously open to political interpretation , although they are based on a historical assumption which we all acknowledge and which is extremely important , but which is not a precondition for reopening dialogue with Turkey .
With regard to relations between Armenia and Turkey , which we hope will be positive in future , all that the European Union has done is to try to ensure that Turkey complies with the European Union ' s normal framework of external relations . This framework includes good relations with Armenia , especially on trade matters .
These good relations and the whole framework for cooperation on which they are based are part of the acquis communautaire that Turkey must accept .
Nevertheless , at international level , we cannot force countries to maintain good relations with one another , as these cannot be imposed by decree . They must result from a political decision .
Turkey must practically demonstrate that no matter how it views the situation in Armenia , if it wishes to open negotiations with the European Union and if it wishes to join the European Union , it will , of course , have to respect the whole framework of good relations that the European Union enjoys with Armenia .
This has , until now , been a purely bilateral issue and the European Union cannot , therefore , intervene in it .
Question No 3 by ( H-0365 / 00 ) :
Subject : EU-Jordan Association Agreement Would the Council please list those Member States which have still to ratify the EU-Jordan Association Agreement and advise what level of priority it is giving to encouraging them to speed up the process ?
Mr President , in reply to this question , I think that in terms of day-to-day relations between the Council and the European Parliament , it would be useful if we could make full use of the facilities that the transparency process for Council information provides for all citizens , including Members of the European Parliament .
That is why I would like to suggest that those honourable Members who are interested in issues such as this should use the Council web page , which is updated daily , to ascertain the dates of signing and the position on ratification , adoption and entry into force of all agreements , and specifically the Mediterranean agreements such as the agreement with Jordan to which the honourable Member ' s question refers .
On this point , the latest information I have is that eight countries have still not ratified the EU-Jordan Association Agreement .
As you will be aware , this is a matter for national parliaments , and they have the final say , as these are mixed agreements , in which there is a Community dimension and a national dimension .
It is obvious that we cannot interfere in the decisions of national parliaments .
Nevertheless , we can and we must make representations to the governments of these countries , and I must say that the Portuguese Presidency intends , at the next informal meeting of Foreign Ministers on the Euro-Mediterranean process , to highlight the importance of making the parliaments of these countries aware of the need to ratify this agreement in particular , as well as other agreements which still remain to be ratified .
I would , however , like to mention an issue that is often overlooked .
This is that given that there is a Community dimension to these agreements , and that this dimension concerns trade , the entry into force of these agreements would normally be preceded by a Commission decision . And the Commission has , in fact , as it has done with regard to other Euro-Mediterranean agreements , already brought into force unilateral measures for dismantling customs tariffs , which will provide products from Jordan with easy and swift access to the Community market .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying how delighted I am that the presidency is prepared to put some pressure on the governments which , in turn , I hope will put pressure on their parliaments to proceed with ratification .
It is quite shaming that after well over six months there are eight Member States still to ratify .
The Jordanians are particularly sensitive to the slow pace of progress .
Commissioner Patten is determined to reinvigorate the whole Barcelona process and the European-Mediterranean relationship .
I hope that the Council will follow that lead and ensure that this is transmitted down through the governments to the Member State parliaments .
Could he give me some assurance that the Council gives Mr Patten its full support in what he is trying to do in the Mediterranean area ?
Mr President , with regard to the latter part of Mr Purvis ' s question , actions in the Mediterranean area have been one of the Portuguese Presidency ' s priorities .
The Portuguese Presidency also intends to continue the very thorough work that has been done to establish the joint strategy for the Mediterranean , and it has developed various initiatives in this area .
Specifically , with regard to the agreement with Jordan , even though we acknowledge and regret the fact that the agreement is not yet in force , previous experience has shown that these agreements take around three years to be ratified .
The most rapidly ratified agreement was the agreement with Tunisia , which was signed in July 1995 , and which came into force in March 1998 ; it therefore took just under three years .
Our experience with all the other agreements is that they took around three years and I think that the pace of the agreement with Jordan is more or less standard .
This depends to a large extent on national parliaments . Nevertheless , the Portuguese Presidency will certainly make the various governments aware of this issue .
As the author is not present , Question No 4 lapses .
Question No 5 by ( H-0370 / 00 ) :
Subject : Culture and the WTO The Portuguese Presidency has emphasised the role of culture in the European project and has linked it , in particular , to the need to clarify the European strategy for the future WTO Round .
Will the Council now make a statement on the issue ?
Mr President , I gather that this question refers to the issue of culture within the WTO .
As you will be aware , when the Council ' s mandate for the Seattle Summit was being prepared , many Member States were particularly careful to stress cultural aspects and , above all , the European Union ' s need to adopt a very firm position in these negotiations on protecting the specific nature of culture .
I would therefore remind you that in the conclusions of the Council meeting on 26 October on the preparation of the Seattle Ministerial Conference , the idea was expressed that during the forthcoming WTO negotiations , the Union would try to ensure , as it did in the Uruguay Round , that the Member States which comprise the Community would be able to preserve their cultural diversity by maintaining their own cultural and audiovisual policies .
Honourable Members will be as aware as I am of the fate that befell the launch of the new round of WTO negotiations in Seattle , which has , of course , led to delays in addressing issues of this kind .
Nevertheless , it is worth noting that within the specific framework of the GATT agreement , that is , of the General Agreement on Trade in Services , it was specified that negotiations on the so-called built-in agenda would have to begin on 1 January 2000 .
These negotiations have begun , but there has been no substantial change of position so far - which is something of an understatement - with regard to progress on these issues , given that this whole process is obviously linked to the start of the overall negotiating process .
I can also tell you that the Council believes that there is no way that a satisfactory start can be made to the process this year .
I wish to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
The reason for asking the question is that we have in our own ideologies many different models at a European Union level which are unique to the European Union as a whole : many times we speak of the European model of agriculture or the European social model , and so on .
In particular , with regard to things like audiovisual , we had a discussion today in Parliament on the Randzio-Plath report on transparency and financial dealings between undertakings and state aid .
There is a huge threat now to cultural diversity within the European Union because of the import of programmes from America and globalisation even of food chains like McDonalds .
That is constantly undermining what is unique not only about Europe as a continent but also about the individual Member States .
I hope that you and your colleagues will be vigilant in ensuring that we have the opportunity to maintain that diversity , as it adds to what essentially the core of Europe is all about .
I would like to offer Mr Crowley certain assurances .
We will continue to address the issue of preserving national identity and the need to maintain a set of instruments which , without in any way distorting the competition rules , can , in some way , ensure that the core values of European identity will be preserved . This applies both to the overall position adopted by the Council , which will , of course , remain the focal point of the negotiations conducted by the Commission on behalf of the Union during the next round , and also at national level .
The position I have described reflects Portugal ' s view of this matter , and I believe that my country is not alone in its approach to this issue .
Mr President , the WTO deals primarily with issues pertaining to the opening up of markets . For example , there is a discussion on-going at the moment about China , and whether our European manufacturers are to have access to the textile market as well .
It is a market worth billions and could create many new jobs here in Europe , particularly when one considers that the only possession many Chinese have to their name is a pair of trousers .
The cultural question I would most like to hear answered though , is this : how are we proposing to handle the language issue in future ?
France pursues a very independent policy where the French language is concerned .
Do you see any evidence of similar tendencies on the part of the Germans , Spanish or Portuguese ?
Are we going to take an even-handed approach in this respect or will we form an assessment on a country-by-country basis , taking into account the respective size of population ?
I would be very happy to answer the honourable Member if I had any idea at the moment of how the debate on this issue will proceed .
I nevertheless believe that the Council intends to highlight these different national approaches , which reflect the very diverse nature of the European Union .
And as regards my own country at least , there is considerable concern that these cultural issues , and specifically the language dimension , should be the very top priority in the discussions that the European Union will be holding with its WTO partners .
As the authors are not present , Question Nos 6 and 7 lapse .
Question No 8 by ( H-0376 / 00 ) :
Subject : EU agriculture budget paying for the UN mission in Kosovo Will the EU use appropriations from the agriculture budget to pay for the UN mission to Kosovo ?
Mr President , with regard to the previous questions , I think that when it comes to agriculture , the actions of the Portuguese Presidency are sufficiently eloquent to have answered the honourable Member ' s question - even in his absence .
Turning to the question about financing our policy in Kosovo through the agricultural budget , I must make it absolutely clear that the United Nations mission in Kosovo cannot possibly be financed from agricultural budget headings , since there is no appropriate legal basis for this .
The current financial regulations do not allow for appropriations to be transferred between two headings in the financial perspectives .
This does not necessarily mean that there is no intention , as specifically announced by the Commission , to propose an amendment to the 2000-2006 financial perspectives which , in the Commission ' s view , would not fundamentally affect CAP appropriations .
The Council is currently studying this issue , which is highly controversial .
We know that in this House , too , a majority is against a review of the financial perspectives which would lead to a reduction in the amount available for the common agricultural policy .
Nevertheless , I repeat that the Commission has stated that there is absolutely no danger of direct aid to farmers being reduced and that this is simply a question of taking advantage of savings essentially flowing from changes in the euro / dollar exchange rate . These savings will be extrapolated over the next two years .
Furthermore , the Commission considers that the post-2002 review of the CAP , which was , as you know , agreed in the Berlin European Council conclusions , will provide a basis for further savings .
But as I have said , the Council ' s position on this issue is , in political terms , to oppose a review of the financial perspectives .
The Council considers that a very thorough assessment must be carried out of the requirements of the Balkans and of the real ability of the people there to absorb these funds , particularly bearing in mind and focusing very closely on the role of the European Union as one of the international funding agencies in this area . This request has already been made to the Commission and to the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
We have therefore asked the Commission to provide a schedule showing the indicative distribution of all the contributions that have been pledged , divided into those components which are donations and those which are loans .
The Council feels that it is only on the basis of this kind of information that an accurate assessment of the Commission ' s proposals can be made .
It is precisely for this reason that the idea of a review of the financial perspectives is not being considered at present .
What the President-in-Office of the Council has just said completely contradicts what the Commissioner said yesterday , the day before yesterday and on previous occasions in this House .
The Council ' s view is correct : payments to farmers are at stake .
It is truly outrageous that aid is not paid for nuts - which means they cannot continue to be grown - or that farmers are not being given what they are asking for : a reduction in diesel oil prices .
Nevertheless , what the Commission does is take funds intended for agriculture , and which have already been approved under Agenda 2000 , at the Berlin Summit , as if there were a surplus , and divert them to foreign policy .
Although I am in favour of aid to Kosovo , I am not in favour - in fact I consider it an outrage - of taking money intended for agriculture , approved under Agenda 2000 - since if we do this it shows that it has been nothing but a smokescreen - and dedicating it to foreign policy .
My question is as follows : what do we do when the Council says something diametrically opposed to what the Commission says ?
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , what do we do in this event ?
If Parliament feels that there is a contradiction , it can address this contradiction by comparing it with reality , and the reality is that , contrary to what the honourable Member has just said , nowhere in my speech did I say that direct aid would suffer as a result of this redeployment of appropriations .
I must make it clear that the Commission has simply said that it would use available funds and that savings would be made in the common agricultural policy .
That is all .
This does not mean that the Commission may not present proposals for the redeployment of appropriations , but rather that - as the Commission itself has continued to say - this will not affect direct aid to farmers either .
- ( EL ) Mr President , frankly the President-in-Office leaves me speechless .
First he assures us that no part of the CAP budget will be used for Kosovo or for exercising the European Union ' s foreign policy and then he says that , in any case , the Commission has said - and rightly so - that any sums not taken up will be shared out .
In other words , part of the CAP budget will be redistributed .
We insist on knowing if the Council really believes that part of the agricultural budget , which has undergone swathing cutbacks for 2000 , can be used for purposes which have absolutely nothing to do with the purposes for which the budget was approved .
Apart from our opposition to the entire policy being exercised by the European Union in Kosovo , the issue at stake is this : we want a commitment from the Council that not one single euro from the agricultural budget will be channelled elsewhere .
Our farmers are already being squeezed dry , their needs are tremendous , as we see on a daily basis , and it would be unacceptable to take money away from their already reduced budget .
Mr Korakas , I should like to begin by explaining that most of the appropriations allocated under the ACP framework have been granted through the European Development Fund and are extra-Community budget contributions . They come from the specific EDF budget , which is why I say that it would be rather difficult to transfer EDF appropriations to aid for Kosovo , because they are not part of the Community budget .
Furthermore , I would like to make one point quite clear : I explained that , at the moment , appropriations allocated to aid for Kosovo are unused CAP appropriations .
I repeat : they are unused CAP appropriations .
I would also like to say that , with regard to the Commission ' s proposal , I stated quite clearly that currently there is not a universally positive attitude to changing the 2000-2006 financial perspectives in the Council .
The Council has taken the view that the internal balance of the financial perspectives should not be changed during this phase .
It is , however , also obvious that the Berlin European Council conclusions are relevant here , as they show that the financial perspectives for the period 2000-2006 provide for a mid-term review , specifically with regard to the common agricultural policy .
Perhaps it would be worthwhile for honourable Members to consider whether the common agricultural policy will ultimately be compatible with the outcome of the next WTO round .
The 2000-2006 financial perspectives also provide for a review , which will , for the first time in fact , be dealt with by a qualified majority , and I would also ask the House to bear this point in mind .
As the author is not present , Question No 9 lapses .
Question No 10 by ( H-0381 / 00 ) :
Subject : Financial assistance to European-level parties Replying to my oral question H-0268 / 00 in Parliament on 12 April 2000 , the Commission took the view that :
' The present Article 191 of the Treaty establishing the EC does not constitute a legal basis for funding European political parties .
The article refers to the importance of political parties at European level .
It does not , however , empower any of the institutions to enter into expenditure commitments to support European political parties , nor does it provide for a procedure for approving any measure to facilitate the giving of such an expenditure commitment .
The Commission therefore considers that in the interests of legal certainty it would be best to incorporate an appropriate legal basis for such expenditure in the Treaty establishing the EC .
This matter should be considered at the Intergovernmental Conference . '
Does the Council take the same view with regard to the legal basis for this ?
Will the matter be placed on the agenda for the IGC ?
Mr President , as the honourable Member ' s question states , it is true that Article 191 of the Treaty does not constitute a legal basis for the funding of European political parties .
This issue was studied at the Intergovernmental Conference that established the Treaty of Amsterdam , and it was considered at the time - and I say this as someone who was there representing the Portuguese Government - that there was not a majority , let alone unanimity , among the Member States in favour of creating a specific legal basis in this area .
As regards the Intergovernmental Conference , and particularly bearing in mind the speech made by the President of the European Parliament , Mrs Fontaine , at the IGC ministerial meeting on 10 April , this is an issue that the IGC will consider again .
I myself , as Chair of the preparatory group , intend to have this issue put on the IGC agenda once again by the end of the Portuguese Presidency .
In any event , I think that , at the moment , as there is no legal basis , all we can do is try to discover , through the various Member States participating in the IGC , whether or not there is a will to work towards funding for European political parties .
Mr President , I agree with Mr Seppänen on the legal basis being a primary concern , i.e. it must be in place before expenditure for this kind of support is entered into .
After this , the amount , type and form of support will surely be for Parliament and the Council to decide .
In this context , I would like to ask what kind of plans , if any , the Council has regarding these practical arrangements .
The report on Parliament ' s financial administration , in which all political groups were criticised for having channelled parliamentary appropriations into European political parties also , did not take into account the fact , for example , that the office of the Party of European Socialists is situated within the European Parliament buildings , whereas my own group , the PPE , received a great deal of criticism despite the fact that our Party office is situated away from the European Parliament ' s services .
I would therefore like to know whether any plans are afoot as to what might be incorporated in this support , which was jointly decided upon by Parliament and the Council , and what issues will be taken into consideration .
I would like to tell the President-in-Office of the Council and the honourable Members that we are discussing these issues within Parliament .
The question concerns the legal basis and the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is one of Parliament ' s duties .
As the author is not present , Question No 11 lapses .
As the author is unwell , Question No 12 by Mr Bowis will be replied to in writing .

Question No 13 by ( H-0389 / 00 ) :
Subject : Turkish incursion into Iraq What view does the Council take of the new large-scale incursion into Iraq by a heavily armed section of the Turkish army ?
, Council . ( PT ) We all know that the current situation in northern Iraq and , in particular , the fact that Baghdad is not sufficiently in control of the northern part of the country , are causing a political and even a military vacuum , which have led to Turkey taking direct action .
This results , de facto , from the fundamentally ambiguous situation in that area .
It is obvious that the European Union must oppose any actions that could involve the violation of other states ' borders .
But I cannot comment on this issue , except to say that we will remain concerned about the territorial integrity of Iraq and that we believe that anything that could cause this territorial integrity to be violated is undesirable .
- ( EL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , thank you for your reply .
It was most interesting . You say that the situation is unclear and that there is a political and military vacuum .
In other words , that Iraq does not control its northern area . Now , forgive me Mr President-in-Office , but Iraq does not control its northern area because we do not let it and perhaps we are right not to .
But even if we do not let Iraq control its northern area , that does not mean that we have to put up with its being controlled by someone else .
What I am hearing is quite absurd .
I imagine that you are unable to defend whoever it is who takes the decisions there .
Except that , of course , they include members of the European Union .
Perhaps they could inform you of what is happening in the area and tell you , for example , why they are allowing other people to go into and take control of the northern area of Iraq , which they do not allow Iraq to control , i.e. let us not beat about the bush - why are they allowing military invasion ?
I think that this situation is scandalous in every sense of the word from an international and political point of view and I wonder how you tolerate it .
I would just like to say that nothing I have said implies that the European Union is at all complacent about actions that Turkish troops may be involved in beyond Turkey ' s borders .
Question No 14 by ( H-0390 / 00 ) :
Subject : European Charter for small companies In the context of creating a business environment conducive to entrepreneurship and innovation , the European Council has called for the drawing up of a European Charter for small companies .
Can the Council say that , in such a charter , it would support due recognition being given to the very specific nature of the fisheries sector , where such factors as seasonality need to be considered ?
Mr President , I want to thank the President-in-Office for his reply and I am pleased that work is under way and in fact , near finalisation .
Hopefully , it will not be too long before we have details of the proposals .
I am also pleased that the President-in-Office has recognised that the engine of growth in the economy are the SMEs providing 70 % of the jobs .
Therefore , it is blindingly obvious that SMEs will play an important role if we are to resolve the very high unemployment problems that we have generally in the Union and specifically in various regions of the Union .
I did ask a specific question about fisheries .
Of course , fisheries by their very nature create much-needed jobs in coastal regions of the Union .
Fisheries , unlike any other industry , depend so much on seasonality and weather factors .
Could the President confirm that the study which has been carried out would , even at this late stage , look at fisheries in isolation rather than look at fisheries in the global sense ?
Mr Gallagher , I am sorry that I did not specifically mention your point about fisheries in my answer .
Nevertheless , in line with the understanding that there has been about addressing this issue on the part of both the Commission and the Council - and this issue will , for example , be considered by the Industry Council tomorrow - we acknowledge the very specific nature of the fisheries sector and we share your concern about the importance of small- and medium-sized enterprises operating in this sector .
This Charter is , however , a broad policy document and is generically aimed at all small- and medium-sized enterprises .
It is not a document that lists measures to be adopted in each sector and assigns priorities to them .
The Charter is designed to create a universal regulatory framework for small- and medium-sized enterprises as defined at European level , and also to establish stages for implementing these measures .
There is no provision for defining sectoral measures that could be implemented at EU level once the Charter is approved , and this could only be done in a more technical document relating to the actual implementation of the Charter .
When I speak to small- and medium-sized enterprises , they are certainly pleased about the mood music that is coming out of the Council , but frankly they are a little sceptical as to whether the Charter will do anything constructive for them .
They think it is just another piece of paper saying how wonderful they are .
Can the President-in-Office tell us if this Charter will envisage new Community instruments being created to help small- and medium-sized enterprises . For example , funds to help them with training , education , adaptation of premises or the use of new technology .
If so , can he also indicate that they will be as free as possible from bureaucracy because the other complaint one gets from small- and medium-sized enterprises is that the funds which already exist at European level are almost unobtainable because of the hoops that they have to jump through in order to obtain them .
I recognise that small- and medium-sized enterprises probably lost patience a long time ago with the lack of concrete measures aimed specifically at them .
Nevertheless , although we are aware of the situation , we would ask them to be patient for another three weeks , until they actually see the draft Charter which will be presented at the European Council .
In fact , the draft version of this Charter will be considered by the Industry Council tomorrow and the Charter will be published in three weeks .
Furthermore , I think that , like the Lisbon Special Summit conclusions , which Mr Gallagher will surely acknowledge go somewhat beyond traditional , merely speculative rhetoric , the Charter must provide concrete and timetabled measures , with firm objectives .
With regard to the Charter ' s real potential , let us wait for it to be published and then we will , of course , be willing to listen to criticism from small- and medium-sized enterprises and in particular from the European organisations that coordinate and represent them .
We will be willing to consider all the opinions of small- and medium-sized enterprises .
As they deal with the same subject , Question Nos 15 and 16 will be taken together .
Question No 15 by ( H-0391 / 00 ) :
Subject : Specific directive to combat discrimination against the disabled Pursuant to Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which provides for action to combat discrimination , the Commission has recently presented a package of measures which include three directives .
However , although disability is included as one of the forms of discrimination which Article 13 is intended to combat , the package of measures does not include a specific directive designed to counter discrimination based on disability .
What view does the Council take regarding the possibility of drawing up a specific directive to combat discrimination on the grounds of disability ?
Should it take a favourable view , when would it expect to present an appropriate initiative ?
Question No 16 by ( H-0396 / 00 ) :
Subject : Combating discrimination At the start of the twenty-first century , which signals a new departure by European society in the direction of greater democracy , cohesion and recognition of the contributions of all citizens , the unacceptable phenomena of racism and social exclusion can be observed .
In Greece , the exclusion of physically disabled and paraplegic citizens from two competitions is causing a social and political problem . One competition is for the employment of officials in state banks and the other is for the employment of school teachers ( primary and secondary ) in state education , and the exclusion is because the new Code for Public Employees includes the term ' able-bodied ' .
The Greek Parliament adopted the Code for Public Employees in 1999 , almost at the same time as the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which protects citizens of the Member States from all types of discrimination against them ( Article 13 ) .
In these circumstances , how is the Council intervening to restore the credibility of the European Union ' s policies and the dignity of its citizens ?
Mr President , under Article 13 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , the Commission has duly presented three proposals which are currently being discussed in the Working Group on Social Issues . These are a proposal for a directive establishing a general framework for equal treatment at work and in professional activities , a proposal for a directive implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons , irrespective of racial or ethnic origin , and also a proposal for a Council decision establishing a programme of Community action for fighting discrimination between 2000 and 2006 .
The Commission ' s three proposals enshrine different approaches to combating discrimination .
The first proposal prohibits discrimination in the field of employment based on racial or ethnic origin , religion or beliefs , disability , age or sexual orientation .
The second proposal for a directive prohibits discrimination on the grounds of racial or ethnic origin in the areas of employment , education , access to goods and services and in the area of social protection .
The proposal for a decision establishing a programme of action for fighting discrimination , which is designed to support and complement the implementation of the directives through exchanges of information and experience , will be implemented by promoting good practice in legislative and other fields .
Furthermore , the fight against discrimination on the grounds of disability is covered by the first proposal for a directive , which seeks to implement the principle of equal treatment in the field of employment and in carrying out professional activities .
This proposal covers an area which is crucial to our citizens ' ability to exercise their rights , given that this is an area in which discrimination is more obvious and has a more negative effect on integrating people into society .
As Parliament is aware , it is the Commission that has the power of legislative initiative , not the Council , and therefore the proposals that the Council adopts will be based on what the Commission proposes to us .
Firstly , I would like to express my satisfaction , both at the existence of Article 13 which has been mentioned , and for the action plan which the President-in-Office of the Council has referred to and which has been developed for the issue that we are considering today .
However , since not everything in the garden can be rosy , I am not completely satisfied at the moment .
It is true that Article 13 covers practically all possible - at the moment at least - forms of discrimination .
However , subsequent regulatory development and the initiatives being proposed are incomplete and unbalanced .
The President-in-Office of the Council has mentioned three examples and I would like to refer to them specifically .
There are certain cases in Article 13 which are susceptible to discrimination , such as the one we are dealing with today , the case of disabled people , which I believe have been implemented in an irregular way .
It is true that there are others which are still much less developed , such as discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
However , returning to disability , I believe that the European Union requires more complete legislation which covers every possible type , including cases of double disability .
I would like to know the Council ' s opinion - as well as that of the Commission - and I would like to know whether it is considering any initiative for cases such as , for example , women and disability , discrimination on the basis of gender and for the kind of disability involved in the case I have referred to .
Mr President , Mrs Cerdeira Morterero , as I said , these proposals for legislation have been presented by means of Commission initiatives . The Commission , by using the information provided by its various committees , can , of course , take into account the opinions expressed by various interest groups , and in particular those which legitimately oppose discrimination .
Regardless of your real reason for asking a question of this nature , we must recognise that , in recent years , and particularly since the Treaty of Amsterdam , very specific measures have been adopted in the European Union to ensure that these issues are addressed in a far more appropriate way , taking into consideration the interests of the various parts of society that are affected .
In the last few years and over the last decade , the European Union has dedicated a whole approach to this issue and a raft of policies which , although far from ideal , represent a huge qualitative leap forwards .
At world level , we can be truly proud of the steps that we have taken in this area .
But I do acknowledge , of course , that we still have a great deal to do and that probably this accumulation of legislative proposals on discrimination may even lead to and require a different legal procedure .
It is important that we continue to make the Commission aware of this issue and the Council will follow this matter closely and actively .
- ( EL ) Mr President and Mr President-in-Office , thank you for the replies which you have given us .
I should like to remind the House that the European Council in Lisbon highlighted the promotion of social inclusion and called on the Commission , and the Council , to take priority actions for specific target groups .
One of these groups is the disabled .
Member States choose amongst these actions according to their particular situations and subsequently report on their implementation .
What is happening in Greece , as described in my question , is causing me a great deal of concern because the procedure described by the Lisbon Council gives national legislation and practices the opportunity to practice indirect discrimination .
Perhaps a European observatory should be created so that the specific practices of the Member States and the application of European policy can be better monitored ?
Also , does the Council intend to work with candidate countries on the recognition of the rights of minority groups , given that we know they are not properly respected in many of these countries ?
Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , I cannot add much more to what I have already said .
You are concerned at the shortcomings in the way these principles are being implemented and I would say that such shortcomings will have to be rectified .
I feel that it is extremely important today for all forms of discrimination to be addressed and monitored at political level , either by establishing a specific monitoring centre or by using existing mechanisms , which are more appropriate for monitoring and managing the experience of individual countries .
In any event , I must say that the Council follows this type of issue with great interest and I believe that the attention paid by Parliament to such issues is crucial to keeping them on the Community agenda , and in ensuring that the various Member States do not feel tempted to make any exceptions - within their own borders - to what the Union decides as a whole .
As the author is not present , Question No 17 lapses .
Question No 18 by ( H-0392 / 00 ) :
Subject : Burma What further measures will the Council consider taking if existing measures appear to be inadequate and if the second EU Troika mission meets with no greater success than the first , when the common position on Burma comes up for another renewal in October ?
Mr President , the European Union has been closely following the situation in Myanmar for several years .
More recently , at its meeting in April , the Council adopted three additional sanctions against the Burmese regime .
At that Council meeting - and against the background of the concern that has been felt for many years - the Union ' s concern at the situation in Burma-Myanmar was expressed , specifically with regard to the repeated and active repression of civil and political rights , and the harsh conditions that prevent the people from exercising their economic , social and cultural rights .
Once again , the Council urged the government of Burma-Myanmar to respect human rights , to restore democracy and to establish dialogue with the opposition , which would lead to national reconciliation in a unified and democratic State .
For this reason , the Council decided to renew the common position adopted in relation to Burma-Myanmar for a further six months and , at the same time , to ban exports of equipment that may be used for internal repression or intimidation , and to improve the current visa system , by identifying those people who are covered by this system and those who support it .
Furthermore , the Council wishes , with the agreement of all Member States , to refuse to grant an entry visa for the Minister for Foreign Affairs , a decision which could be reversed if it is in the interest of the European Union , to freeze assets held abroad by the persons I have just mentioned , who are associated with these acts of repression , and to make greater efforts to explain and promote the objectives of European Union policy on Burma-Myanmar by establishing meaningful political dialogue .
To this end , the European Union plans to send a second EU Troika mission to Rangoon .
The Council has furthermore decided to ask the Commission to study the possibilities of increasing humanitarian aid for Burma-Myanmar , with the aim of directly helping the people , and in particular of distinguishing development aid from direct aid to the people , in particular through non-governmental organisations .
I think that the European Union ' s concern about the situation in Burma-Myanmar has been made sufficiently clear and I believe that it matches the concerns that have been expressed by Parliament .
President-in-Office , thank you for the answer .
I am , of course , very happy that the new common position has been established by the Council and that it has strengthened the position as compared with the past .
I prefer to use the name Burma rather than Myanmar since the people of Burma and now Aung San Suu Kyi , the legitimate leader in Burma , do not refer to it as Myanmar .
I should prefer it if Parliament avoided the term Myanmar also .
I have to say to the President-in-Office that the net impact of the various measures the European Union has imposed since 1996 has been very limited : the Burmese have not entered into dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi and the democratic forces in Burma remain as outside the whole process as ever .
Whilst I express my support , one thing still puzzles me . Whilst we take these measures , there is no progress on the pressure that some of us in Parliament have been trying to exert on the Council in relation to the need for sanctions - sanctions , of course , which Aung San Suu Kyi has consistently called for .
Related to that , we continue to oppose the Massachusetts Federal laws which impose very effective sanctions on Burma .
We are waiting for the US to decide against these Federal laws .
Will that remain the case ?
If the US decides in favour of Massachusetts , will the European Union then reintroduce our opposition in the World Trade Organisation to these measures taken in Massachusetts ?
Mrs Kinnock , I am pleased that we agree on the importance of renewing the common position .
I admit that the action the European Union has taken in this area may not have changed the situation in any concrete way .
I would remind you that in this area , my country spent years , sometimes in relative isolation from the rest of the Community , trying to draw attention to the situation in Indonesia , and the success of that pressure was only measurable against the internal reaction and above all against action by the people of East Timor .
It is obvious , however , that EU action in such a far-off place cannot always have an immediate impact on changing the political conditions that mark the current regime , specifically human rights violations and the lack of respect for these countries ' most basic democratic rights .
I would nevertheless like to refer to something that I did not mention just now . The resolution on the human rights situation in Burma adopted by the United Nations Human Rights Commission in April of this year is also important .
I would also like to say - and this is an important point that also concerns the overall framework of relations between the European Union and countries in South-East Asia , and acts as an element of cumulative pressure - that relations between the European Union and ASEAN have , since 1998 , been through a rather strained period , precisely because of the problems resulting from Burma ' s membership of that organisation .
Because of the common position on Burma , it was impossible to invite the Burmese delegation to the EU-ASEAN ministerial meeting in Berlin , which led to that meeting being cancelled .
I cannot predict what the European Union ' s attitude to this situation may be in the future .
As the author is not present , Question No 19 lapses .
Question No 20 by ( H-0395 / 00 ) :
Subject : Decision-making powers of the Euro 11 The media quite frequently make reference to the ' Euro 11 ' as if it were a formal decision-making body within the EU 's institutional structure .
Infeuro No 13 , however , defines the Euro 11 as follows : ' This is not a Council in any legal sense but an informal gathering of the Economic Affairs and Finance Ministers of the 11 Member States participating in the euro area ...
However , Ecofin remains the decision-making body .
In the light of this statement , will the Council say what exactly takes place at Euro 11 meetings and what implications it may have for the EU 's regulated decision-making procedure ?
Can the Council confirm that no decisions whatever are taken at Euro 11 meetings ?
Can the Council refute media reports that references have been made at Ecofin meetings to decisions already having been taken by the Euro 11 ?
Once again , I am sorry that the honourable Member who asked a question , this time question number 19 , is not present , as this would have given me the opportunity to provide an answer with regard to my own country . In any event , I am more than happy to answer question number 20 .
As stated in the European Council Resolution of 13 December 1997 , the meetings of the ' Euro 11 ' group are informal and their aim is to enable Member States to coordinate , through discussion , issues which relate to the responsibilities that they share with regard to the single currency .
Formal decisions cannot be taken at these meetings and are , in all cases , as is in fact stated in the Resolution , taken by the Ecofin Council in accordance with the procedures laid down in the Treaty .
I think that this is quite clear and that this dual framework works in accordance with its own rationale . By that I mean that Euro 11 is an informal setting , and Ecofin is the formal setting .
The function of the first category of meetings is purely to coordinate the countries that have joined Economic and Monetary Union and which are part of the single currency .
Thank you for your answer , which I think was important and valuable .
In the debate in those countries which are not participating in the third phase of EMU and which are not therefore becoming a part of the euro zone , the point has been made that ministers from these countries are losing influence , not only on issues directly affecting the euro , but also on other issues dealt with by Ecofin .
A real shift in power seems , in fact , to be taking place , from the meetings of Ecofin to those of the Euro 11 , despite the fact that the latter are of an informal nature .
I should therefore like the Council ' s representative to confirm that there is no real shift in power whatsoever from the formal , regular Ecofin meetings to those of the Euro 11 .
I should like the Council ' s representative genuinely to confirm that it is not the case that ministers from , for example , Denmark or Great Britain , are losing the power to influence other issues dealt with by Ecofin because these countries are not members of the Euro 11 .
Mr Gahrton , the cause of your concern will vanish on the day that these countries attend this Council , which will then no longer be Euro 11 , but Euro 15 .
In any event , I must tell you that until then , nothing within the European Union prevents countries meeting in smaller groups than in the normal Community context .
We are all aware , from newspapers or from conversations in corridors , that various countries in Europe , particularly the Nordic countries , regularly coordinate their positions in a framework that predates the Community decision-making process .
This coordination does not , of course , mean that there is any transfer of power to the specific framework in which these discussions are held .
This is purely and simply a coordination of joint positions , and it is perfectly natural that countries that joined the third phase of Economic and Monetary Union and which are members of the single currency should need to find specific measures to express their action and that they should collectively bring these issues to Ecofin .
I do not think , however , that the position of the other countries is any more restricted in Ecofin than it was at the beginning .
But , let us be frank here : minorities are minorities .
This means that the democratic process is at work in Ecofin and there is nothing we can do about that .
That is how the EU works .
Mr President , I too should like to thank the Portuguese President for his answer , and I would also ask him to confirm that there is no question of an issue being taken off the agenda for any meeting of Ecofin because it has already been discussed in a Euro 11 meeting .
If that were to happen , would it not be possible for any minister at all to be able to insist that it be put back on the agenda for the Ecofin meeting ?
Mrs Sandbæk , let us be quite clear about this .
The Euro 11 arrangement forms part of the framework for coordinating relations between certain countries that have a different level of integration or , to use more modern parlance , closer cooperation as predetermined in the Treaty , and this involves certain coordination mechanisms .
The Euro 11 Council can obviously discuss whatever it likes , and may even agree that a certain issue is not discussed in Ecofin . This does not mean that the countries that are not members of Euro 11 , but which are , of course , members of Ecofin , cannot raise that issue under the Ecofin Council agenda .
What must not happen is that a country that is not part of Euro 11 is asked to set the agenda for those that are .
I must say one more very simple thing , Mrs Sandbæk .
The other countries are not in Euro 11 or Euro 15 only because they do not want to be , not because anyone has banned them from joining .
Thank you very much , Mr Seixas da Costa .
We hope that you have success with your contact with the Parliamentary group on the important issue of the Statute of Members .
Since the time allocated to Questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 21 to 31 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Telecommunications / radio spectrum policy
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0094 / 2000 by Mr Paasilinna , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament , the Council , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : Fifth Report on the implementation of the Telecommunications Regulatory package ( COM ( 1999 ) 537 - C5-0112 / 2000 - 2000 / 2072 ( COS ) ) ;
A5-0122 / 2000 by Mr Alyssandrakis , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament , the Council , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : Next Steps in Radio Spectrum Policy - Results of the Public Consultation on the Green Paper ( COM ( 1999 ) 538 - C5-0113 / 2000 - 2000 / 2073 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , deregulation in the telecommunications sector has continued for a decade and it has been a great success .
The traditional telephone as we knew it is now a fading memory .
In the past , people acquired a telephone in order to keep in touch with each other , but now they have become shareholders in a company , which could , for example , be acting as an intermediary in sexual services .
I am sure this has come as a surprise to many .
The instrument itself is so tiny that it could , for instance , be inadvertently placed in the mouth , being mistaken for false teeth ; in this respect , too , things have changed a lot .
Deregulation created fears of a fall in standards of public services and an increase in telephone charges .
This has not happened , however , and instead services have become diversified and prices have fallen .
Money to finance all this has , of course , been generated by new data terminal equipment , networks and services .
The 1988 regulatory package was well timed and - due to its efficient implementation - worked well in several Member States .
In some countries , however , implementation has been slow and even formal .
We would support action by the Commission to improve cross-border services and honest competition .
We are concerned at the fact that the limited supply of user access has prevented many user groups - in particular those with lower resources - from taking full advantage of , for instance , reasonably affordable Internet access .
Therefore , we need new alternative loop systems , we must facilitate the development of wireless local loop systems and also , for instance , the use of a cable TV network , without having to resort to specific legislation on this issue , however .
Parliament notes that due to the variations in its implementations , the current regime has led to legal uncertainty in different Member States .
Sufficient transparency on the specific conditions for operating licences is required , so that undue delays in the approval process can be prevented .
The most important reform strategy of the European Union is a reform initiative called eEurope , the framework of which was recently approved in Lisbon .
The Commission must be congratulated on the fact that the structure and strategy of the European information society differ in a positive way from others in that it has not only taken account of competitiveness , but also of elements such as cohesion , social equality and employment .
The objective is to prevent social discrimination and to increase consumer confidence and social cohesion .
This initiative is impressively entitled : " An Information Society For All " .
The radio spectrum is a scarce natural resource which has now started to come up for auction .
We take a negative view of this with the exception of certain special instances .
We were aware , as early as two years ago , that the GSM auction in the USA had resulted in a state of chaos , i.e. bankruptcies .
Experiences from India are equally bad .
Those in favour of auctioning believe it to be a good means of controlling resources .
We think it will lead to increases in user tariffs and delays in the spreading and development of communications services .
Prices at auction have now become incredibly high , and these will be passed on to the consumers , resulting in a new telecommunications tax . This would be an unfair tax , in that it would be the same for both rich and poor .
Now that the eEurope initiative - with all its worthy objectives - has just been approved , it is being obstructed by the imposition of a new ' digital divide ' , a greedy fee-charging principle . In practice , this means that our priority project , the development of an information society , is now being obstructed through taxation .
This is cause for concern , which , in my opinion , should be looked into in greater detail . I therefore request that the Commission investigate , without delay , the impact of this , the auctioning principle , in different countries , in order that we should have more information on which to base our opinion .
Furthermore , this principle will privilege big operators , who will start dividing up the market . In the end , there will be the fear that as we reduce regulations , i.e. deregulate , these big operators will make mutual agreements and ' reregulate ' , creating new regulations .
This cannot be right .
.
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the idea of using the radio spectrum to transmit signals revolutionised telecommunications and new applications for the radio spectrum have been developed continuously ever since .
Thus , we have progressed from the simple wireless telegraph to the digital transmission of sound and image , satellite navigation and the third generation of mobile telephones .
I should like at this point to stress that the radio spectrum is not used solely for telecommunications .
Apart from applications based on the transmission and reception of radio signals , there are also ' passive ' applications which just receive signals emitted by natural phenomena .
The main applications here are radio-astronomy , which studies natural phenomena beyond our planet on the basis of the radio waves which they emit , and Earth observation , both of which use the radio spectrum .
The constant increase in the demand for radio frequencies for new applications is such that we need to review the principles on which they are distributed and the policy which the European Union needs to apply in this sector .
The European Commission responded to this need by publishing a Green Paper on Radio Spectrum Policy for public consultation at the end of 1998 .
It subsequently issued the communication which we are examining today on the basis of the aforementioned public consultation .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , having expressed its satisfaction with the work of the European Commission , has come to a number of conclusions and has formulated a number of principles .
Starting from the premise that the spectrum is a valuable but scarce natural resource and that the demand for it is rising constantly , it stresses that it must be used efficiently in order to best serve the public interest and help develop new high-quality services .
In this respect , the Committee on Industry considers that spectrum policy cannot be solely market-driven , that the economic and social value of the radio spectrum should not be assessed on the basis of profit opportunity and that we need a balanced combination of commercial and social interests .
The Committee on Industry also stresses that specific measures need to be taken in order to guarantee a satisfactory number of frequencies for public and private radio and television broadcasts , for amateur radio operators , for navigation systems and for passive applications , such as radio-astronomy and Earth observation .
The Committee on Industry accepts the proposal of the European Commission to create a Spectrum Policy Expert Group having a purely advisory role and transparent internal structure and modus operandi .
However , although it acknowledges that it would be advisable to further harmonise Community radio spectrum policy to an extent , as far as pan-European services and applications are concerned , it does not accept the European Commission ' s proposal for a new regulatory framework at pan-European level , considering this to be both premature and hurried .
I should like to draw your attention to one issue which seriously worried the Committee on Industry and which Mr Paasilinna mentioned just now .
I refer to the degree to which the principle of spectrum pricing , auctioning and the introduction of a secondary market should be adopted .
Your rapporteur takes the view that radio frequencies per se should not be bought and sold , because this would result in frequencies ' being diverted from their intended purpose .
Other practices , such as auctions and a secondary market , would result , with mathematical accuracy , in the prevalence of stronger economic interests , which would then monopolise the market .
Your rapporteur is in favour of an overall payment for each commercial service which uses the spectrum .
The Committee on Industry did not adopt my view and , although not in favour of auctions in all cases , considers that they could be applied for commercial uses .
I should like to point out to members that the results of the recent auction of radio frequencies for third generation mobile telephones in the United Kingdom have given rise to second thoughts on the subject .
The huge sums paid will not come out of the companies ' profits ; they will be paid for by users .
I have heard that in the United Kingdom , in order to find the money paid at auction , every man , woman and child will need to spend 400 pounds a year on telephone calls .
We must not lose sight of the consequences which such practices will have on the final user .
I therefore call upon the House to vote in favour of Amendments Nos 4 , 12 , 5 and 6 , so that our final resolution includes a clear position against auctions .
Mr President , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I wish to congratulate Mr Paasilinna on his report , which we very much welcome .
He has drawn up not only a very concise but also a very hard-hitting report .
It is entirely appropriate as a response to the telecommunications communication from the Commission and exactly what we needed to give us a basis on which to move into our further consideration of the whole electronic communications package , which we shall be debating again in a month 's time .
I want to focus on some of the key points highlighted in the report .
I am going to leave issues on radio spectrum policy to my colleague , Mrs Niebler , who will be responding on behalf of our Group to Mr Alyssandrakis ' report .
Just to move forward on some of the issues related to opening up the market .
The first and most encouraging thing from our point of view is that we now see the wisdom of opening the telecommunications market .
To have an open competitive regime has now become the accepted wisdom .
It is something that is fully accepted and we now need to translate that and move that forward as quickly as possible , towards further deregulation and even quicker opening of those markets that still work imperfectly .
There is a tremendous amount of detailed analysis in this report and it clearly shows the consumer benefits in price reductions , choice and increased services that have flowed from deregulation .
However , it also clearly shows that there are far too many barriers , and the Commission has our full support in tackling them .
For consumers to benefit from this choice , they have to be encouraged to shop around , to compare in many cases what can be quite complex offers of prices and contract terms and service packages .
We would like to encourage independent regulators to work together to provide simple , impartial price comparisons for consumers and use the sort of new tools they have available , like the Internet , to give consumers the ability to calculate the real cost of their calls .
We encourage the regulators to share best practice with each other to provide a unified price and contract comparison system .
We will not have a developed market unless we have investment .
The other issue we have to address is the ability of investors to make satisfactory returns on their investment .
Therefore , in looking at the market-opening regulations , we have to look at methods of competition and encourage competition between the different parts and elements of the platforms .
That is something we shall address in the next communication .
We welcome this report , which is really going to encourage market-opening to the benefit of consumers and the European economy .
Mr President , Commissioner , previous speakers have mentioned the broad consensus that exists concerning the profits arising from the liberalisation of the telecommunications sector .
There was no such consensus previously .
To my great delight , I note that it is liberals who have been in the vanguard of this change : Commissioner Bangemann , together with Finland ' s former Minister for Transport , Mr Norrback , who was among the first ministers to liberalise this sector .
I would point out , for example , that , last year , we in Finland noted that GSM prices were , on average , seven per cent lower .
Even foreign calls were ten per cent lower than previously .
We are therefore still making quite large strides in this area .
I also hope that , in the future , we shall be able to conduct a similar open dialogue with the Commission regarding development within this sector .
The Commission is undertaking many investigations and inquiries .
We need impartial information to be able to keep track of developments and , as public decision makers , to be able to take the necessary decisions .
These two reports deal with issues both large and small .
In common with previous speakers , I would express my appreciation of the constructive cooperation that has taken place with the rapporteurs .
The major issues are about the ways in which broadband services can be made available to everyone and about the auctions we have touched upon .
Clearly , it is up to each Member State to decide upon its strategy for obtaining networks with high transmission speeds for everyone .
However , we wish today to offer vigorous support to the Commission ' s recommendation that dominant network operators should be responsible for permitting combined services all the way to the subscribers .
In certain Member States , that is already the case , for example in my own country , Finland .
Even there , consideration might be given to going further by introducing a situation in which dominant operators become responsible for hiring out the telecommunications companies ' premises for the purpose of housing equipment .
I think we need to see to it that we utilise existing capacity as far as possible and obtain better service and , in that way , lower prices .
The auctions issue has provoked discussion and does so every day .
One might well wonder if it is a question here of being penny wise and pound foolish .
Apart from the risk of the auction prices for third generation mobile telephones putting the brakes on development , there are two other matters I should like to emphasise .
There is a risk of roaming for third generation mobile telephony being put in jeopardy .
There may also be a risk of barriers arising between the Member States .
I would therefore hope that the Commission is alert to this question and that we can engage in a creative discussion on the subject .
Mr President , Commissioner , twenty years have passed since the philosopher and essayist , Alvin Toffler , identified the new information technologies as the third of humanity ' s great revolutions .
Nevertheless , in Europe , we once again failed to take much notice of our thinkers and , in the meantime , over the last decade , the United States has increased its GDP and income per capita to above European Union levels , where , in the last year , these indicators represented barely 75 % of US levels .
While half of the world ' s internet users are American and 44 % of US homes have direct access to the networks , in Europe that proportion is barely 15 % .
We are now rapidly turning to the information society , information technology , the Internet , the Galileo network for monitoring and intercommunication by satellite , the liberalisation and convergence of telecommunications and technological advances in general .
For all these reasons I would like to call for the prompt transposition in all Member States of all the directives relating to radio-broadcasting and voice telephony , the interconnection and maintenance of digitisation , general authorisations and licences , leased lines , open networks , mobile telephones and data protection .
In this regard , we should condemn the fact that the national regulatory authorities of certain countries - such as Spain , Germany , Sweden and the United Kingdom - are not playing their part to the full , which has led to complaints from new companies , who have found that the telecommunications monopolies that already exist are placing obstacles in their way and delaying the consolidation of free competition to the detriment of users .
Furthermore , we ask that , as soon as possible , flat rates be established for access to the Internet , to the network of networks , and we even argue that they should be free , since they should be offered , like health and education , as an essential public service to the citizens .
Mr President , there has been a change over to electronic capitalism , both in Europe and worldwide .
On the stock markets , there is a ' gold rush ' for the shares of IT companies - IT shares are a present-day Klondyke .
The reports by Mr Paasilinna and Mr Alyssandrakis emphasise the necessity of rules even for gold prospecting : if the common and public interest is not secured , the richest , largest and fastest players will take all , and they will reap all the fruits of the new technological developments .
A rapid concentration of the information industry is in progress - at the consumers ' expense .
The battle over market shares for next generation mobile phone frequencies , for example , will raise consumer prices sky high .
As we know , the profit from these shares will ultimately always be generated through the prices of telephone calls .
We must now ensure that public interest is secured - as proposed by Mr Alyssandrakis - and ensure the availability of sufficient frequency bands for use by public broadcasting .
This will not be possible if such a restricted natural resource as the radio spectrum is auctioned off for the monopolised use of the highest bidding major companies .
Rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , in 1993 the European Union undertook to open up the telecommunications market .
Since then , this decision has led to the adoption of a series of directives , and we have constantly been reminded that there is a political objective underlying these regulations , namely growth , employment , competitiveness and the provision of access to the information society for all citizens , with the necessary legal protection .
In this context , the Commission has performed its monitoring role and produced a raft of reports , and the communication we are discussing today is part of this undertaking .
I must say that the assessment presented to us is , at least , detailed .
Although , during the two years since the market was completely opened up , the telecommunications market has been characterised by growth , newcomers to the market and some price reductions , nonetheless , gaps have also appeared which are serious to say the very least , including what is known as the digital divide between regions and between citizens caused by the cost of accessing these new services and , along with this divide , the exclusion of some citizens or regions from the new technology society .
It is therefore imperative that we do not lose sight of the objective of providing a high-quality service for all citizens if we want to avoid creating a fresh division within our society .
Moreover , today we are debating reducing the cost of Internet access within the framework of local loop competition .
The objective is admirable , but we must avoid certain errors and must , therefore , discuss the matter very thoroughly with the national authorities .
Once again , I would stress the need to simplify the rules , as well as consumer protection , the role of the national regulatory authorities and the licensing system which has been discussed at great length .
Finally , opening up the market is not an end in itself : it is a means of ensuring that the transition to an information society is made by and for all citizens through the creation of permanent jobs , and this is certainly not always the case in this field .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Reino Paasilinna for his thorough and excellent work in preparing this report , but I would also like to thank the Commission , which has done so much in support of this eEurope initiative and the expansion of the Internet .
As the Commission has stated , there has been a lot of progress in the past few years in the EU telecommunications sector , but there is still a lot to be learnt where the mobile phone market is concerned .
For instance , the availability of carrier pre-selection should be considered , and this facility made available to consumers , if studies confirm that they are going to benefit from this pre-selection .
In future , it is incumbent on the Commission to ensure more vigorously than ever that the ' roaming ' fees charged to users by operators are brought down in all EU countries to a sensible level based on actual costs .
At the same time , the Commission must ensure that the fees collected from the operators remain under control .
The EU ' s operating logic thus falls into two stages .
The operators are not allowed to collect fees from the users , but neither must the public authority collect from the operators .
The costs to the operator might become unreasonably high , should the new generation mobile spectrum be auctioned .
Auctioning may also distort competition , if operators start making ' tactical ' bids for the spectrum in order to harm the position of their competitors at auction .
Therefore ' beauty contests ' between the various operators are clearly more consumer-friendly alternatives .
The latest UMTS auction in Great Britain , where prices soared sky high , will , in any case , set the alarm bells ringing .
After the hammer has gone down , it is always the consumer who foots the bill - and that is exactly what we do not want , all of us being consumers ourselves .
If we also want to introduce the Internet into schools and libraries and make it available for everybody on a very large scale in future , and if we also want to utilise its future potential in competition with the USA , the Internet will have to be affordable to all .
President , Commissioner , colleagues , can I add my congratulations to the Commission and to my two colleagues , the rapporteurs , on the speed and thoroughness of their reports .
I want to comment on both reports in a very few , but I hope , significant respects .
On Mr Paasilinna ' s report , I want to comment , and perhaps ask the Commission to comment on the whole question of the balance between regulation and liberalisation .
Mr Caudron touched on this in his remarks to the effect that the benefits of liberalisation have been felt disproportionately in the business community and those who make long distance and national calls while domestic consumers have benefited much less , particularly those who make very few calls , or people who live on their own .
I want to ask the Commissioner about the speed of regulation and the purpose of regulation .
It was good to see the Commission taking very urgent action , for example , in respect of leased line and the charges for leased lines where the existing legislation had not been properly implemented .
The differences in attitude , ethos , resources and the degree of independence among the national regulators are still a cause for concern .
On the report on spectrum , others have mentioned the question of to what extent it matters that different systems for deciding on third generation mobile licences have been sorted out .
It significant and I would like the Commission to comment on this in respect of third generation mobiles , and digital television , which are the two areas where the European Union has a lead .
I also want to ask the Commissioner whether he thinks the application of the subsidiarity principle in respect of the allocation of licences might do something to narrow that lead .
If he thinks so , if he thinks the differences in methods are going to distort competition , is he able to tell this House what steps he will take to monitor and address that question ?
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Paasilinna and Mr Alyssandrakis on their very timely and invaluable work .
As part of an on-going exercise of monitoring by the Commission , the Fifth Report sets the scene for many of the conclusions and recommendations made in the communication ' s review , which was issued at the same time , and on which we , and the European Parliament , are working right now .
Mr Paasilinna ' s report inevitably touches on some of the issues to be addressed by the final proposals , which we will discuss here again next month .
The Commission shares many of the concerns expressed in Mr Paasilinna ' s report on the current regulatory situation .
They are vitally important for the uptake of the information society , for the development of the Internet , e-commerce and m-commerce - mobile commerce .
They offer unbundled access to the local loop , facilitating developments in licensing , co-location , carrier pre-selection and the independence and the powers of national regulatory authorities .
The Commission is addressing many of these problems which you identify at the moment .
It has the very recent recommendation on the local loop and on bundling .
The Commission will also use its powers in regard to competition to monitor carefully dominant positions .
We have also made a revised recommendation on interconnection pricing and now we have on-going enforcement measures and infringement proceedings , for example , against a number of Member States on carrier pre-selection and local tariff structures .
Pending the adoption of the new framework , which will be presented in June , the Commission will continue to press for effective implementation of the current rules .
This is called for by market players , national regulators and national administrations and has now also been unanimously mandated by the Lisbon Summit .
At the moment , the Commission is preparing the sixth framework report to be adopted during 2000 .
Parliament ' s report will provide important input .
I am sure that the report will be an important benchmark as we follow the development of the information society .
Cable systems will be examined more closely by the Commission .
We already have a policy of pushing for divestment of cable TV networks to ensure greater local competition and to stimulate investments and services , as Parliament is calling for in these reports .
As to the radio spectrum issue and the report of Mr Alyssandrakis , I agree that radio spectrum is an increasingly scarce and valuable resource .
It is used in many policy areas of concern for the EU , such as telecoms , broadcasting , transport , research and development , which are all very important for the European economy .
For that reason , the Commission proposes a harmonised approach .
Mobile and wireless communications develop at a rapid pace and the unexpectedly high results of spectrum licence auctioning in the UK show the growing importance of the sector .
Furthermore , the messages of the spectrum Green Paper demonstrate the need to address certain radio spectrum issues at Community level and to reach a balance between various user sectors .
Second , Community action on the radio spectrum is beneficial if taken within a clear regulatory framework .
In addition , political support is required to facilitate the achievement of Community objectives at international level .
We have the on-going radio conference in Istanbul where issues like Galileo or third generation spectrum will be discussed .
The Commission therefore welcomes the report from Mr Alyssandrakis .
As this report calls for a radio spectrum policy , which fulfils Community policies , further harmonisation of radio spectrum is necessary .
We have to see development of information and communications technologies and a balance between all spectrum needs including private and public interest .
The competitiveness of European industry at global level must be developed in the interest of the European citizen .
At the same time , the Commission would like to stress that it is urgent and not premature to have an appropriate framework at the Community level to implement the spectrum policy options agreed in the Spectrum policy group and to ensure that results of harmonisation mandates are implemented in the Union .
We should be able to promote without delay harmonisation measures which respond to technological and market developments .
The Commission will report annually to the Council and the European Parliament on the measures adopted .
As far as further actions are concerned , the Commission will present by the end of June - after Parliament ' s discussions and the votes on the radio reports - the appropriate framework for radio spectrum policy in the EC .
This will also take into account the results of the overall discussion which is now taking place in the 1999 review .
We well understand the debate on auction prices which have received a lot of attention here .
According to the present new rules , the Commission must recognise the authority of Member States to choose their preferred spectrum licensing method , whether it is the administrative or auction method , but the Commission will closely monitor developments to avoid distortion of competition and ensure the implementation of the licensing directive and also technological and service developments in the interest of EU citizens .
Mrs Read put a question about the balance between competition and regulation .
I would say that we need regulation to push for competition because otherwise bottlenecks can actually prevent competition which can help citizens because it will be the incentive for lower prices and higher quality services .
But there are areas where we also have a major public policy interest , especially in regard to universal service and data privacy .
In those areas the Commission will make proposals in the context of the new legislation on electronic communications which will be presented at the end of June .
At the same time , the Commission also intends defining this balance between the markets and public policy in the context of the Europe Action Plan , which should be presented next week .
Finally , as far as the coherence of the licensing arrangements is concerned , we must ensure there will be no distortion of competition and guarantee the implementation of the licensing directive .
This whole discussion is very important for defining the content of the new electronic communications legislation , and I am sure these issues will not be the concern of only a few passionate expert parliamentarians as is the case today - electronic communications will be a major political issue in the years to come .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Coherent European approach for space
The next item is the report ( A5-0119 / 2000 ) by Mr Alyssandrakis , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission working document : Towards a coherent European Approach for space ( SEC ( 1999 ) 789 - C5-0336 / 1999 - 1999 / 2213 ( COS ) ) .
. ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the launch of the first artificial satellite by the Soviet Union in 1957 marked the start of space exploration and the beginning of a new era for mankind .
Man ' s ability to launch space vehicles has extended our frontiers well beyond the Earth ' s atmosphere and has afforded us a wealth of new knowledge on the solar system and the universe as a whole .
At the same time , it has brought practical applications which have changed our lives .
The use of artificial satellites in telecommunications , weather forecasting , Earth observation and navigation is so widespread that it is hard to imagine these activities continuing without the use of space .
Moreover , the high technical standards required of space equipment have led to enormous technological breakthroughs , which have gradually filtered into our everyday lives .
Finally , space has always had a strategic importance , since whoever controls space also controls the Earth .
Space is the one sector in which international cooperation is particularly important .
In Europe , the European Space Agency ( ESA ) , an independent body comprising 14 European countries , 12 of which are members of the European Union , has played a critical role in fostering cooperation in space exploration , space applications and the development of research in space .
The Council , the Commission and Parliament have all addressed the issue of space policy on a number of occasions in the past .
The main political issue in the entire discussion concerned the development of a coherent approach to space and the promotion of collaboration between the European Union and the ESA on the basis of specific targets and within a clear framework .
The Commission ' s working document being examined today comes as a response to the Council ' s resolution of 22 June 1998 calling on the Commission to take practical measures to promote cooperation between the European Union and the ESA .
The text discusses aspects of the European Union ' s space policy concerning practical applications , mainly in the fields of telecommunications , navigation and Earth observation , but makes no mention of space exploration or the use of space for scientific research .
From this point of view , the document is somewhat limited in scope , since an overall policy for space cannot restrict itself merely to practical applications .
The Commission has made it clear that a coherent approach is indispensable for the European Union .
It has therefore set up a consultative structure for space and related matters with the active participation of the ESA .
This structure comprises the Space Advisory Group and other high-level groups .
The Commission ' s document concludes that the European Union must find new means of implementing a space policy and proposes specific lines of approach .
The resolution by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy expresses a strong desire to see space used for peaceful purposes for the benefit of mankind as a whole .
At the same time , it takes the view that space policy must not be wholly dominated by the market and that account must be taken of long-term assessments of the benefits and risks of exploiting space , not only from the point of view of the interests of industry , but also in terms of the welfare of mankind as a whole .
It stresses the importance of international cooperation , the need for all Member States to participate in space activities and the importance of collaboration with third countries , and points out that the ESA has functioned efficiently and has played a leading role in space research and space applications in both Europe and worldwide .
The Committee on Industry welcomes the European Commission ' s intention of establishing a policy framework for future programmes and stresses that this framework must be developed after extensive and in-depth consultations between all the parties involved .
It is in favour of the further development of launching systems , the development of new telecommunications systems and further European participation in the Alpha station programme and reiterates the European Parliament ' s support for the development of the global satellite navigation system known as Galileo .
It calls on the Commission , in collaboration with the Member States , to take all measures needed for effective use of space-based systems for monitoring the environment and for security , in order to protect citizens ' lives and natural resources , identify at an early stage , or even avert natural or man-made disasters and help combat fraud .
I am convinced , fellow members , that today ' s debate will help to develop space policy further .
Mr Alyssandrakis , ladies and gentlemen , everyone is in favour of mankind ' s direct or indirect access to space for , in the first place , it is a dream , a fantastic adventure and a way of expanding our knowledge .
But , in addition to this , it has , above all , generated incredible change in our everyday lives .
Satellites and telecommunications have been mentioned , and we could add the weather forecast .
However , we must also acknowledge that space is a strategic issue : we have mentioned the terrible war between the United States and the USSR .
Today , although the United States and Russia still dominate this sector , the countries of Europe play a major and increasingly significant role .
It is of paramount importance that we establish a European strategy if we want to lend more weight to the Union and this strategy must maintain a balance between the various uses made of space .
The European Space Agency has played a role which has been crucial for the cooperation between European countries in the field of the exploitation of space and research development .
However , as the rapporteur suggests , it would appear necessary to extend its activities to projects launched within the Community framework .
We must also make up for the absence of a genuine European policy and a European strategy ensuring the effective use of space systems to monitor the environment and to provide security , protect natural resources , detect or forecast natural and man-made disasters and combat fraud .
A large chunk of the practical applications involving space is already controlled by the market , and I feel that this is dangerous .
The Commission must put forward measures to control what are genuine abuses .
Lastly , together with many of my fellow Members , I am extremely pleased that the Galileo project met with such approval . It will ensure that Europe makes a substantial contribution to the establishment of a worldwide satellite navigation system .
To sum up , the new approach to space policy must be based on a close partnership between the Member States , the European Union and the European Space Agency .
This is the only way to achieve the consensus such a policy requires .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , the European market for space applications is fragmented .
There are many smaller companies active which do not work together very well .
In order to be able to compete on the global market , it is necessary to restructure the space industry , that is to say integrate various companies into one company or group of companies .
There is , as such , plenty of work for the space advice group .
Cooperation at Community and international level in space activities is imperative .
My second point concerns the position of the European satellite industry .
Since the end of the cold war , the strategic importance of having our own satellite industry has been of commercial importance .
The sector is growing by 10 % annually and thus helping create employment .
If the European Union does not want to miss the boat , the Commission and Member States need to promote the development of the industry .
Satellite systems are the means to further develop information and communications technology .
Unfortunately , the European satellite industry is very much dominated by governments .
This is why it works too much in isolation , without a great deal of interaction with the computer , network , software and peripheral equipment industry .
As a result , the industry is increasingly losing its market share to the US .
More cooperation and company mergers are needed , as well as more support in technology development , through the framework programme , among other things .
My Group is waiting with bated breath for the document the Commission has promised on a European space satellite in which , needless to say , the input of the European Space Agency is vital .
All this noise is making things very difficult : the sound quality is dreadful .
I would appreciate it if the technicians could do something about it .
Thank you , Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel .
The Bureau has also noted that there is a problem with the sound , but this problem can , of course , only be fixed when we are not working .
Let us hope that the sound quality will be better tomorrow .
Mr President , although I do want to congratulate Mr Konstantinos Alyssandrakis on his extremely comprehensive report , I have to say that , on this occasion , the Commission , in particular , and this final report have not been bold enough as regards the European space research initiative .
As has already been said , there is no longer any competition between America and the Soviet bloc , and yet , for all its scientists and technical expertise , Europe is unable to launch itself into space and space research .
We need to increase funding and create a specific budget heading for space research .
The European Union should manage national space research budgets , for space research is , by nature , one of the main activities of the European Union and would clearly not yield satisfactory results if carried out merely at individual State level .
We need to create a European Union space body which is separate from the ESA : the ESA is something different .
We need to organise the launching of low cost European Union satellites to serve European industries .
Finally , I would like to point out that pensioners should somehow be included in this space research .
How can this be ?
Well , in the United States , a famous pensioner , the astronaut John Glenn , went into space at the age of 69 .
I am 55 years old and in 15 years ' time I will be 69 .
I am already a politician : I could become an astronaut , the first pensioner astronaut of the European Union .
I am booking my seat today !
Thank you very much , Commissioner Busquin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
European research area
The next item is the report ( A5-0131 / 2000 ) by Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : Towards a European research area ( COM ( 2000 ) 6 - C5-0115 / 2000 - 2000 / 2075 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would first of all like to thank Commissioner Busquin for launching a broad debate on a European research area .
It comes at exactly the right time , between two framework programmes .
At present , there is no European research area as such .
The research policy of the Member States and that of the Union are running parallel without forming a coherent unit .
In addition , we invest far less in research than the United States and Japan .
These two factors have caused the chasm between us and the United States to widen even more over the past few years .
If the European Union wants to invest in more competitiveness , and thus more employment , we will need an approach which is broader and more innovative than the one we have pursued so far .
The forthcoming enlargement of the Union makes this all the more pressing .
The European Member States need to leave behind their technological nationalism and strive more towards a European Union for research and technology too .
This means that European researchers need access to each other ' s national programmes .
The European framework programme for research and technological development is a useful instrument for stimulating international cooperation , but this programme on its own is not enough to boost the joint European research efforts .
Although it only makes up 6 % of total European research expenditure , the framework programme fulfils an important multiplier function , a kind of flywheel function .
Industry pays 60 % of total investments in research in Europe , 90 % of which is spent on research to improve existing production processes and , in this way , to retain the competitive edge .
Only 10 % is spent on new innovative research .
As such , the framework programme certainly makes a considerable contribution to this 10 % .
Europe has no problem converting euros into research , but has far greater difficulty converting research into euros .
It appears that commercialisation , i.e. injecting expertise into a product , seems to be much more successful in the United States than it is in Europe .
A better link is required between the development of new technology and application in the market .
In this respect , increasing expertise is not a goal in itself , but translating expertise into innovation and industrial success , however , is .
It creates employment and prosperity .
Universities and companies therefore need to work more closely together .
As is the case in the United States , the work of scientists should alternate between academia and industry .
Commissioner Busquin has now indicated how a European research area could be brought about .
However , he mainly focuses on optimising the infrastructure by , among other things , incorporating centres of excellence into a network and by setting up Virtual Centres .
But I believe that in order to bring about a European research area , we will need more than measures in the sphere of infrastructure .
Infrastructures do not innovate , neither do electronic networks , although they are a prerequisite .
But a European research area can only be created if , in addition to an advanced infrastructure , we also have a European identity and European creativity .
In my view , the potential of women has been neglected for too long in this respect .
My final point concerns the lack of a Community patent .
The existing European patent system causes fragmentation and leads to considerable extra costs .
A patent application in Europe is ten times more expensive than it is in the US and far more involved .
Not only do we not have a Community patent ; the mechanisms to help small companies protect their patents are also lacking .
Will the Commissioner consult Mr Bolkestein to do something about this ?
After all , small- and medium-sized companies do not have the means to pay for expensive legal procedures .
Finally , I would like to state that Europe needs a joint research policy which accommodates both applied and fundamental research in various technical specialist fields and which takes into account the fact that innovations often emerge at the interface of different scientific disciplines .
In future , new employment could mainly be created within the specialist areas of bio-technology and ICT , but also research into human and social sciences will remain necessary in the European Union , with its large diversity of cultures .
I would like to thank my colleagues for their kind cooperation .
Mr President , I have to say with great regret that I disagree with my colleague , Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel , on one point , namely this : if there is any end worth pursuing in human life it is knowledge for knowledge ' s own sake .
If there is any impulse which contributes to good research it is the impulse of pure curiosity .
It has been work done out of pure curiosity for the sake of knowledge as an end in itself which has , in the end , produced the big spin-offs that make a real difference .
I agree with her , however , that it is not enough to justify spending public money on the ground that somebody suffers from acute curiosity .
Therefore , it is the promise of long-term applicability and long-term economic contribution that justifies the expenditure of public funds .
But we must remember that public funds will not be well spent unless they are spent on people who have the drive of curiosity and the commitment to knowledge for its own sake .
That is something which we in Europe forget at our peril .
It is mentioned in clauses ' n ' and ' o ' of the preamble .
I am very grateful for that .
Indeed I am very grateful to Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for the way in which she has worked into the report of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy practically all the points that were contained in the draft opinion from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for which I was responsible and which is the reason for my addressing you tonight .
The whole is better than the sum of its two parts .
It was very good of her to work it in so effectively .
The amendments by Mr Pietrasanta and Mrs Maes , which add the points about sustainability , environmental goods and health , to the other economic points that we have been making , are important and should be adopted .
There is indeed a European crisis in research funding .
We must increase it .
It must go up to 3 % from the current pathetic 1.8 % - about half of what our Japanese and American friends and competitors put in .
Legal devices are important .
We should improve the European patent .
Subsidiarity is all-important ; subsidiarity , as the Commissioner has said , in its broadest sense - regions contributing to research as well as Member States and the Commission , right down to the research team .
They are the people at the sharp end .
We must make sure that we never have systems of research support that are so over-burdened with bureaucracy , with application mechanisms so difficult to penetrate that we use resources in applying for research funds that should be spent doing the research itself .
Simplicity is all and subsidiarity means , in this context , simplicity and an appropriate period of research review .
We also need other things .
We need due and proper attention to mobility and all that goes with it , proper research careers throughout Europe , the chance for people to gain employment in research and to move freely .
The omens are not entirely good .
We have seen , in the case of the foreign language lecturers in Italy , that 12 years have passed with immobility enshrined in European law because the right to free movement without regard to nationality has been denied and has not yet been effectively enforced by the Commission .
We really must insist that improvement is achieved here and is carried through from the teaching community into the closely allied research community .
In short , we must do at Community and Union level the things that can only be done at those levels and push the rest down .
All that is stated in paragraph 40 of the report .
We must also be better at developing and applying the knowledge we achieve .
My colleague in Edinburgh , Professor Salter , has developed a device for destroying mines safely .
It has never been taken up industrially .
Many good ideas that are developed do not get taken up .
That is also vital .
Mr President , I have great pleasure in responding on behalf of the EPP and ED Group , and on behalf of my colleague , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , who was the shadow rapporteur in the Industry Committee but who unfortunately cannot be here tonight .
I have the pleasure of shadowing Mr MacCormick in the Legal Affairs Committee .
You have already heard that this is indeed a formidable combination and an extremely comprehensive and thorough report from Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel , but Mr MacCormick added his own distinctive touches to the report , the flavour of which you have just heard .
Clearly , the thrust of the Commission ' s thinking that has gone into this report and indeed our response has focused on two aspects : competitiveness and coordination , because research capability combined with the ability to translate that research into products and services of real commercial value is going to be the key to the competitiveness of the European Union and the enlarged Union into this new century .
We really need to make better use of all the intellectual capabilities that we have across the European Union by improving ways of working together , particularly by better focusing our efforts , by not duplicating that work , by bringing together the original thinkers that Mr MacCormick was talking about .
Anyone who has worked in research will know that if you get people together you spark new and creative ideas all the time .
That activity cannot really be achieved by a lot of centralisation .
The Commission has a job to do as a catalyst for the process .
As Mr MacCormick says , we have to get people across the Union together talking region to region , university to university .
We have to have better information networks , we have to have this exchange of information horizontally , not coming into the centre and going out again .
We have now fantastic new tools to be able to do that .
After all , the Internet was a tool intended to facilitate research networking .
That is what it was originally designed to do and we now have the ability to use it and to think about how we are going to develop the telecommunications capability , the ways of using it , the structure that we talked about in our early debate on telecommunications , the idea of virtual centres of excellence .
That , I think , is a factor of very great importance in trying to achieve this focus and this synthesis of ideas .
If anything should be brought forward very quickly in a pilot stage by Mr Busquin and his team , it is the idea of moving into the virtual centres of excellence and achieving progress in certain key areas .
The second point I want to make links in with our competitiveness .
I echo very much the closing phrases of Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel to us just now : we have to encourage research and development of skills on taking products to market .
We have to improve the ways that we do that .
The processes of original design are prototyping , testing and making .
We have to reduce the time to market , to take these ideas and move them out to consumers as soon as possible , to make products simply , quickly , more effectively , more flexibly .
Those are very important skills that we need to develop and research has a very important part to play in that .
In welcoming Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel ' s report , we are anticipating the next stage , Mr Busquin , in meeting these challenges that we have thrown down .
We look to you to turn these proposals into tangible ideas to achieve the objectives that we all share .
Mr President , Commissioner , the communication under discussion forms an important introduction to closer cooperation in the field of research .
As things are now , resources are wasted due to overlapping and lack of coordination .
On behalf of the ELDR Group , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel , for a good report and for her extremely enthusiastic work for this cause : your views have the full support of my Group .
The statistics indicated in the communication regarding the poor level of investment by EU countries in research are cause for concern .
Even worse is the fact that the gap with respect to the USA is widening .
However , some Member States have made considerable investments in research , and this appears to have paid dividends , particularly in the area of information technology .
While I have the floor , I would like to bring up a few additional points .
I would prefer to talk about cooperation or strategy , rather than research policy .
The word policy has a connotation of activities being closely controlled by Brussels .
In research , however , objectives for activities should not be defined at too detailed a level .
Each research community is best aware of its own needs for investment and development - these should not be too tightly controlled by policy .
The participation of women in scientific research within the EU continues to be too fragmented .
More tangible action must be incorporated in the programmes in order to promote this participation .
Researcher exchange programmes and interaction between research teams are matters which deserve our full support .
They are a means of disseminating information and skills ; these activities will create true European cooperation - networks which will also bear fruit later on .
The COST secretariat has already produced some commendable work .
Its position as research coordinator should be further strengthened .
Mr President , it is , of course , essential to develop a European research area , but this must not operate simply in areas neglected by the Member States .
It must be built openly , sharing competences and resources at as early a stage as possible , in order to ensure optimum synergy .
I wish to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for her very dynamic work on this report .
We must naturally consider the economic impact and job creation , as our fellow Member , Mr Desama , said .
In the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , we do not give priority to the pursuit of competition and competitiveness at any price , or to the commercialisation of research .
Both fundamental and applied research must , above all , retain public support and a public dimension .
We are opposed to the areas of biotechnology focused on genetic manipulation or patenting the living organism . On the other hand , we are in favour of research focusing on sustainable technologies , particularly in the areas of the environment and health .
As the Committee of the Regions advocated in Mrs Blandin ' s report , we wish to emphasise support for decentralised research , the formation of networks , collaboration with the regions .
For example , the cooperation which has developed through the ecosites , in the field of ecotechnologies , according to the criteria of sustainable development , is appropriate to local development and to supporting SMBs and SMIs .
Europe may be a significant driving force in this field .
I should also like to stress the aid which we wish to provide for new information and communications technologies by developing virtual laboratories for data collection , analysis and diagnosis , and prevention in the area of major risks .
There is here a potential which can only be realised fully at European level , in collaboration with universities , centres of excellence and the authorities .
Finally , I should like to flag the interest we have in the Joint Research Centre , a subject that is well worth thinking carefully about .
Its nuclear bias , which was topical when it was set up because of the involvement of Euratom , must now be reconsidered .
It is not a matter of duplicating the installations or the research carried out in some European Union Member States but instead of developing , as Mrs McNally suggests , a shared system of technical and scientific references for political applications .
In this respect , there is also a need for serious thinking about the STOA .
In conclusion , I wish to thank our Commissioner , Mr Philippe Busquin , for undertaking , as soon as he arrived , this investigation into a European research area which we support .
He did not neglect the areas of schemes on behalf of young people and the participation of women in research and , in continuing liaison with the Member States and with Parliament , he is working towards developing a knowledge-based Europe in the latest fields , without neglecting social and human aspects .
Mr President , Commissioner , considerable research is indeed essential to be able to make sense of the 27 recitals and 60 paragraphs of a report which has reached oversized proportions due to the studies of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and which contains absolutely everything , albeit in occasionally vague and often inexact terms .
Let us begin , however , in a spirit of constructive criticism , by welcoming the fact that this contribution towards achieving better integration of the European scientific community seeks to safeguard the balance between fundamental and applied research in order to combat the brain drain , to prioritise the problem of unemployment among young researchers within a European policy which is aware of the reality of the situation , and to recognise the leading role played by businesses in research and development .
We might then , also , reiterate what the report said , by emphasising the risk that concentrating research infrastructures , with a view to establishing a cost-effective critical mass , would represent for the peripheral regions , which are , in general , increasingly being disregarded by European programmes .
Attention should also be drawn to the need to adhere strictly to the principle of subsidiarity , in order to leave the Member States and , through them , the regions with genuine local driving forces for research centres in direct contact with the worlds of business and academia , the ability to define their own priorities and methodologies under their own responsibility .
Finally , let us dare to hope that your laudable concern to develop communications and translation services in order to eliminate the language barrier to the desirable synergy between the work of our respective researchers is not a cover for a further attempt to promote one of the Union ' s languages above all the others , a language whose imperialism would be no less neutral here than elsewhere .
Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel , the Union for a Europe of Nations Group is going to vote in favour of your report , but I would ask you , in practical terms , will it be effective enough for us to achieve our shared goal , which is high-level scientific knowledge generating improved performance in every field ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel ' s excellent report , which we have before us , on the European Commission communication , " Towards a European research area " , has aroused genuine interest in the House judging by the fact that almost 150 amendments have been tabled .
Clearly , the development of research within the European Union is one of the keys to the future .
The twenty-first century will be the century of knowledge and grey matter .
Progress in communications effectively increases the rate of dissemination of knowledge , as the development of the Internet demonstrates , and is a powerful factor in promoting economic growth .
In the broadest sense , then , research will , more than ever , be a fundamental element of future development .
According to the figures made available by the Commission , Europe is definitely lagging behind the United States .
Here are some examples of this : the average investment in research for the European Union as a whole is no more than 1.8 % of GDP , as opposed to 2.8 % in the United States ; the number of European graduate students studying in the United States is twice that of American students in Europe .
On this subject , the proposals of both the Commission and the Plooij-Van Gorsel report lead me to make a few observations .
The first is that European investment in research is at least as important as the European research area .
In the United States , there is rather less concern for semantics and more for practical action .
The second observation is that approximately two thirds of research is undertaken by private companies and that the European Union must take this situation into consideration when focusing its resources .
My third observation is that we must absolutely avoid anything which , from a distance or close up , looks like what has just been referred to as a master plan for European research .
Research is , first and foremost , a matter for freedom and not for planning .
This is all included in the Commission communication and the report by our fellow Member .
There is , however , no prioritisation in the proposals , and this is something I would like to suggest .
This prioritisation should focus primarily on researchers and businesses .
As far as researchers are concerned , their standard of living throughout Europe must be enhanced .
As far as businesses are concerned , research work must be encouraged .
My conclusion is as follows : that we should first back the people involved , then business and , finally , that we should ensure that the European Union does not hinder the activities or the development of either party .
This is what our approach must be .
So the area ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for her usual very good report .
I thank the Commissioner , whose timing is very good and so is his idea of launching this debate .
There is indeed a growing feeling of unease at the lack of coordination in European science and research .
The response has been positive , as the Commissioner knows from his contacts throughout Europe , including a recent visit to Cambridge .
We are looking forward to seeing his analysis of the results of the consultation .
There is a growing awareness in Europe of the dimensions of the threat from the very well-resourced , very well-targeted United States of America .
Frankly , the EU is not punching its weight in research , although some Member States are very good .
I would name Finland , Sweden and countries like the Republic of Ireland , which have made good progress .
Apart from industrial competitiveness , of course , as Mr Desama says , we have serious environmental and social problems which need research to put them right .
A target of 3 % of GDP on research is realistic and essential , as is the recruitment of far more scientists , including women .
Please do not underestimate the potential of the Joint Research Centre , which is itself a scientific centre for policy - a reference centre for policy - and is ideally suited to the role of networking the centres of excellence .
It is itself a centre of excellence in many areas .
I strongly support paragraphs 16 and 17 , which call for informing the European public about scientific achievements and looking at ethical questions .
We look forward to regular reports from the Commissioner about the implementation and realisation of this very exciting and essential project .
Mr President , it is impossible to say something meaningful in two minutes about such a challenging report as the one written by Mrs Plooij without getting very frustrated , because one could say so much more and , more to the point , would want to say so much more .
I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on his ambition , which is considerable .
Trying to create a European research area is an ambitious plan , because this research space is currently lacking and we only have ourselves to blame . We make insufficient resources available , although we all - and Mrs McNally underlined this a moment ago - acknowledge the link between progress , development , and creating prosperity and jobs .
This is evident to all of us , yet our governments fail to set aside sufficient funds .
This is true for the Member States and regions , some of whose percentage levels are shamefully low .
We should , as it were , sound the praises of certain Member States and regions , but should not work on averages .
This is why it is good to emphasise cooperation .
Pyramids and hierarchies are not really of much use here , because we know that talent bubbles up from below and from all those regions and all those milieus where talent breeds , both male and female , although female talent - and this has been pointed out many times before here - can only ascend to the very pinnacle of academia very slowly .
Cooperation , however , requires organisation .
And really , the absence of this is something we only have ourselves to blame for .
If our organisation of the scientific environment lags behind , we will not achieve a European research area .
After all , it is exactly this area , where people can communicate a lot more freely with each other than before , which has to ensure that scientists feel at home in Europe .
I really have to ask the Members to exercise some self-discipline . I am sorry to interrupt you , but time goes on and , at this rate , we will be here until gone midnight , and surely that is not what we want .
We cannot do this to the Commissioner either .
Mr President , as a scientist on loan to politics , as I like to describe myself , who has worked in the most advanced laboratories in Italy and elsewhere and who has worked with highly advanced countries such as the United States and Japan , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her extreme sensitivity , her competence and her enthusiasm .
I would , of course , also like to thank all the members of the committee , irrespective of their political party , and , in particular , I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude on behalf of the academic world to Commissioner Philippe Busquin for the extreme sensitivity he has shown in creating , at last , a European common research area .
The creation of a common research area in Europe will , at last , make it possible to fully exploit networks of high quality centres and achieve that critical mass which is essential both for the progress of knowledge per se and to provide practical answers to the man in the street : answers which cover a range of issues , from the control of terrible illnesses such as AIDS or cancer to neurodegenerative diseases or injuries caused by environmental pollution and so forth .
This is why we support the Commissioner !
Dear Commissioner , what a challenge !
We will keep fighting in order to overcome that red tape which tends to delay the achievement of these goals .
The adoption of the amendments I tabled will greatly promote recognition of the common research area and boost its efficiency .
Thus , the first amendment , which calls for at least 3 % of the gross domestic product of all the countries of the European Union to be allocated to research , represents a great victory and will allow us to compete with the United States and Japan .
The second amendment I tabled on behalf of the poor , vulnerable and abandoned regions , the Objective 1 regions of the South , i.e. to invest 5 % of the unused regional funds - which would otherwise be taken back - to benefit those regions , will , at last , make it possible to exploit the excellent human resources available to us and close the gap in infrastructures and technology between these regions and the regions of Europe .
The third amendment , which was also approved by our friend Mr Novelli - whom I would like to thank - will apply tax exemption and , thereby , at last make it possible to further increase the level of research carried out in all sectors .
Commissioner , I would therefore like to finish by paying tribute to the new scientific research structure which you have introduced . On 20 June , two Nobel prize-winners , Rita Levi Montalcini , holder of the Nobel Prize for neuroscience , and Renato Dulbecco , will pay tribute to this initiative , in recognition of the fact that , at long last , in establishing the research area , you have conferred great honour on all research scientists .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , cooperation in terms of research is difficult in Europe , far more difficult than it is in the United States and this is why Commissioner Busquin ' s communication is so significant .
Investment in research and in cooperation must lead to more economic growth and more employment .
This effort deserves all our support , and this is why I can give my full backing to the report by Mrs Plooij , to whom , by the way , I would like to convey my sincerest compliments .
But I would prefer it if we were a little more precise in our debate .
We have to ascertain that not all research leads to more economic growth or more employment .
The demand for research is huge where supporting policy choices , risk analyses , environmental effect reports , monitors and comparative research is concerned .
It is all part of the preparation or assessment of political decisions in the environmental sector in the area of food or public health .
In these particular areas , European cooperation is meaningful .
The Joint Research Centres , the JRCs , have many examples of sound cooperation projects .
In many research areas , the JRC researchers find themselves in a situation much like a spider in a web .
Where research in support of policy is concerned , initiatives from the Commission are therefore vital in order to prevent work from being duplicated , to avoid fragmentation and to ensure that the best measuring methods and the best techniques become the benchmark .
But in this type of work , no major spin-offs in the employment sphere can be expected outside the research centres .
There is also great demand for applied research , which can be expected to have a far greater impact on employment .
But European policy could restrict itself to creating appropriate conditions , and practical obstacles should be cleared away .
I would like to finish off by saying a few words on basic research .
Research situated between applied and basic research now has a lower profile but remains significant .
Many fundamental questions in the fields of natural and life sciences remain unanswered .
It is precisely in these spheres that coordination of national research efforts is of major importance .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her invaluable work .
On account of the amendments tabled in committee , this report ended up being more wide-ranging ; when dealing with issues related to research areas , we must not focus solely on scientific communities .
The role of the SME sector as a locomotive force for innovation and research work must also be clearly borne in mind .
The Commission ' s communication provides an unnecessarily one-sided view of the challenges of European research .
It is obvious that , in the preparation of this communication , there has been no horizontal utilisation of the expertise of the various directorates .
Since the discussion on the research area touches , for example , on the enlargement process of the Union and on the vitality of the SME sector , one would have wished that the Commission ' s communication had presented more visions and concrete content .
It is not enough to talk in broad terms about the competitiveness of the Union .
Keywords in research policy are flexibility , global thinking , and the more effective use of resources than at present .
The self-directed nature of science and the Member States ' own research policy priorities must be accorded sufficient space .
It is therefore necessary to give careful thought to what will be required in the future of the joint research centres highlighted in the Commission ' s proposal .
On no account is it appropriate to enlarge the role of the Union ' s research centres in such a way that the operations of national research centres are made more difficult in the context of resource reallocation .
Most of the added value of the internal market approach in research will be acquired specifically through the more even distribution of the research and know-how which is funded by non-public resources .
Practical experience has shown that by working within framework programmes it is not possible to react sufficiently flexibly to problems which demand rapid action , such as the BSE crisis .
Increasing , for instance , the mobility of researchers according to need and enhancing the cooperation between the scientific communities of the EU and Eastern Europe will create a reliable and credible basis for research projects .
In this discussion , particular attention must also be paid to the position of women in European research policy ; the body of technical experts in particular - which actually suffers from a labour shortage - is alarmingly male-dominated .
The EU must accept that one of the most important challenges for its training and research policy is to awaken women ' s interest in this sector .
Mr President , Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel , ladies and gentlemen , I am personally delighted to have this opportunity to express an opinion on the Commissioner ' s communication and to be able to tell him that it is a document of extremely high quality which , as we have seen again this evening , has provided the basis for a relevant debate on revitalising research in Europe .
We have effectively entered the knowledge society , which has led us to put research back at the heart of our society .
In Europe , however , as many people have said , the position of research looks worrying if one looks at the figures .
It is therefore necessary , as a matter of urgency , to adopt an overall strategy at European level in order to make up for lost time .
It is not a matter of casting doubt on the efficiency of the FRDPs . Their results are plain to see .
It must be noted , however , that new initiatives need to be adopted in order to decompartmentalise Member States ' national systems which today represent nothing more than a duplication of efforts .
Among the many measures which must be implemented , this evening I shall mention , in particular , the training and the mobility of researchers , to go back to a previous debate which involved the Commissioner and researchers from my own region .
I am speaking , therefore , to voice their concerns , for we are not training enough scientific researchers and even fewer European researchers .
The training of researchers should therefore include a European dimension , which would offer them greater mobility .
Schemes do exist , but , in the real world , before and during implementation , there are administrative obstacles to mobility , such as welfare cover , which discourage many researchers .
I shall end by saying that we must also devote ourselves to informing the citizens , in whom scientific progress raises as much hope as concern .
I therefore hope that , in June , our ministers will be able to approve the rapid establishment of a whole series of building sites in Europe , on the basis of the Commissioner ' s proposals .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Busquin for deciding and having the courage to create a European research area , bearing in mind that , in the field of knowledge , we have always fought hard for the principle of solidarity .
I am a member of the Committee on Culture and in fact Parliament has not taken up the opinion of this committee .
I am the only person from that committee who is speaking in this debate .
I very much regret the fact that the contribution of the Committee on Culture has not been allowed to enrich the debate .
In this respect I would like to offer some constructive criticism .
Firstly , I would like to say that this is a laudable and courageous piece of work , because subsidiarity is a straitjacket which is holding Europeans back despite the brilliance of their desires and their minds . Nevertheless , it lacks a parallel project , which is concerned with human resources .
Much is said about money and companies , but we never take into account - or at least we only do so in the small print and indirectly - the fact that it is a question of human resources and that therefore research requires training , training and more training .
In Europe there are no training programmes for researchers .
FEDER and the FEDER projects do not cover grant holders .
Furthermore , the fifth research plan only includes one person per project , although it is impossible to carry out a far-reaching project with grant holders alone .
The personnel available to us include very few post-doctoral teachers and we do not have sufficient staff .
How can we talk about mobility if we do not have researchers ?
This is the great challenge we have to face and , in this case , I would support Mr Rübig and others who have proposed specific training programmes .
We must support the universities and researchers because , in Europe , working in research means sacrifices and a career full of risks and very few rewards and , of course , no economic reward .
I repeat that we must recycle our teachers .
Only by means of a strategic European resources plan can we do so .
Lastly , I would like to express my fear that only centres of excellence will be recognised .
Mr President , I will confine myself to stressing three points tackled by Commissioner Busquin which are also referred to in the report under debate .
The first concerns the close relationship between research , economic growth and employment .
In order to respond to the challenge represented by the United States , the Union as a whole and certain countries in particular must allocate a higher proportion of their resources to research and facilitate investment by private companies .
I subscribe to the view that we need to propose tax relief , harmonised at European level , as a guideline for the Member States .
Point two : research and development have generated an extremely well integrated system .
In some areas , it is not easy to distinguish between basic and applied research .
However , public financing and the European programmes need to target chiefly medium- and long-term economic and non-economic objectives , whereas competence for market-related research should lie chiefly with the firms .
Thirdly , the tertiarisation of research policies and the consolidation of the role of the regions : The territorial aspect of research policies is important chiefly in terms of the transfer of scientific and technological knowledge towards the small- and medium-sized enterprises which characterise many industrial districts .
Small- and medium-sized enterprises are one of European industry ' s strong points , in certain countries in particular , but they are still poorly integrated into the research system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to add my thanks to those that have been expressed already .
I should also like to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for the excellent report she has drawn up within a very short time limit .
I should like to thank Mr MacCormick of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and all of you for your contributions , as well as for your contributions to the debate this evening .
As I have already said , I believe that this debate requires collective action and that you , as Members of Parliament , can play a decisive role in relations with the scientific community and industry .
Rest assured that I and the other members of the Commission will be ready to pursue this dialogue and this debate tomorrow .
In this respect , I think that this Parliament resolution is going to provide strong democratic support for the text ratified by the Lisbon Council which , moreover , set practical goals and deadlines .
We should realise the extent to which the meeting of the Heads of State and Government in Lisbon served to highlight - what I believe is very important - the key role of research policy , as we have again pointed out this evening , and to acknowledge the importance of this role in the advent of a knowledge-based economy and society .
We are at a juncture which gives us hope that greater and more crucial progress may be made in this area .
In addition , I should like to stress the importance of consulting the scientific community , with its awareness of developments , but also the industrial world , which can gauge the importance of the issues at stake .
Let me now outline a few points in the resolution , not in order to reopen the debate , Mr President , given the late hour , but in order to put a few brief comments to you .
I consider that the concept of centres of excellence is one worth developing further and , in this connection , there is one essential principle , and that is that excellence is the condition sine qua non for scientific and technological progress .
Such excellence does exist in Europe , in all the Member States , but at an inadequate level of critical mass , and this is a situation which could be improved .
This is the significance of all these networks of centres of excellence that must be created without necessarily specifying the exact infrastructures involved .
It is a matter of human resources , but it is something that must be set up in order to have the ability to raise levels in Europe .
And , as Mr Harbour pointed out , this excellence may also come in a virtual form in the modern technologies and high-speed networks we wish to see set up .
As regards fundamental and applied research , I think this is a matter of balance .
These two aspects are closely linked .
Everyone accepts this , both the world of industry and the world of research , of course , in the same way as they accept multidisciplinarity , which is one of the results of scientific developments .
In order to create the necessary dynamic , it is therefore essential to develop the concept of benchmarking .
I think this is an instrument which will make it possible , at European level , to create this dynamic , and also to instigate proactive and open coordination .
I think establishing a patent is a condition sine qua non , as has been adequately pointed out .
Mr Bolkestein , who is responsible for the internal market , is well aware of this .
Indeed , I should like to take this opportunity to thank Parliament for having , with a view to the Intergovernmental Conference , insisted on initiating a discussion on a European legal body , since this is an essential condition for bringing about this Community patent .
Finally , as far as small- and medium-sized businesses are concerned , the matter of the patent is a crucial factor , quite apart from more specific elements .
The aspect of regional development has been stressed , and I attach great importance to this , as successful experiments have been conducted in some regions and these should be exhibited as an example throughout Europe .
I also attach great importance to the link between research and the Structural Funds , not forgetting the role of the European Investment Bank .
In connection with this , discussions have been held with the European Investment Bank and schemes are underway to ensure that the EIB has a still more dynamic role in matters related to innovation and transposition and , since this was mentioned , that includes with candidate countries .
The Joint Research Centre and its specialist role have been stressed , and the goal of 3 % of GDP is , I believe , an ambitious but necessary goal in all Member States .
So , to be brief , I should simply like to inform Parliament of the forthcoming stages .
The first stage is clear .
I would first of all like to emphasise just how important it was that Parliament expressed its opinion today .
This is why I wished to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for drawing up her report so quickly , and also all the Members of Parliament for debating the matter in such detail within such a short time period .
The next stage , then , is the Council of Ministers responsible for Research , which will take place on 15 June .
This report will provide practical examples to support the determination that we must display .
For I have clearly understood that practical action is needed .
So , regarding the practical action , let me quickly list a few points , starting with benchmarking .
With national research policies , the methodology exists .
I think that the Member States accept this methodology , with the establishment of a high level group of representatives .
Initial results will be available by the end of the year .
A map of areas of excellence in Europe is being drawn up , with the cooperation of the national specialist institutes .
That is no surprise to anyone , I think .
I am hopeful that this map will also be ready by the end of the year .
The mobility of researchers presupposes the mobility of workers in general .
The ambition of Mrs Diamantopoulou and myself is to set up a group made up of representatives from each Member State in order to identify where the obstacles lie .
Regarding Women and Science , in fact , on the initiative of Parliament , a sizeable group of five hundred women has been set up .
You are familiar with the very interesting report that this group produced , which triggered policy in each of the Member States . I shall be able to give you the results of this in the near future .
Finally , as regards electronic networks , Mr Liikanen and I wish to increase these to several gigabytes very soon .
That , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is what I wanted to tell you briefly , given the time constraints and that I do not want to detain you further .
I do , however , wish to express my heartfelt thanks for the interest you have shown in this debate .
I believe we have to set up a dynamic , one that must be enhanced , and I promise that I shall give you progress reports on a regular basis .
I hope that , together , we shall be able to open up the European research area that I believe in so strongly .
Thank you very much for your contribution , Commissioner .
Given the time , we should not hold lengthy discussions .
I am not a spokesperson for this debate but I would nevertheless like to congratulate Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel at this stage on this important report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Peking action platform
The next item is the report ( A5-0125 / 2000 ) by Mrs Smet and Mrs Gröner , on behalf of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , on the follow-up to the Beijing Action Platform [ 2000 / 2020 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , this initiative report is the European Parliament ' s contribution to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly which will be held in New York in three weeks ' time and where the actions of the past five years will be assessed as a follow-up to the World Conference on Women in Beijing and where , at the same time , a declaration will be issued to re-establish the commitments made and to see what needs to be done in the next five years .
As such , it is an important report , because it will be the only report from the European Parliament .
I hope that we will be given the opportunity - and this is also a request to the Commission - to do some preparatory work with the Commission before we leave for New York to ensure that we are singing from the same hymn sheet .
I think it is useful to be on the same wavelength because , as regards women ' s liberation , we could expect Europe to play some sort of a pioneering role .
Europe has done this in the past and we must be able to continue to do this .
But before I talk about this pioneering role , I would like to say a few words about the assessment itself .
Commissioner , it is particularly difficult to carry out an assessment if there is no data available to check on the precise extent of progress made by the different European countries over the past few years .
No statistical data exists .
There are reports on the twelve topics which we need to discuss in New York for each country , which show exactly how much progress has been made with the assessment .
I am therefore delighted that you announced in the discussion on the fifth action programme that you would like to set up a kind of observatory where an effort will be made to collate all possible gender-related data .
After all , there is an enormous gap in this field .
I would like to direct my second point to Parliament itself .
The efforts we needed to make in order to finish this report suggest that the Secretariat of the Women ' s Committee is heavily understaffed .
There was very little in the way of cooperation , and had it not been for the fact that Mrs Gröner and myself had hard-working collaborators , then there would probably not have been a report now .
It is a disgrace for Parliament that other committees can apparently acquire excellent secretariats and well-equipped secretariats with many staff , but that this is not possible for the Women ' s Committee .
It may be useful that we , together with the women involved , should take an initiative .
That is all I have to say as regards assessment and I will not touch on it any further .
For the next five years , I believe that the action programme , the five-year programme which the Commission is presenting for discussion at the moment , is of huge importance .
It obviously comprises the traditional themes , which is quite normal because , although the world moves on , these themes are still on the agenda . Admittedly , there are new emphases but , at the end of the day , they are the same recurring themes .
The first theme I would like to mention is the world of employment and the new emphases which should , in my view , be applied .
These include the new technologies and the fact that there are too few women in this sector , if any .
This was also said a moment ago .
Other matters to be emphasised are the division between work and family , as is provided for in the employment guidelines , and equal pay for equal work , something which I find the Commission is not emphasising enough and which is receiving insufficient attention .
There is still a chasm between men and women in terms of wages .
Another theme is decision making .
The Commission has made efforts , as has Europe , but mainly in the political sphere .
I think that efforts should also be made with regard to both sides of industry .
Far more attention should be paid to them since they manage and control a large part of social life .
On the theme of violence , too little attention is being paid to violence within the family , in my opinion .
Attention is being paid to violence in the work sphere , and so forth , but not so much within the family .
In my view , more attention should be paid to the media , which is such a determining factor in social life .
Women are very much absent in the media .
As for women ' s rights and human rights , I hope that some progress can be made at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Finally , I already said that Europe is expected to play a pioneering role .
I would mention two areas , in particular .
Firstly , if we grant development aid or if we have contacts with third countries , we should not just prescribe conditions with regard to the economic position of women .
We are now familiar with this .
We know that in many developing countries , the economy is carried by women , and we support this .
This much we now know .
What we do not emphasise enough in our contacts with third countries is that human rights should be respected with regard to women , too .
What is happening in Afghanistan is unjustifiable .
It is unjustifiable that , in a number of countries , female circumcision is still practised and that we maintain the best relations with these countries as a matter of course .
Secondly , with regard to the Union ' s enlargement to include the former Eastern Bloc countries , it will be vital that the screening report to be compiled by the Commission should give a sound account of what is happening there , because there are signs of regress instead of progress in this regard .
Mr President , Commissioner , the special session of the United Nations General Assembly , which will be held at the beginning of June under the banner ' Women 2000 : Gender equality , development and peace for the 21st Century ' , will be of enormous importance to the situation of women .
The monitoring of the application of the Beijing Action Platform reveals that the greatest concerns , in relation to the proposed objectives , are still education and training , power and decision making , health , poverty and violence .
The social changes of recent years have affected women in a special way .
The increase in the elderly population has had a great effect on the lives of women who , in general , when they are no longer looking after their children , have to look after their parents .
Despite considerable progress in terms of the situation of women , there are still considerable differences , especially discrimination at work and different wages for the same job .
The majority and , in many cases , all of the responsibility for domestic tasks falls to women .
The situation of women with family responsibilities , combined with the difficulties in the labour market , have led to a term which is explicit as well as unfair : the feminisation of poverty .
We still require initiatives which help to give women access to the labour market and allow them full professional development , to which end we will need to facilitate women ' s ' other ' work through nurseries and financial aid .
Men will have to take more family responsibilities and adapt to a society which is constantly changing and which has modified their traditional roles .
The information society requires increasing numbers of people with technological training , which women must get involved in , since this is an area for which they are particularly well-equipped .
If the number of women involved in decision making were to increase , it would become easier to resolve the problems facing them .
A lot of progress has been made , but there are still political and economic areas in which women are under-represented .
Amongst the problems which women are unfortunately facing at the moment , we must mention the violence directed at them : domestic violence , armed conflict and trafficking in women , which has been increasing in recent years .
This is a form of violence against their person , their fundamental rights and their dignity .
The Treaty of Amsterdam provides for the integration of the objectives of equality into Community policies and , especially in Article 141 , positive actions in the field of employment .
Employment is usually also a solution to other problems of marginalisation , economic dependence , lack of personal freedom , etc .
The fifth Community Action Plan will have to deal with the problems still existing through a budgetary provision which will allow programmes to be implemented in the most urgent areas .
The cooperation of the media is essential to achieving these objectives .
Mr President , ' Half the sky is borne on the shoulders of women ' , a successful man once said .
But the heavens are not enough .
Women account for more than half the earth ' s population and yet remain unheard and under-represented within most political , economic and social spheres .
That is unacceptable .
In the course of the centuries , women have demanded their rights as full citizens .
They have ranged from , in the northern hemisphere , female campaigners for the right to vote to , in the southern hemisphere , groups opposing genital mutilation .
In the course of the Beijing Conference in 1995 , a common action plan was decided upon for these different groups of women . This was a milestone in the recognition of women ' s rights as being integral to human rights in general .
Just about all the governments of the world endorsed the Beijing Conference ' s action plan .
The Beijing Declaration distinguishes twelve critical areas and defines views and long-term objectives which should be adopted by governments , the United Nations , national movements and private industry in order to improve the conditions under which women live .
Five years later , discrimination against women is still widespread , and violence against women is still a global phenomenon .
A glass ceiling bars women from advancement in the professions , administration and politics .
Women constitute the overwhelming majority of the one billion people who are illiterate and who live in the most extreme poverty , and decisions affecting women are still made by men .
It is high time that , in the course of the Beijing + 5 Conference in June , concrete decisions are taken which will actually result in the objectives of the Beijing Action Platform being realised .
The report we are voting on tomorrow emphasises that progress within all twelve areas is necessary if women are fully to be able to obtain their share of human rights .
A threefold strategy is needed if the Conference is not just to be another exercise in rhetoric .
First of all , the world ' s governments must adopt a concrete action plan and again undertake to fulfil the Beijing objectives .
Secondly , they must pledge financial resources with a view to implementing the decisions and , thirdly , supervisory tools must be created for the purpose of monitoring implementation .
These three tools have so far been missing in implementing the Beijing Action Platform .
The fact that the world ' s governments refuse to acknowledge that , from the cradle to the grave , girls and women are exploited and persecuted has , throughout the ages , been the most flagrant and far-reaching violation of human rights .
This is something which the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities wants to change .
Women should not just bear half the sky on their shoulders , but also have the right to take responsibility for decisions affecting our entire earth .
Is that not so , Commissioner ?
Mr President , we are going to New York first and foremost to discuss the position of women globally .
Naturally , there is a need in the European Union , too , to improve the position of women in all walks of life , but we are now talking more about a worldwide conference .
In my opinion , a worthwhile contribution to this event would be the concept that the empowerment of women can be regarded as a strategy for the development of society as a whole .
By investing in women , we will be helping whole communities and societies on the road to development .
The evidence in support of this is very convincing ; many problems can be overcome by investing , for example , in the primary health care of women .
In the eradication of poverty , supporting women , for example by ' micro loans ' ( negligible amounts from our point of view ) has proved a very sound strategy for promoting economic activity .
Education and training are , of course , the means for women to become members of full standing in society .
I believe that if there is anything we in the European Union can contribute to this conference , it would relate to the fact that we have launched this ' gender mainstreaming ' process , which entails trying to involve the gender viewpoint in all decision making .
As all those present are well aware , this is not easy - we have a tremendous amount of work to do in this respect ourselves - but we can raise the issue that the role of women needs to be reassessed when it comes to questions of war and peace , for example .
Women are , to a very great extent , the victims and those who suffer in wars now .
Would it not be a good idea to debate what could be done by women to prevent or resolve these kind of present-day conflicts ?
Five years ago , at the Beijing Conference , it was stated that women ' s rights are human rights .
We quite agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Smet . We cannot accept what is happening to women in Afghanistan and we must promote the human rights of women at the New York Conference .
Mr President , we support the foundation work carried out by the co-rapporteurs , we support their approach and we support the fact that sound proposals continue to be produced , but when it comes to evaluating what has been achieved over the last five years - as has been said - we have no information , in either objective or more general terms , to provide a basis for planning new actions or finding means of rectifying failed past actions .
The European Commission will once again , therefore , be conspicuous for its grand proposals and the failure to follow them up with tangible actions .
In our opinion , on this occasion , it might be appropriate for the Union to adopt an initiative , a practical initiative which is a priority objective with set time frames .
We feel that , out of the vast amount of issues to be considered , female circumcision warrants particular attention .
We would like Mrs Diamantopoulou to inform us whether the clause on relations with third countries which deals with female circumcision is seen as particularly important and , in the interests of bringing the matter to a swift conclusion , we suggest that no further Union aid should be granted to any of those countries which permit or tolerate female circumcision .
This is a major issue , a practice so common and widespread that it is featuring increasingly , even in the European daily media .
- ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like , as we are discussing the action platform on equality decided in Beijing in 1995 , to take this opportunity to extol the role played , and the efforts made , by the UN on this issue and to remind the House of the important role played and the contribution made by the Union in adopting a common accepted action platform at worldwide level .
In view of the forthcoming UN conference in New York , I think it is opportune that we claim a more active and effective European and worldwide policy in all sectors , a policy which will reach as far as Afghanistan and the Gulf states , where women are still in a most unfortunate position and are denied fundamental human rights .
This does not , of course , mean that we underestimate the progress achieved and the European Union ' s contribution to the dynamic presence of women in all professional and scientific circles , the performance of women at all levels of education and their successes wherever equal opportunity policies and the principle of meritocracy are applied .
However , despite the undisputed progress being made , serious problems of inequality and discrimination persist and have serious repercussions on the functioning of democracy and the failure to make full use of the valuable human resource which women represent comes at a huge economic and social cost .
This is why we need to move forward with a specific vision and specific plan , with strategies and mechanisms , with a precise timetable and indicators , with quantifiable targets so that we can appraise the preceding decade and accurately evaluate the progress made at the new UN Conference in 2005 .
Today we need to extend our action to eradicate discrimination on the labour market , involve women in social dialogue and deal with violence against women .
We need to guarantee a fair redistribution of responsibilities and obligations between the two sexes , both in public and private life .
In short , we need to create a new institutional and social framework which reflects the changes which have taken place and which solves the problems and contradictions which arise from the new contract with the two sexes .
The European Union and the Member States must be on the front line of this fight .
- ( EL ) Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating Mrs Gröner and Mrs Smet on their exceptional and remarkable report .
Apart from the 28 specific recommendations , which are particularly helpful , both for Beijing and the Commission ' s fifth programme - and I should like to assure you that complete account will be taken of them - I must also highlight the fact that they are accompanied by a particularly interesting political analysis containing information and views which is an excellent tool and which I think the Member States would be well advised to reproduce .
Five years on from Beijing , we shall be assessing the past five years .
As the speakers have said , a great deal has been done and a great deal remains to be done .
And , of course , Afghanistan will have to be discussed and reported and voted on in New York because it is one of the worst disgraces of our century , one of the worst disgraces of mankind in the year 2000 .
We made commitments in 1995 ; these commitments have been honoured up to a point and we shall be analysing them in full at the Beijing Conference .
One question which arises is whether or not we have the information needed at European Union level .
I should like to inform you that the Commission has been endeavouring for a long time now to collate information on all the Member States , to obtain answers to questionnaires sent out more than once , to obtain answers to individual issues of legislation , infrastructures , action and statistics .
We have managed , after a great deal of trouble , I must admit , to collate a set of data and we shall be publishing a paper as quickly as possible - within a fortnight I hope - containing the data for 1999 .
That was the reason for the delay .
As far as the report is concerned , I should like to refer to three points which , according to the questionnaires sent in from the countries of Europe , take priority there .
The first is new changes in the information society .
The new changes , which are changing the economy , society and the work model , are throwing up both huge challenges and huge problems , especially for the weaker groups , and huge problems for women , who are less involved in the new world of technologies and who , of course , have higher unemployment rates .
We therefore need here to highlight the new objective of education , lifelong learning , retraining and special programmes to ensure that women participate in the new information society and , hence , in the labour market .
The second point concerns democracy and is linked to the information society , which is creating a new type of communication between citizens and politicians and opening up a new route , which you need to be aware of and for which you need the right vehicle .
And , of course , there is the traditional problem of the representation of women , which all the speakers have already touched on .
The third point , which also proved to be the issue to which the Member States attach importance , is the issue of violence against women , the most important problem being trafficking in women , i.e. the modern version of the slave trade .
Unfortunately , ladies and gentlemen , we must assume that the new era is bringing with it not only electronic commerce , as defined in the economy , but also electronic commerce in women and children .
These are issues which call , of course , for innovative solutions and new approaches and cannot simply be seen as the price paid for the new era .
I think that these are the basic points which need to be assessed and , more importantly , where we need to renew our commitments .
I should like to stress that Beijing will obviously give rise to negotiating problems .
I agree that there will be centres of power and organised powers which will try to reverse all this progress and review the agenda which we have agreed on .
How we organise ourselves at all levels and how our lobby operates at all levels are extremely important , because we want to prevent any review of the agenda or a return to the past , renew our commitments and create new momentum so that our commitments are implemented in the new era .
I think that , since all negotiations depend on preparation and on being fully aware of one ' s own situation and the situation of those sitting on the opposite side of the table , we at the Commission and the European Parliament need to cooperate very closely with the Portuguese Presidency .
It is , I think , superfluous , to assure you that the Commission - and I personally - am at the disposal of the Portuguese Presidency so that we can prepare for these negotiations in the best possible way .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
I would , by the way , like to congratulate all Members who are still present on their perseverance and I would also like to extend warm thanks to the staff who are still present for their prolonged efforts .
( The sitting was closed at 11.53 p.m. )
Address by Mr Kuçan , President of the Republic of Slovenia
In my capacity as President of the European Parliament , it is my honour and my very great pleasure to welcome Mr Milan Kuçan , President of the Republic of Slovenia .
This is the first time that we have had the opportunity to welcome you here , Mr President , and I am very pleased to do so .
Just ten years ago , on 8 April 1990 , the first free , democratic elections were held in Slovenia , a high point in the Slovene spring .
This spring contained the seeds of the confrontations and tensions of the summer of 1991 , during which Slovenia won its independence .
We are all , of course , still mindful of the images of those ten dramatic days in the summer of 1991 .
At that time , the courage , love of freedom and determination of the Slovene people and their President eventually prevailed over the threats of violence .
And a free and democratic Slovenia was born .
This event at the same time marked a return to the shared European values of peace and freedom , democracy and respect for human rights .
These essential values of our European civilisation form the inalienable foundation for our joint actions , present and future .
The European Union is first and foremost a Community based on values .
I am pleased to see that after several decades of Communist dictatorship , Slovenia has enshrined these values as the foundations of the State .
And now Slovenia belongs to the greater European family which we hope to bring together in the near future .
In 1996 , the Association Agreement enabled us to set up a joint European Parliament / Slovene Parliament parliamentary committee .
On 10 June 1996 , your country submitted its formal application for membership of the European Union .
Negotiations began in March 1998 , and I am aware that they are actively continuing under the leadership of the President of the Commission , Mr Romano Prodi , and Commissioner Verheugen .
We are aware that over the last ten years , in your capacity as President of Slovenia , you have played a key role in achieving positive development in your country .
I am therefore particularly pleased to welcome you here today .
You are most welcome , Mr President , and without further ado I shall give you the floor .
- Madam President , honourable Members , I am honoured to be able to speak in this august House .
I am especially pleased that this has been made possible for me on the 50th anniversary of Robert Schuman ' s appeal to France , Germany and other countries to enter into a common economic policy on steel and coal .
That was the day when the process of European integration began .
It is your and our common European day of celebration , and I offer you my sincere congratulations .
I congratulate you with trust and faith in the European idea of association .
I am confirmed in this faith by the recent very successful visit by the distinguished President of the European Parliament , Mrs Fontaine , to Slovenia .
In her address to the Slovene Parliament , Mrs Fontaine expressed her clear commitment to furthering the project of a united Europe , saying : " It is important that we support the will to strengthen the special features of each of our countries .
We must therefore deepen the foundations of the European Union and prepare it for enlargement in such a way that it will be able tomorrow to maintain all its ability to function in response to challenges both internal and external .
This will be possible only on condition that we maintain the existing balance between the small and large countries , and continue on the path towards a Europe of citizens " .
This idea seems to me particularly important , for it emphasises coexistence .
Coexistence is the only real alternative for the future of humankind ; including that of Europe .
Yet the question is : what will coexistence be founded upon ?
My own firm conviction is that it should be founded , first and foremost , upon the experience we have brought with us and which has engendered the values that we have articulated as the quintessence of European democracy and declared as the principles binding together the very fabric of the new Europe .
The experience we carry into the third millennium is an experience of the rise and fall of colonial powers and ideological , political and social totalitarianism .
Set in counterpart to this , yet an integral part of our experience , is the ultimate establishment of the rule of law and human rights , the freedom of individuals and nations , democracy as the criterion of political power , social justice and stability as the goals to which we must constantly aspire .
Alongside experience , our coexistence should be founded upon a set of laws that will determine human life on the threshold of the third millennium and in which these values will be implemented and confirmed .
These are the laws of the global community .
For the moment , the global community seems limited to markets , economies and information and communication technology .
Politics is lagging behind this trend .
Yet the solid foundations of coexistence in the world demand globalised politics , which will be capable of establishing social coherence which will balance the effects of capital which has already been globalised .
Globalised politics presupposes that national politics and interests founded on the sovereignty of the nation state should be bound to the global politics of common responsibility .
This would be a kind of world ' domestic politics ' , to which all countries would be bound .
It would be founded in part on the following elements : on the global spread of political and economic democracy , on binding standards of individual and collective human rights , on dialogue between different cultures , religions and civilisations , on opposition to nationalism and xenophobia , on a new balance between the economically developed and developing parts of the world , on the globalisation of learning , knowledge , research and information , on developing international and inter-regional cooperation , on constructing a social order based on the model of social justice and solidarity , on common security and defence and on the fight against organised crime .
With such politics we might seek a way of ensuring that the former ideological , political and military confrontations of the Cold War are not replaced by clashes of culture , religion and civilisation .
If we are to move towards worldwide political responsibility , we should be moving all the sooner to a policy of common responsibility in Europe ; in the very Europe that right now is consolidating the foundations of coexistence for the future .
This is being heralded by common European policies - not only monetary , but also foreign , defence and security policies - the European human rights charter , and perhaps a future European constitution .
It is also heralded by the efforts to set up crisis management , which would prevent external or internal crises of countries in the region spilling over into armed conflict and aggression that might threaten the common peace , security and prosperity .
A global policy of common responsibility requires not only that we prevent the actions of others that harm the community , but also , and most importantly , that we refrain from such actions .
In the open , multipolar world where Eurocentrism is no more , Europe can be one of the standard-bearers of civilised development only if it is internally globalised , only if all of its parts are integrated within it , and if no one is excluded from the common future or marginalised .
In the ruins of the Berlin Wall , however , traces of new divisions are appearing in Europe .
In real life , several Europes exist . Here we have the countries of the European Union and members of Nato , which are developing on the basis of the long European democratic tradition , on respect for human rights and the prospects of a new economic upswing , complete with a common European currency .
This grouping also includes some small countries that have experienced major developments within the EU and have preserved their special features .
The second Europe is one of countries that are negotiating with the European Union : countries , therefore , that are in the first or second-class waiting rooms for the European train .
The third Europe is made up of the countries of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe ( Ukraine , Croatia , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Albania , Macedonia and Moldova ) , which have not yet reached the station , although they wish to do so .
Some of them will not get there without help .
There also exists a group of countries that , for the moment , do not wish to join the EU .
They would prefer to toy with the project of a new ideological division of Europe .
We may call this the fourth Europe .
Serbia , poised to tip the scales of stability in South-Eastern Europe , has been thrust into that fourth Europe by its aggressive national political elite , which has , from time to time , been supported by the nationalist ambitions of political elites from other Balkan nations .
As it decides on the lasting foundations of peace and also , following the horrors of war in the Balkans , on the future of Kosovo and Montenegro , European unity again faces a great test .
The possibility of bloody military clashes is still real .
This unity will be all the more vital when Serbia needs to be helped in the process of democratic change , when it will be faced with the truth and with its own responsibility .
This change will open up the field of democratic , plural politics and efforts to bring the European value system back into the consciousness of the Serbian people .
It will then be necessary for Serbia - and for other Balkan countries , too - to be presented with the challenging but realistic prospect of entry into European integration ; and presented to each country on the same conditions , without special favours , but for this reason requiring all the more assistance .
None of these ' Europes ' is immune from political or cultural diversions , which might distort their democratic image , not even the first Europe .
I have in mind the crude forms of xenophobia and hatred of foreigners , resistance to free movement of labour , and anti-Semitism , all of which are part of today ' s political populism .
This puts pressure on fundamental values , and threatens coexistence and our common future .
Insensitivity to these phenomena would create new barriers between us .
We are reminded of this by the experience we carry with us .
I believe that the reservations of certain European countries towards the position of the Austrian Freedom Party are motivated by this experience and that this response will be consistent , irrespective of who might be affected by it .
Alongside all the old divisions , new ones are emerging , and they are even more radically afflicting Europe , for the information society of today ' s world is presenting challenges to every facet of our lives .
There are ever increasing signs of the emergence of two classes in society .
The world is beginning to divide in a new way .
On the one hand , there are the unemployed and those who , through inadequate knowledge , have no access to modern information technology .
They are threatened with social exclusion , stagnation and marginalisation .
On the other hand , there are those who have the necessary education and are therefore guaranteed a future .
This is a new phenomenon , which was identified recently at the EU Conference in Lisbon on social cohesion .
It is clear that , today , everyone in Europe is faced with the same problems , and we are all responding to them .
Of course , we are not responding in entirely the same way .
Nevertheless , it is essential that in seeking answers we all proceed from the same value system .
The common cornerstones of values for coexistence have been established .
Now everyone must be afforded the chance to live in accordance with those values .
Decisive importance in this may probably be ascribed to the new feeling of commitment to Europe , which I understand as a Europe-wide system of human ties , cooperation , solidarity , respect and other values .
This does not simply involve the free flow of ideas , labour , goods and capital , but also values such as respect for diversity , tolerance , equality before the law of the ' citizens of Europe ' , irrespective of their national , ethnic and cultural affiliation or outlook .
This will enable a high level of identification with the same values across Europe , which , in turn , may represent the basic connective tissue of Europe .
This frame of mind would be the best guarantee that intolerance and enmity remain a marginal phenomenon .
At the same time , it would mean that in no European country could those in power dare , in the name of sovereignty or the principle of non-interference in internal affairs , to systematically stifle or limit either individual or collective human rights .
Such an event would demand common action , without wavering or compromise .
The NATO intervention in Kosovo is perhaps the first step in this direction .
The value of fundamental human rights was placed above the value of classic state sovereignty .
The systematic mass violation of human rights should henceforth not simply be the internal affair of an individual country .
It is becoming a subject of responsibility for the international community .
Whether this marks the beginning of a new chapter in international relations and international law , only time will tell .
Europe , and in particular the EU , should not be in two minds about this .
The real path of globalisation for Europe is the enlargement of the European Union to cover all European countries .
This is a challenging enterprise , for a period of enlargement of the European Union is now beginning to include countries that have a different political ' pedigree ' from the current members .
Now it is the turn of countries that , in the great division of the world , belonged to the former ideological East of Europe .
It is the turn of countries that , because of this , have lagged behind in their economic development .
Yet the fact is that only this enlargement will mean the actual integration and globalisation of Europe , and will mean for the European East and West an end to the past and for both the beginning of a global European future .
For those countries , like Slovenia , that were forcibly removed by the bloc system to a different culture , inclusion in European integration would also represent proof that they had finally returned to their western civilisation .
In any case , we should not forget that these countries , including Slovenia , have shown that in a relatively short time they have been able to adopt the rules that have taken a relatively long time to become established in the EU and in the European West .
The great efforts invested in reforms may serve as a guarantee that EU enlargement will be beneficial , both for the current members and for those that wish to become members .
Holding back this enlargement would indicate that Europe has still not buried the past , that it has not learned sufficiently from history , and that globalisation is not yet its internal requirement .
It would also indicate that Europe is abandoning its influence and presence in the world .
Alongside this new qualitative step forward , doubts are emerging among the members of the EU .
They are moving from the entirely known to the not entirely known .
The decision on enlargement carries with it entirely new risks ; and there must be a degree of understanding for the dilemma facing the EU .
I am thinking primarily of the implementation of serious internal , institutional and substantive reforms in the EU , of its readiness to accept new members and of postponement of the date of enlargement .
Could it be perhaps that once again the special interests of individual Member States are rising to the surface ?
Does changing the view on successive acceptance of new countries , as soon as they are ready to be accepted , into a view on group acceptance of candidates in a first and second round , not mean a renewed shifting of enlargement towards the end of this first decade ?
Dilemmas , doubts and uncertainties are also emerging among the candidate countries .
The impression is growing of a ' moving target ' , which is shifting and dampening the enthusiasm of the better prepared candidates with the feeling that they will have to wait for the less-prepared candidates .
Clarity and transparency of these views would , of course , have an encouraging effect , and it would be especially useful if everyone could stop trying to offer each other excuses .
The EU should not use the problems among the candidate countries as an excuse to delay its own reforms , while the candidate countries should not use the difficulties of EU internal reforms as an excuse for putting off the reforms they need for full membership .
Such excuses would slow down the prospects of the rise of the future Europe , and making enlargement conditional upon bilateral demands and the interests of individual countries would have no less an effect .
This includes conditions that go far back into history and attempt to revise it , particularly the history of the Second World War .
Such demands are appearing from the position of power held by those that are in the European Union , against the powerlessness of those that are only just exercising the right to acceptance into the European Union .
At this point I would like to recall my address of November 1995 to the Committee on Foreign Policy , Security and Defence of your Parliament in its previous composition .
At that time , I argued against the discriminatory treatment of Slovenia , for the then Italian Government was preventing us , through its power of veto , from signing the association agreement , and was setting as a condition the resolving of what were for Italy issues in dispute deriving from the border treaties between Italy and the former Yugoslavia .
With its back to the wall , Slovenia signed the so-called ' Spanish compromise ' .
I do not mention this episode to resurrect memories , but rather because in the current negotiations there have also appeared tendencies to raise purportedly justified interests in relation to Slovenia to the level of an EU demand .
I am thinking of the demand for restitution of property to those from whom it was appropriated following the Second World War as part of the punishing of collaboration with the Nazi and Fascist occupation regime .
In the then Yugoslavia , Slovenia did nothing that was not done in the spirit of the Potsdam resolutions by the Allies , with whom the Slovenes fought together against Fascism and Nazism .
This time , Slovenia does not wish to accept this kind of imposition of conditions , and expects understanding and sympathy from the European Union .
I believe that individual bilateral issues should not , in any event , be allowed to become a reason for placing conditions on acceptance as a full member of the EU ; nor should they be allowed to gain the pragmatic support of EU members , for the sake of clear and open foundations in European integration and in its future .
Slovenia is a small nation .
For many centuries we lived in a multinational political community , in the Austro-Hungarian Empire and in two Yugoslavias .
We felt all the anguish of non-respect for national identity , of pressures towards our national identity being wiped out and of the fatal consequences of inequality in society and before the law .
The worst thing of all was the aggression during the time of the Nazi and Fascist occupation .
Our right to existence as a nation was taken away .
For this reason we value highly the efforts of those carrying forward the project of a common European home , founded on the concept of open autonomy of national and other entities of society .
Life in diversity is the key to success for European association , and Slovenia has tied its future to this .
Our historical experiences and the future of our citizens dictate that we cannot reconcile ourselves either to voluntary or forced isolation from Euro-Atlantic institutions .
Slovenia wishes to be a part of them , and is prepared to contribute what it can to the common life of European nations , but is not prepared to pay an inequitable price for it .
Slovenia will be ready for accession by the end of 2002 , and believes that it will then be welcome in the club of EU Member States .
We are also pleased that , in Helsinki , the Member States of the EU committed themselves to enlargement by the same date for those candidate countries best prepared .
In order for the current goals to be achieved , negotiations should be concluded next year .
We are convinced that the current progress in negotiations should make this possible .
I would like finally to stress that I do not see globalisation and European integration as unification .
The positive effects of these processes are interdependent on the simultaneously establishing freedom of individuation and fragmentation .
This is not just the freedom and autonomy of the individual , but also the freedom of social groups to express ethnic , cultural , religious , political and spiritual affiliations and convictions .
These freedoms have a special meaning in people ' s lives , and through them people express their bond with specific values .
Only respect for such freedoms can be the foundation of European coexistence .
This involves establishing the principle of ' unity in diversity ' .
The alternative is clear .
If we do not succeed in finding in this new millennium the foundations of coexistence , which cannot simply be a negation of the past , but also an active acceptance of the future , including the formulation of a universal European policy of common responsibility in an open European Union , Europe will direct its destiny back into the past instead of into the future .
In the first decade of the new century and millennium , democratic Europe is also facing new trials .
My firm conviction is that united Europeans could be more than a match for these trials .
Madam President , I wholeheartedly support Mr Buttiglione ' s speech and , on behalf of the Forza Italia delegation of which I am head in the European People ' s Party , I cannot forget the suffering of the Italian people in the former Yugoslavia at the end and during the immediate aftermath of the Second World War .
A genuine ethnic cleansing operation took place and disputes still remain which have not been resolved .
Some Italian citizens are still waiting for their rights to be respected .
We are on extremely good terms with Slovenia , but we cannot forget past events or allow them to be forgotten .
The Europe which is just emerging , our common home which we are building together , cannot disregard the past .
We cannot create a Europe which does not condemn the atrocities perpetrated by Communism and Nazism .
Therefore , Madam President , in addition to calling upon you to make authoritative representations to the Slovenian Government , I also invite all the Members of Parliament to sign the declaration calling for the institution of a day dedicated to the Shoah , to the holocaust , to be observed throughout the European Union .
Madam President , we know President Kuçan and we are aware of his regard for Europe and the good relations which have been established between Italy and Slovenia .
We do not feel there is cause for concern but we would certainly like the matter to be clarified , and I would like to say that we regard the Spanish compromise managed by Mr Solana as non-negotiable .
Clearly , there is no question mark over any of this , and , therefore , I also consider that it would be appropriate for you to obtain clarification of the issue .
We entrust the matter to your wisdom and authority .
Thank you , Mrs Napoletano .
I propose to the three speakers that I write to Mr Kuçan to inform him very respectfully of your remarks .
I should probably also give him a very precise account of your interventions .
I believe that these reflect the feelings of a large part of this House . Thank you for trusting me to inform Mr Kuçan of this situation as precisely and clearly as possible .
Statements by the President
I have two statements to make .
You should already have received the first one by e-mail . This concerns the practical problems encountered on some of Parliament ' s premises .
The Quaestors acted quickly to resolve this situation in the best way possible .
They commissioned air analyses from the German company , Dekra , which identified certain failures which we have remedied as quickly as possible .
I thank the Quaestors , and particularly the President of the College , Mr Poos , for their prompt action .
I myself immediately wrote to the Strasbourg authorities and the social services so that all the relevant authorities were informed .
You should therefore have received this statement by e-mail .
Madam President , it is totally unacceptable that a building that cost millions of pounds , and which was officially opened less than six months ago , has thousands of faults and is now found to be a potential threat to the people who work in it .
I trust that this problem will be raised in the negotiations for the final price of the building , which should strengthen Parliament ' s hand in reducing the cost for the taxpayers of Europe .
My second statement concerns the information sent to me by the French Government regarding the receipt of a decree withdrawing the mandate of Mr Le Pen .
You will remember that I informed the House at the time that I would ask the Legal Affairs Committee , in accordance with our Rules of Procedure , to give an opinion on this issue .
This committee has , on several occasions , examined all the aspects , particularly the legal ones , of this issue .
I thank Mrs Palacio , the committee ' s chairperson , and the committee members for their efforts .
The discussions were extremely thorough and it was only yesterday , at 8 p.m. , that I received Mrs Palacio ' s letter informing me of the committee ' s opinion on this issue .
So that there is no room for error or misinterpretation , I would prefer to read you the letter .
' Madam President , during its meeting of 16 May 2000 , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market re-examined the situation of Mr Le Pen .
The committee is aware that the decree of the Prime Minister of the French Republic , of which Mr Le Pen was notified on 5 April 2000 , and which was published in the Official Journal of the French Republic on 22 April 2000 , has become enforceable .
However , the committee has also noted , as mentioned in the letter notifying Mr Le Pen of the decree , that the latter has the option of appealing to the French Council of State .
This appeal may be accompanied by a request to suspend the enforcement of the decree .
In view of the decision taken the day before not to recommend at present that Parliament officially take note of the decree regarding Mr Le Pen , the committee has examined the possible responses .
The case of Mr Tapie was mentioned as a precedent to be followed in support of this decision .
The result is that the European Parliament should officially take note of the decree withdrawing Mr Le Pen ' s mandate only after expiry of the deadline for appealing to the French Council of State or , if applicable , after a decision by the latter ' .
These are the contents of the letter sent to me yesterday evening by Mrs Palacio on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee .
Once again , I thank her .
I intend to abide by the opinion of the Legal Affairs Committee .
Madam President , I am taking the floor to request that Parliament express its opinion in accordance with Rule 7 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
If you will allow me , I will justify my proposal .
Go ahead , Mr Barón Crespo .
Madam President , Rule 7 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure lays down that the President may ask the competent committee for its opinion and that Parliament may express its opinion on the basis of that proposal .
I would ask Parliament to express its view , and I do so with all due respect for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the internal Market , which has held a full debate on this issue , because I believe that there are two basic elements here .
One of them is respect for parliamentary rules and the Treaties .
Monday ' s letter from the chairperson of the Legal Affairs Committee - which is the one I know , because I have just been made aware of it - cited Article 12 ( 2 ) of the 1976 Act concerning the election of representatives of the European Parliament , which reads as follows : " Where a seat falls vacant pursuant to national provisions in force in a Member State , the latter shall inform the European Parliament , which shall take note of the fact " .
This means , firstly , that a Member State , which is a constitutional state , like France , has taken decisions in accordance with a legal judgement and the executive ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I am going to suspend the sitting for a few moments as it seems that one of our colleagues is feeling ill .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.20 a.m. and resumed at 10.40 a.m. )

Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Staes has just been taken ill .
Apparently it does not seem to be a heart problem and is therefore hopefully not too serious but an ECG is going to be carried out straightaway .
I can therefore reassure you , relatively speaking , about his state of health .
I thank the two Members who are doctors for taking immediate action and for giving me this information .
I must also say that this unfortunate incident has regrettably shown the length of time which it takes for the medical services to arrive .
This sort of thing could happen to any of us so we definitely need to do something .
I am going to give the floor to Mrs Banotti who wishes to speak straightaway so that the Quaestors can take steps to ensure that the facilities are exactly as they should be .
Madam President , we have all been deeply distressed by the illness of our colleague .
I am immensely relieved that he appears not to be as ill as he appeared at the beginning .
I am a nurse which is why I went up to see if I could give assistance .
We have to recognise that , particularly when the weather gets as hot as it did this week , colleagues ' health is under a great deal of stress .
It is unfortunate that it took a considerable time to get the stretcher to take Mr Staes out of the Chamber .
I would propose on behalf of colleagues that we have immediate resuscitation equipment here in the Chamber in case such a distressing event occurs again .
I am very glad that he is not as ill as he looked , but we must have resuscitative equipment in the House , given not only the conditions but some of our ages and I include myself in that .
Many colleagues are finding it particularly difficult this week in the heat .
Thank you , Mrs Banotti .
I believe there are no age limits for this type of illness .
Madam President , together with the other MEPs who were present during the moments after our colleague fell ill , I must say in all fairness that the time that passed between the incident occurring and the arrival of the doctor would be classed as admirable for any of the world ' s institutions .
And when the official doctor , who came equipped with all the appropriate resuscitation equipment - and in this respect I agree with my colleague - ordered the stretcher , the stretcher arrived .
I am very satisfied with the time that was taken and the action of Parliament ' s medical services .
Madam President , maybe at long last we will decide that the Medical Services should not be placed in the basement .
They would prefer to be on the same floor as the plenary session and maybe we could actually look into that .
Ladies and gentlemen , we trust that the Quaestors will look into the matter .
Madam President , I very much hope that Mr Staes will get well soon , but I believe that we should also remind and ask the media to inform our co-citizens that our life is not a bed of roses , and that coming and going like nomads is not the best thing for our health .
However , we have all made a free choice .
I will return to the issue we were discussing : my Group ' s request for this House to express its opinion in accordance with the regulations .
I was reading Article 12 ( 2 ) of the Act of 1976 , which is the legal basis cited by the chairperson of the Legal Affairs Committee in her letter of Monday .
This paragraph says : " Where a seat falls vacant pursuant to national provisions in force in a Member State , the latter shall inform the European Parliament , which shall take note of the fact " .
France is a constitutional state .
There has been a legal judgement , a government decree , which has been communicated to us and I believe it falls to the European Parliament to take note of it in accordance with the Treaties and with parliamentary law .
I have heard - because I do not have first-hand knowledge of the letter - that precedents are cited .
There certainly are precedents and my Group believes they should be respected .
However , in this case , we should not cite the precedent of Mr Tapie for two reasons : firstly , he was ineligible for reasons of bankruptcy , and , secondly - and this is important - he had used his right to appeal .
Here we have a case of ineligibility for one year and the right to appeal , recognised in the French decree , has not been used .
I do not wish to enter into a debate on French law , since I have no knowledge of it .
I believe that , in accordance with the Treaties and our Rules , Parliament must take note of the decision of the French State .
This is the correct procedure and I think that , although I was not present in the Committee on Legal Affairs , the proposal does not reflect it .
In any event , I believe that this proposal should not be ratified by the European Parliament , I am going to request that it be put to the vote and I would like to say that my Group will vote against it .
Madam President , I am speaking as coordinator for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament ' s Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I was very surprised by the letter which you have just read from the chairperson of the Legal Affairs Committee .
Yesterday , I received a letter from the chairperson , which faithfully reflected what had happened in the Legal Affairs Committee : following a discussion , it was decided not to recommend that Parliament take note , leaving the issue on the table for further discussion .
The letter which you have read reflects the personal motives which the chairperson and perhaps other MEPs put forward , but which does not reflect the point of view of the Legal Affairs Committee .
Specifically , the Socialist Group ' s position was that , in view of the Act of 1976 , all this Parliament could do is what Mr Barón just said , that is to say , take note ( prendre acte ) of the decision of the French Government , with no other condition .
The possibility of giving an explanation was raised , and I argued that that would mean a new vote .
No new vote took place and therefore - I repeat - the views expressed in the letter which you have just read reflect Mrs Palacio ' s personal position and not the position of the Legal Affairs Committee .
Madam President , firstly I would like to say that , in any event , we are all aware that we are facing a situation in which we have to find our way with few specific points of reference and therefore , we must resort to analogy , precedent , common sense and , in general terms , the general principles of the law .
This is because in our statutory law , in our Rules of Procedure , there is no explicit mention of how to proceed in a situation such as this .
Secondly , I wish to point out that there is doubtless confusion here .
Madam President , you have consulted the Legal Affairs Committee on the basis of a purely formal decision .
As on other occasions , such as , for example , when the Legal Affairs Committee examines whether or not to lodge an appeal in the Court of Justice , we are talking about a purely technical assessment by an internal body of Parliament , which makes a recommendation to the President , the external body of Parliament , who is expected to take the decision .
I respect what Mr Barón Crespo says .
His views were discussed and examined in depth by the Legal Affairs Committee .
Allow me to refer to what was said in this committee .
Firstly , Mr Barón says that there is no similarity with the Tapie case because the ineligibility in that case stemmed from a bankruptcy and in this case it stems from a criminal conviction .
I do not personally share that view , and I believe that , according to the relevant law , there are reasons not to share it , because , in any event , we are talking about two sentences , both from French courts and both leading to ineligibility .
It makes no sense now to look into the reason for the sentence .
The sentence exists .
The fact that it involves ineligibility is what concerns us .
Mr Barón ' s second argument concerning the difference between the cases related to the fact that Mr Le Pen has not lodged an appeal and that Mr Tapie had .

I do not share this view either , and nor did the majority of the Legal Affairs Committee , because Mr Le Pen is still within the time limit for lodging an appeal .
We therefore cannot go against something , to which he is entitled under French law : to lodge an appeal within a certain time limit .
Please allow me now to refute Mr Medina ' s statement on his interpretation of the matter .
I would like to do this calmly , although I consider it to be absolutely unjustified and to warrant a more forceful response .
However , in my capacity as chairperson , I must point out that the two letters are complementary .
In the first letter , Madam President , you were informed that the Legal Affairs Committee had taken a decision not to take note of the judgement for the moment , bearing in mind that it is not final . It is enforceable but not final .
In the second paragraph it said : " tomorrow we will continue to discuss this issue " .
The second letter refers to what happened at the second meeting and all the members of the Legal Affairs Committee know that that was how I presented it .
In no way was there any intention to hold a vote , but simply a discussion . I personally , as rapporteur , was going to propose a basis for discussion .
There was therefore no place for a vote on the issue and I had stated that on the previous day .
The vote had already taken place in the Legal Affairs Committee .
Madam President , I did inform you of what happened in that debate and why it did not continue , and it did not do so basically because there was insistence on the issue of the Tapie case .
Clearly , the Legal Affairs Committee can vote on anything , but since it was not laid down and since it was dealing with such an important and serious issue which did not appear in the agenda , it did not seem to me to be reasonable to hold a vote if we were taking a route which all the speakers - and this is recorded in the Minutes - for one reason or another , rejected .
Furthermore , the Minutes also show that I said that a committee chairperson rarely obtained such a degree of unanimity with regard to a proposal .
I say this in order to refute these statements .
I would now like to make a comment in relation to the Rules of Procedure .
Madam President , Rule 7 ( 4 ) is being cited .
That paragraph - in the event that we had to resort to it , which I do not believe to be the case , and I will explain why - states that Parliament may express its opinion on a proposal .
Madam President , there is no proposal to the plenary here .
I believe that , in order to vote honestly , on an issue as delicate as this , if Parliament has to vote , a report should be produced in accordance with the rules , so that everybody may vote as they see fit , and not be influenced by allegations from one side or the other , bearing in mind that , in actual fact , the majority of MEPs are not aware of the background to this issue .
Therefore , if the President wishes to take this route , a report by the Legal Affairs Committee is absolutely essential and it would be irregular not to proceed in that way , ...
( Noise )
... for Parliament to express its opinion on an issue for which there is no written document or anything whatsoever , and which requires legal consideration at the highest level .
It is absolutely irregular and contrary to the Rule that has been cited ...
( Applause )
... because , Madam President , a majority in the Legal Affairs Committee considered , on purely legal bases , that we could not take note of this loss of MEP status .
( Protests )
Madam President , in my opinion , furthermore , this article is not applicable , and I will tell you why : Parliament is asked to take note . It does not have the option of making a political assessment .
It is in the nature of all decisions in plenary that they be taken from a political point of view . In this case we are talking about a purely formal legal assessment .
Madam President , I believe that it falls to the President to take this decision , and you may consult the Rules of Procedure , which states that you must consult the Legal Affairs Committee .
An analysis could be made of the reasons why the Legal Affairs Committee should be consulted , as the internal advisory body in this case . I am prepared to make this analysis , because I have done so before .
( Protests )
Madam President , you can consult any other internal body and , in particular ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
... the Conference of Group Chairmen . However , the House cannot consider this proposal in these circumstances .
( Protests and the President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , as one political group chairman has spoken , as is his right of course , I would also like to briefly make our Group ' s position clear .
The person in question holds political views most of which I find loathsome .
But there are legal systems in the European Union and I would always defend the rights of all Members of the European Parliament under those legal systems .
If legal proceedings are being taken against a Member of this House in a Member State , then we should await the outcome of those proceedings before we can make a final decision here .
Mr Hänsch , if my information is correct , and I have not had a chance to talk to you about this , but I say this with all due respect to our former President , Klaus Hänsch , then our former President specifically made the same point in relation to the Tapie case , that is to say that we should await the outcome of the appeal procedure before we reach a decision here .
What was right then cannot be wrong now .
We must respect the rights of every individual Member of this House , whatever his political views are .
My Group will always argue for that , even if the Members involved belong to other groups .
We will defend these rights with equal vigour , because they are our common rights .
If we violate the law , we can say goodbye to the European Union .
That is why we respect and defend the law - no matter who it applies to .
( Applause )
Mr President , the representatives of our group in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market have familiarised themselves thoroughly with this matter , and I too represent our group in this Committee .
We are fully aware of the political sensitivity of this issue .
We do not , however , want this issue to be used against us for political purposes .
Supported by a majority , our Group concluded that the opinion of the majority of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was justified .
We must make it clear , however , that if there is to be a vote in the part-session on this matter , i.e. on whether the mandate of Mr Le Pen should be terminated , the majority of the French delegation in our Group will vote in favour of this termination .
Mrs Hautala , we must be very clear on this .
It is not a question of voting to waive anybody ' s immunity .
We are talking about Rule 7 ( 4 ) based on which I asked the Legal Affairs Committee to draw up a proposal .
We now have this proposal and Rule 7 ( 4 ) itself states that : " On a proposal from that committee , Parliament may adopt a position on the matter " .
I have received a request for Parliament to adopt a position . In my opinion , I must logically , as a result of using this Rule , not put the committee ' s opinion to the vote , but hold a vote to find out who wants us to vote on this opinion .
Is this now clear to everyone ?
( Interruption by Mrs Pack ) Quite right , Mrs Pack , it is not a question of voting on the substance but of finding out whether or not this is an issue to be placed on the agenda .
The House wants Parliament to adopt a position at midday on the opinion of the Legal Affairs Committee and it is understood that at that point we will see ...
( Mixed reactions ) But the letter will be provided to you .
I speak as the coordinator of the ELDR Group on the Legal Affairs Committee .
The House should realise , from the fact that this matter has occupied our Committee for a period of three very long and exhaustive meetings , that it was felt to be a very complex and difficult issue to deal with .
I for one would feel it wrong for this House to try to look at this matter in a hurry , which seems to be the proposal being put forward by Mr Barón Crespo .
This is a case for absolute objectivity and attention to the rules .
As I understand the rule in question , which , Madame President , you are carefully trying to construe , there is at the moment an opinion before you from the Legal Affairs Committee but there is not a proposal as such .
The rule talks about Parliament having a right to give a view on a proposal , but it seems that you have merely an opinion , not a proposal .
If we were to take a view as a full Parliament , then we should have something more in front of us and a great deal more time and careful consideration before we enter into such a hasty vote on an issue such as this .
Madam President , this matter has been very badly handled from the start . This is to be regretted given the political impact it will have .
You can get an idea of the confusion which reigned within the Legal Affairs Committee during the examination of this issue when someone like Mrs Hautala is under the impression that this is a question of waiving parliamentary immunity .
This is not at all the case and it is in this climate of confusion within the committee that a roughly equal number of votes for and against were cast , hence this proposal .
( Mixed reactions ) This is what happened .
I completely agree with Mr Poettering that the law must be respected : French law is what it is , however , whether you agree with it or not .
In this situation , French law stipulates that the government must assume its responsibilities based on a judgement from a tribunal . In other words , it must publish the decree withdrawing the mandate and we unfortunately have no choice but to take note of this officially .
Whether this is a good or bad thing , it is a situation which I felt I had to clarify .
Madam President , I wish to raise a procedural motion .
I must remind Mr Wurtz that a tribunal does not deliver judgements .
A court delivers judgements .
He should brush up on his legal knowledge .
That apart , the Legal Affairs Committee rightfully discussed this issue and Mr Wurtz was not there .
As a result , he is ill-placed to criticise a confusion which did not exist .
There was political confusion but no legal confusion .
The position of the Legal Affairs Committee was simple .
The decision is not final and therefore cannot be accepted .
That apart , if the President wants to consult the plenary , this should at least pertain to a specific report , as pointed out by the committee ' s chairperson .
We cannot properly discuss and vote at midday on such a politically complex issue when this complexity is based on an internal contradiction between texts in French criminal law , which is not easily accessible to the Members of this House , including the French Members .
If you decide that a vote must be held in this Parliament , this cannot occur without a committee report .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have received many requests to speak .
We absolutely must find the best solution .
I will read to you the letter that Mr Hänsch sent to Mr Hervé de Charrette , the then French Foreign Minister , at the time of the Tapie affair .
The most important paragraph states that : " Due to the irreversible nature of the withdrawal of the mandate , it seems to me appropriate to wait for the Council of State to rule on this appeal .
It appears that the Council of State ' s decision on the stay of execution will be taken imminently " .
As you can see , and we cannot get into a discussion on this , I too looked at what my predecessors did in similar situations because case law does , rightfully , exist .
We are now in a difficult position .
I propose that we decide whether or not we want the Legal Affairs Committee to draw up a genuine proposal , as some of you seem to think that the letter written to me by Mrs Palacio is not a proposal within the terms of the Rules of Procedure .
Personally , I must abide by the Rules of Procedure which state that : " On a proposal from that committee , Parliament may adopt a position on the matter " .
If Parliament , therefore , wants a genuine proposal , we will ask the Legal Affairs Committee to draw up this proposal on which we can calmly vote , not at midday , but a little later perhaps .
We must resolve this situation .
I will therefore immediately put the two possible solutions to the vote .
The first is that we keep to the current position which is to abide by the terms of Mrs Palacio ' s letter and await the outcome of any appeal lodged with the Council of State by the Member in question , before officially noting the withdrawal or otherwise of the mandate .
The second solution is that the plenary asks the Legal Affairs Committee to draw up a genuine proposal on which Parliament will adopt a position in accordance with Rule 7 ( 4 ) .
Madam President , I am sorry I need to ask to speak again , but we cannot vote on anything at all here today , because we have clear and proper procedures .
If we refer a matter to a committee , then we must have a basis for doing so , that is to say we need a document defining that referral .
We do not have such a document .
That is why I urge you not to hold a vote on this matter now in any way whatsoever .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I appeal to Mr Barón Crespo and the Socialist Group .
We have reached an impasse .
I fully understand that you want Mr Le Pen to lose his mandate .
Fortunately , however , this issue does not depend on our political desires but on the law and on the fact that , at the moment , we are faced with a legal situation which goes against what you are proposing and which is forcing us into a stalemate .
The President is right .
Either this is a legal proposal from the committee and we can vote on this basis or this is not a legal proposal , in which case you are asking for one to be drawn up .
If you want a vote as an indication of our position , that is entirely up to you , but it would be wise to reject this as I believe there is a contradiction .
I do not often agree with Mrs Garaud but in this case she is right .
There is a contradiction in French law which states that a decision is not final and not suspensive .
Understand that if you can , but it is up to the French Parliament to reform this law .
In our opinion - and on this point , Mr Wurtz , I cannot agree with you - the French State , the Italian State and the German State are sovereign .
The European Parliament is also sovereign and can adopt a position contrary to a state decision .
This is my conception of Europe .
In the current situation , I would simply ask you to say that we will wait and press for a decision by the Council of State as to whether or not Mr Le Pen ' s request is suspensive .
This can happen very quickly .
This would not be a decision on the substance , even though it is purely a legal matter , but on the form .
If the Council of State decides today that its decision is not suspensive , the European Parliament can , within 48 hours , take the necessary decision .
I would therefore ask you to withdraw your request for a vote so that we do not reach a total impasse .
Madam President , the first thing I wish to say is that I think it would be unworthy of the European Parliament to be at loggerheads over this issue .
We should not be presenting the public with a spectacle of that kind .
My second point is that you decided , on the basis of Rule 7 ( 4 ) , to consult the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
That is your right .
However , if I have understood correctly , we do not have a proposal from the Legal Affairs Committee as a basis for a vote , but you did ask the Committee on Legal Affairs for its opinion .
There is a legal problem here that only you can clear up .
I have in mind the difference between Article 12 of the Act on the election of Members by direct universal suffrage and Rule 7 ( 4 ) of our Rules of Procedure .
There is a discrepancy here .
My advice is that we need to clear up this discrepancy .
That is your task , Madam President .
There is nothing we can vote on until you have cleared this up with the Committee on Legal Affairs .
( Applause ) My advice is therefore that we should not hold a vote today , but that we should await your decision , Madam President .
( Applause )
I agree with Mr Hänsch .
I see that Mr Barón Crespo is applauding Mr Hänsch .

I therefore assume that he agrees with Mr Cohn ­ Bendit and will withdraw his request as this is not a genuine proposal from the Legal Affairs Committee .
This is the best solution for everyone .
Equal treatment
The next item is the report ( A5-0136 / 2000 ) by Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin [ COM ( 1999 ) 0566 - C5-0067 / 2000 - 1999 / 0253 ( CNS ) ] .
Madam President , the agenda features an extremely important report by Mrs Buitenweg , yet , with all due respect , we are going through it rather quickly .
Especially given that we only voted on her report this week in the parliamentary committee , we have since had very little time to work on amendments for the plenary .
But to make matters worse , I have to say that , in this case , Rule 115 applies , which states that , except in the cases of urgency referred to in Rules 50 and 112 , a debate and vote shall not be opened on a text unless it was distributed at least 24 hours previously .
The latter , Madam President , was unfortunately not the case .
As I understand , the French version was still not available this morning .
I suggest postponing the debate and vote on this extremely important report to the next part-session .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I wish to make three brief points .
The first concerns the point of procedure addressed by Mr Oostlander , namely that various colleagues felt , because of the sensitivity of the issue in hand , that they should like to have in their own language , as is their right , the text of the report and all the amendments to it .
This matter was signalled clearly at the Conference of Presidents last week - on more than one occasion , I understand .
I myself was absent , but I have had this confirmed to me .
In that case , when the sensitivity of the availability of documents was clearly signalled , why was it not prioritised by the services in such a way as to avoid this ?
That is my first question .
Given the sensitivity , the Bureau , the House and the Conference of Presidents should be given a detailed account of this breakdown in the system .
My second point is that Mr Oostlander is perfectly within his rights to say that , under Rule 115 , proceeding with the debate or the vote can be questioned as the documentation was not available 24 hours in advance .
He is perfectly correct to insist on the application of that rule , if he should so wish .
It is my understanding that all the documents and amendments in all languages were finally available about 3 p.m. yesterday .
I should like to have that confirmed .
If that is true , I should then like to suggest that we change our order of business for today and , respecting the 24-hour deadline , I would ask the rapporteur , Mrs Buitenweg , to introduce her report at 3 p.m. , followed by a debate , urgencies and then the vote , which would fully respect the 24-hour deadline .
There is one point that , to many of us , is the issue of substance in this report .
We have under the Treaties the power now to bring in new anti-discrimination legislation .
Of all the areas of political sensitivity in contemporary Europe , that dealing with racism and xenophobia should be given the highest priority in this House .
The Portuguese Presidency will organise a Social Affairs Council which we can engage with if we deliver a view .
I appeal to the House to make creative use of the possibility open to us , in setting our agenda , to recognise this substantive political requirement and to facilitate a debate at 3 p.m. and a vote at 6 p.m. or thereafter this evening .

Thank you , Mr Cox .
Before giving the floor to the rapporteur , Mrs Buitenweg , I can tell you that the report was available in all languages yesterday afternoon and that the amendments have only just become available .
It is quite clear that we are not within the time limit established in Rule 115 .
Madam President , I am delighted with Mr Cox ' s proposal and I think that it is also a viable compromise .
I regret that the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats have quoted Rule 115 , because the last version of the text , which was the French one , was actually issued at 1.02 a.m.
It is now 23.5 hours later .
Maybe they need this last half hour to prepare for their debate , but it does seem that they seized on this as a rather lame excuse .
However , I am in favour of the compromise of starting this debate at 3.00 p.m. , and I also hope that we will be able to finish it this afternoon .
I would like to point out once more that it is indeed extremely important to finish it during this sitting because , otherwise , we will lose all authority which we can still exercise in the Social Affairs Council , to be held on 5 and 6 June and , in that way , the report ' s significance will be seriously undermined .
Mr Poettering , the law affecting any given issue is subject to interpretation .
I believe that the position adopted by Mr Cox - who formed a strategic majority with you in order to have Mrs Fontaine elected - is a compromise that makes it possible for everyone here to vote for a report on racism with their head held high .
Opinions may be divided about Austria , but when it comes to making it clear what our position is on racism in Europe , we should not get bogged down in a formal debate as we did just now , we should make it plain that we are clear-thinking people .
So I appeal to you to accept Mr Cox ' s compromise so we can proceed with the debate with our heads held high .
Please , I beg you !
The debate on this dossier in the committee I have the honour to chair has been an excellent example of cooperation between different committees in Parliament and indeed of cooperation between Parliament , the Commission and the Council presidency .
When it was voted in committee on Monday night , the text and all 200 amendments were available in all languages .
I would like to repeat Mr Cox ' s call and ask if you will give this House an assurance that there will be an inquiry into why the final text was not available in French until yesterday afternoon , more than 40 hours after it was adopted in committee .
The fact is that the debate on this directive has been exemplary - it has been a credit to this Parliament and any attempt to delay that debate or to delay a vote would be a sordid political move for reasons of party political advantage .
( Applause )
Madam President , on behalf of my Group , I would like to insist on Rule 115 and it is essential that it is checked how and when the translations were provided .
However , in line with Mr Cox , I deem it slightly inconvenient if , for that reason , this text will be debated on Friday morning , because this will surely cause a moral dilemma for a number of people .
That is another issue .
Mr Oostlander , this situation clearly comes under Rule 115 and Mr Cox ' s proposal takes account of this rule .
If I have understood correctly , and the proposal is accepted by the rapporteur , he is proposing that we discuss this issue this afternoon and vote tomorrow , in which case the deadlines in Rule ...
Mr Cox , please restate your proposal as the deadlines in Rule 115 must be respected .
Madam President , the proposal which I have made and I shall repeat is that we should consider holding the debate at 15.00 hrs followed by the urgency debate , followed by votes on the report , other reports that are completed in debate and urgencies this afternoon .
We agree .
I am now looking to see whether the deadlines would be respected in this case .
They would .
I therefore put Mr Cox ' s proposal , as accepted by the rapporteur , to the vote .
Madam President , yesterday my Group presented a request that all procedural questions related to this report should be subject to roll-call voting .
I would ask you to accept this request .
A roll-call vote is possible on this issue as the compromise proposed by Mr Cox respects the Rules of Procedure .
( Parliament gave its assent ) The debate on Mrs Buitenweg ' s report will take place at 3 p.m.
Mr President , just one specific question : when will the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance start , given that it was quite definitely and firmly set for 3 to 5.30 p.m. ?
This really is a mess !
At what time will it start ?
I have a right to know .
Mr Posselt , considering the time necessary for the debate on Mrs Buitenweg ' s report , the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance will take place at approximately 4.30 p.m.
Trafficking in women
Mr President , Mrs Diamantopoulou , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank everyone who has worked on this report , that is to say , all collaborators , but also the people from the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities and the interpreters , who have worked very hard .
This report is also a reaction to the excellent communication by the Committee on new measures to fight trafficking in women .
By way of preparing for the report , the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities organised a public hearing which involved experts and the presence of a victim who came to give her story .
A delegation of this committee , together with Mrs Diamantopoulou , visited a shelter for victims of trafficking in people .
Moreover , the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of Member States and candidate countries received a questionnaire on how they tackle trafficking in women , the results of which will be made available to the European Commission .
The report primarily aims to fight trafficking in women , but also in children and men , that is to say in people in general .
Trafficking in children does exist , but they are used as adults .
Men , too , are victims of trafficking in people and are sexually abused .
In fact , the sex industry is not the only market on which the victims of such trafficking are sold .
In Belgium , 40 percent of the victims end up on the labour market , in the textile , hotel and catering and fruit-picking industries , bakeries and the construction industry , or as house staff or au-pair girls , obliged to work as slaves in degrading conditions .
Victims are also recruited for the marriage market , as well as to sports clubs and football clubs .
According to estimates by the United Nations and the International Organisation for Migration , the IOM , every year four million people throughout the world fall victim to trafficking , 500 000 of whom end up in Europe .
All the signs are there that the number of victims is rising and that the influx from Central and Eastern European countries has exceeded the existing stream from Africa , Latin America , the Caribbean and Asia .
In a report by the United Nations , it is stressed that trafficking in people is one of the fastest growing forms of organised crime .
The huge profits and relative safety for the perpetrators who generate this type of crime will undoubtedly have something to do with this .
The penalties for smuggling narcotics , for example , are far higher than those for trafficking in women .
Victims are often unable to speak out on account of the illegal situation they are in .
Since there are clear indications that these problems are developing within the framework of international networks , it is important that these problems are addressed and tackled at European level .
In order to tackle trafficking in people adequately , we first of all need a clear definition of trafficking in people .
Priority must also be given to the fight against organised networks which are not only involved in trafficking in people but which are also involved in all kinds of other criminal activity , such as the trade in narcotics , arms and such like .
I therefore applaud the new Community initiatives concerning money laundering where the income from trafficking in women plays a major role .
Various initiatives have already been taken at European level .
Efforts to increase public awareness have got off to a good start in the form of activities on the part of Interpol and Europol , initiatives in every individual Member State , Habitat projects , etc .
However , the harmonisation of the different national legislations in this field and the ensuing discrepancies in methods of investigation and prosecution have to be tackled at European level as a matter of priority .
From a survey organised in connection with this report , it is quite clear that there are considerable discrepancies in this sphere between the Member States and between one candidate country and another .
Some countries which have strict legislation on prostitution do not even have any legislation at all on trafficking in people .
By introducing the STOP programme , Europe is striking while the iron is hot , and opportunities for collaboration have opened up .
Last year , the Council adopted the DAPHNE programme .
This is a new policy tool intended to prevent all kinds of violence - physical , sexual and psychological - against women and children .
It is encouraging that , in the first half of this year , the Commission wishes to submit detailed proposals for harmonising criminal legislation in the Member States on trafficking in people with a view to their sexual exploitation and , specifically , proposals for granting temporary residence permits to victims who are prepared to cooperate in the investigations which are necessary if legal action is to be taken against the traffickers .
Scanning the amendments , I have the impression that some people want to hijack this report , which is about victims of trafficking in people , to start a debate on prostitution .
In the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , a clear decision was made to discuss trafficking in women , or forced prostitution , within the framework of this report .
A debate on whether or not to ban or legalise prostitution may be pressing , but cannot be held at this point in the interest of the victims of trafficking in people .
As I said , trafficking in people is not just about the problem of demand for prostitution .
Victims of trafficking in women also find it extremely difficult to re-integrate into their place of origin and even within their own families .
Once they have , as victims , worked in prostitution , they are labelled prostitutes for the rest of their lives or , as the saying goes , once a prostitute , always a prostitute .
The initiatives which have been taken are the first step towards a solution but the number of victims continues to grow .
A great deal therefore remains to be done .
We have submitted proposals on prevention , reception of victims and legislation .
A society faced with such a phenomenon has a moral duty towards the victims and must give a high priority to the fight against trafficking in people and to victim support .
. ( FR ) Mr President , this report is vitally important .
We are profoundly affected by the tragedy of trafficking in women which is a modern form of slavery .
Our priority must be to give aid and assistance to the victims .
We must fight to eliminate all the links in the chain , namely recruitment , transport , managers , middlemen and clients .
By holding this debate today in the European Parliament , we are helping the victims to regain their dignity and integrity .
Women and children are being traded like goods and doomed to prostitution .
Trafficking in women is an important type of trade for organised crime which regards human beings as goods to be bought and sold .
Misfortune , misery and the false promises of pimps are luring these young women into our countries .
They are attracted by promises of employment and some even come in the hope of getting married .
They have no idea of the miserable conditions in which they will be exploited , beaten , tortured and threatened .
Over half of the victims are under the age of 25 and around 10 % are between 15 and 18 .
Even if these very young girls seem willing , because they are being threatened or are in love , we cannot , at any price , allow prostitution to continue freely when you see how these women are terrorised and traded .
This is why , in our opinion , we cannot use the term ' forced prostitution ' in this report .
Trafficking in women involves terrible sexual exploitation .
We must help these victims to speak out and denounce their living conditions .
We must welcome and help them .
The pimps are very violent and victims must pay off large debts to cover the cost of their journeys and the various identity documents which they must acquire .
When they resist the pressure of traffickers and pimps , they are threatened either personally or through their families .
The traffickers belong to a Mafia-like criminal organisation and control several links in the network that has power over the victim .
There is no way out for victims and the very nature of the environment in which they work often reduces them to despair and drug addiction .
Some even go as far as committing suicide .
Fighting against trafficking in human beings is essential but it is better to prevent this .
It is therefore vital to establish a system of information and preventive education for both young people in the countries concerned and also clients who are often what we would call ' family men ' .
We should not forget that trafficking has economic roots .
Inequalities and relationships of dependency between privileged and disadvantaged countries mean that it is still always the weakest in society , particularly the women , who pay the price .
We demand a coherent European policy which is why this report is so important .
Trafficking in women is a crime . Trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation are unworthy of humanity .
Mr President , it has already been said .
We are touching upon an important topic here , namely that of people ' s dignity .
As has been said , it is not just about trafficking in women , although that is the subject of the communication , but it extends to trafficking in people generally .
Men , girls and boys , are also involved .
It is a growing problem in the EU , too .
Trafficking in women appears to be financially lucrative .
Not only do women from Asian countries fall victim , but also more and more women from Central and Eastern European countries , including women from candidate countries .
They are lured under false pretences - through job advertisements , for example - into becoming hairdressers or into working in bars or as dancers , or else they are enticed via the lonely hearts columns .
Women are often easy prey , given the poor conditions they live under .
Trafficking in women is increasingly linked with international criminal organisations .
A great deal has been done , but still more needs to be done , especially when it comes to aligning different countries ' legislation for the purposes of tracing and prosecution and when it comes to providing information to the police and courts .
This is why I welcome the European Commission ' s initiative , as well as the specific proposals in the report , for example , with regard to the further harmonisation of legislation which may facilitate the tracing of victims and prosecution of offenders and make these activities more efficient ; with regard to cooperation and coordination , especially during investigations , at police stations and in the courts ; and also specifically with regard to the reception and protection of victims .
I hope it will be possible to adopt the amendment on non-governmental organisations , tabled by our group and amended in consultation with the Greens .
Whenever new needs arise , emergency help is often provided by people or groups of people who feel compelled to do something about these on ideological grounds or out of religious conviction .
These groups do not always get the recognition they deserve .
The amendment states that NGOs can also include ideologically-based organisations .
Finally , I would like to state that this is an important communication from the Commission .
It is a sound communication and a sound report on which I would like to congratulate Mrs Sörensen .
I hope that the Member States will adopt a dynamic approach in their future dealings with it .
Mr President , the shameful truth is that our prosperous and free Europe is tolerating a lucrative trade - the trafficking in women - which involves torture , inhumane treatment and flagrant violations of fundamental rights .
The victims have described savage beatings , rapes , abductions , death threats and , on occasions , murders .
The real scandal is that we not only tolerate it in Europe , but we contribute to its expansion .
Every time members of the public purchase the sexual services of a woman trapped in a trafficking ring , they are adding to the abhorrent wealth of these criminal organisations , which employ increasingly cruel methods .
Unfortunately , the institutions ' search for solutions is progressing very slowly , and the problem is growing .
In any event , we should recognise that the European Commission ' s proposals are , on the whole , reasonable and hopefully useful .
Nevertheless , and given the cross-border nature of this crime , we need to harmonise its classification in all the Member States , including cross-border aspects and universal jurisdiction .
The receiving countries should grant the victims a temporary residence permit for the duration of legal proceedings , regardless of whether or not they wish to testify .
Furthermore , the extremely harsh conditions in which the victims live more than justify the Member States granting them permanent residence permits for humanitarian reasons .
Furthermore , persecution on the basis of gender and , specifically , the trafficking in women , should be considered appropriate grounds for the granting of refugee status .
If we really want to help the victims , we must guarantee their safety as well as that of their families and compensate them through the seizure of the networks ' assets .
These victims should also have free access to shelter , medical and psychological assistance , social services , help in finding work , etc .
All of these considerations have been approved practically unanimously by the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , but they will not be enough .
Combating the trafficking in women and immigration policy must become a priority within the political agenda of the European Union and the Member States .
Immigration policies which revolve around the consequences and which are not aimed at tackling the causes will do nothing more than exacerbate this terrible pattern of exploitation which is tantamount to slavery .
Poverty , social inequality and armed conflict explain migratory flows .
Until we find overall solutions to the question of development , the number of people searching for a better life will be unstoppable and migratory pressure uncontainable .
So let us analyse , assess and implement genuine development and integration policies .
At the end of the day , the fight against the trafficking in human beings , as well as being essential to the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice , is an unavoidable ethical duty .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Sörensen .
Not only is she proficient , she is also extremely committed to the subject matter .
The fact that she managed to put this important topic on the European agenda is a huge achievement .
Trafficking in women has been overlooked for too long , and politicians underestimate its importance .
A good illustration of this is that it is now three years since the Justice Ministers declared that it was important to appoint national rapporteurs to monitor trafficking in women .
This actually happened in the Netherlands , not least thanks to the efforts of Secretary of State Verstand .
Unfortunately , many Member States still do not have national rapporteurs and they really should remedy this as soon as possible .
At the same time , legislation as well as cooperation are inadequate .
This report offers many ideas and specific proposals and therefore has the backing of the Liberal Group .
There are , however , two points which may seem commendable , but to which we are unfortunately unable to subscribe .
The first concerns automatic refugee status for victims of trafficking in women .
In our opinion , this is a bridge too far , because this would require the entire Geneva Convention to be overturned .
We do find it important , however , that it should be possible to grant residence permits on humanitarian grounds . We will therefore continue to support this proposal .
Our second objection concerns the reversal of the burden of proof .
What is required here is tantamount to surrendering an important and fundamental part of legal protection , namely the fact that one is considered innocent until proven guilty .
This principle is important in a constitutional state .
The concept is taken from administrative law and mainly pertains to discrimination at the workplace .
To incorporate this principle into criminal law would be a huge step .
Liberals attach great importance to legal protection and we are not prepared to take that step now .
Finally , the discussion on trafficking in women and people is important and a matter of urgency .
This is why it would be wrong to weigh down this discussion with moral judgements on prostitution , as certain people here are attempting to do .
If we do this , it will make the discussion infinitely more complex and will get in the way of effective measures against the trafficking in women .
This should not happen .
The problem is urgent and effective measures are required .
Not just words , but deeds are what are needed now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope you will allow me to speak on behalf of the Greens as my colleague has had to accompany the Member who was taken ill .
In my opinion , it is very fortunate that Mrs Sörensen should have been given the responsibility of preparing this report on trafficking in women .
There are few rapporteurs who have such direct knowledge of this subject for Mrs Sörensen has been concerned for over 20 years with the issues of trafficking in women and prostitution .
We should therefore place our full trust in her proposals . I myself totally support her report .
However , I should like to comment briefly on the discussions held on this subject in committee and also in the Member States , given that the United Nations Conference on the situation of women throughout the world , to be held in New York in June , is now approaching .
In these discussions several rather abolitionist associations have tried to lump together trafficking in women , prostitution and pimping .
They have therefore encouraged a certain amount of generalisation and are , as a result , opposed to any form of debate on these issues , hiding behind moral considerations such as the inalienability of the human body and its treatment as a saleable commodity .
To this end , they have attacked the latest report by the International Labour Office on trafficking in women and prostitution , and the work of Mrs Lin Lean Lim highlighting the need for a statute to protect prostitutes . They have also decried Europe as a pimp on the grounds that certain countries are trying to establish non-abolitionist legislation in this area .
We surely cannot leave an issue such as this in the hands of associations of which some , and only some , having fought against abortion , are now refusing the distribution of condoms to prostitutes , which they see as encouraging prostitution .
There is but a single step from commiseration to stigmatisation and from victimisation to contempt and exclusion from public debate .
The only solution for prostitutes is to be integrated within a common law system , to look after themselves , to live decently , to defend themselves against the violence to which they are subjected by pimps , clients and institutions . The only solution is to recognise prostitutes as such and , as a first step , to give them a voice .
Recognition of their professional activity , full social rights and police protection from any form of violence are what they are demanding .
We must listen to them .
Whether legislation is abolitionist as in France , prohibitionist as in Sweden or even sometimes regulatory , if it fails to recognise a whole population this can only reinforce discrimination against forced immigrants and also prostitutes , irrespective of whether they are immigrants or not .
The ineffectiveness of the law reinforces the enslavement of male and female prostitutes by pimps , for some , and the impossibility for others of living with dignity or of getting out of prostitution . This leads to a breakdown in any fragile solidarity and further damage to their self-image .
Mrs Roure is right in her analysis of this problem but we accept that different solutions must be examined and that various proposals must be made and considered .
The Commission absolutely must examine all forms of common legislation on prostitution which would give real status to prostitutes in order to protect these women and men from pimping , violence and marginalisation .
Mr President , to begin with , I want to thank Mrs Sörensen for a very good , interesting and tremendously readable report .
We are almost one hundred per cent in agreement in the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities .
We would emphasise not only the cooperation from the police which has fed into this report , but also the importance of contributions at all levels of society .
There are nonetheless two things we do not entirely agree with .
The first concerns the role of the sex industry in this issue .
We are , all of us , right across the political spectrum , completely agreed that it is poverty that is the major cause of prostitution and trafficking in women .
I nonetheless believe that the sex industry , which is now moreover beginning to register some of its activities on the stock exchange , must be called into question and , in future , also held to account .
The other disputed issue is - as always where this subject is concerned - the view to be taken of prostitution .
Almost throughout the report , the term enforced prostitution is used .
However , the use of this term implies that there is an opposite , that is to say voluntary prostitution .
That is very strange , especially when we are talking about slavery and trafficking in women .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left has tabled a few amendments , some of them on this subject and in connection with which we naturally hope that we shall receive support .
I would again thank Mrs Sörensen and all our colleagues .
Unfortunately , this is unlikely to be the last time we debate this issue , even though it is so far only the second time we have done so .
Mr President , trafficking in women is not just a women ' s issue . It also falls within the wider global context of international crime and trafficking in human beings .
Raising such an issue today might seem anachronistic but slavery will indeed be a part of the 21st century .
It is a potent force which takes advantage of the misery of the displaced who travel the world against their will , who are sold , bought and then brought to Europe .
Nothing is preventing these global pimps from pressurising families to sell their children and luring girls to Europe to make them work and become prostitutes .
During a conference organised jointly by the United States of America and the Philippines in March , the very lucrative aspect of this new market was also raised .
Trafficking in human beings is , after drugs and weapons , the third largest source of income for organised crime .
Yet trafficking in human beings is , above all , a violation of human dignity and human rights .
Our societies are demanding the right to happiness , pleasure and freedom , and the removal of taboos .
It seems not to matter if people , women and children in particular , are paying the price by being dragged down into the underworld .
Prostitution is a form of slavery which we like to make out to be exotic and romantic in order to hide its tragedy and sordidness .
Yet it is actually a denial of freedom .
These crimes are committed solely for the sake of pleasure and are treated with widespread indifference by a society which accepts prostitution as the oldest profession in the world . This is also true of pornography which is found in the daily papers , on television and on the Internet , where everything can be bought , even girls .
Prostitution , trafficking in human beings , sex tourism and paedophilia are all issues highlighted by the media which are gradually becoming less taboo .
So much the better , for the resignation shown towards what society has deemed to be irreversible is intolerable .
We must now help these people whose bodies are being exploited for commercial purposes , both in our countries and in their countries of origin , by increasing aid for development , education and cooperation between countries .
The European Union must wake up to this situation and , rather than giving lessons to the women of the world , five years after the Beijing Conference , it would do better to clean up its own backyard .
Trafficking in human beings is incredibly widespread in our countries because the demand exists and because the European Union is adept at showing itself to be a greedy customer , disdainful of the distress caused to these adults and children who have been denied any choice .
To conclude , I will refer to the slogan of the seminar organised in Paris on 15 May under the patronage of the European Parliament which says that the humiliation of human beings through prostitution represents an intolerable attack on human rights .
Mr President , on behalf of the Members of the Bonino List , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her excellent report on the tragic issue of trafficking in women .
We are sure that Parliament will adopt this extremely well-balanced report by a very large majority , for no one could tolerate the current violence perpetrated against women who are abducted or forced by deception and threats to enter the European Union , where they are compelled to live a life of forced prostitution or do some other sort of job under coercion .
We are all familiar with the horrific stories of prostitutes , often minors , who are abducted from their native countries , forced to enter the Union - we are told - illegally , raped and threatened with retaliation against their relatives or even killed if they have the courage to denounce their pimps .
The report recommends possible solutions which have already been successfully implemented , such as issuing victims with residence permits and providing protection and free healthcare .
These measures , which have already been successfully implemented in some States , must be extended to cover the whole of the European Union .
I would , however , like to draw your attention to a matter of paramount importance : is it not the direct and indirect prohibition of prostitution and the restrictive laws on immigration which are responsible for trafficking in women and forced prostitution ?
Is it not the case that the victims of prostitution-related crimes are compelled to enter that profession because of their illegal immigrant status and their vulnerability , caught between the violence of their pimps and the forces of the law ?
Is it not the very fact of prohibition which renders the phenomenon it is intended to control uncontrollable , tragic and inhuman ?
And why should those people who , of their own free will , want to be prostitutes have to suffer from what is essentially a ban on related activities and the subterfuge which , in practice , criminalise the practice of voluntary prostitution , even though prostitution is formally legal in many Member States ?
Moreover , would the legalisation of voluntary prostitution not also allow foreign prostitutes to improve their situation in that they would no longer be obliged to work illegally in violent conditions as they are now ?
For this reason , we have tabled two amendments : the first amendment calls for the preparation of a cost / benefit analysis of the various laws and policies currently in place and those which may be adopted in the future ; the second amendment proposes measures to protect adults from criminal exploitation and violence , adults who , in all freedom from direct or indirect coercion , choose to work as prostitutes , accepting to run their business in accordance with legal procedures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , simply raising a problem is an admission of its gravity .
Some 500 000 victims of the traffic in human beings arrive each year in Western Europe .
It is imperative to tackle trafficking in women because , having shown its determination to fight money laundering , drug trafficking and organised crime , the European Union has forgotten that trafficking in human beings is one of the major aspects of organised crime .
I must congratulate Mrs Sörensen on her report which has come on the eve of the enlargement of the Union to the CCEEs , which are often singled out as the countries of origin or transit in prostitution and modern-day slavery .
As for the method , I must say that the fight against trafficking in human beings does not necessarily need full communitarisation but rather close cooperation between Member States under the aegis of Europol and Interpol . These inter-state structures have proven their effectiveness on the ground .
Our aim is to ensure that trafficking in human beings is regarded as a criminal offence to be severely punished in all Member States . In doing so , examples must also be made of those responsible for instigating such networks .
Given the current state of legislation , we are faced with a wide diversity of penal traditions in our Member States .
Establishing specific offences at Community level would therefore lead to an impasse .
Instead , we must take inspiration from the method in the Schmid report on combating fraud and counterfeiting of non-cash means of payment .
The Council of Ministers could , on a proposal from the Commission , draw up a list of criminal behaviour to be combated , which the Member States would be responsible for converting into criminal offences in accordance with their legal traditions .
To conclude , I am sure that this would render the action we are taking to combat this scourge more effective and that we would avoid the pitfalls of a harmonisation which would delay the measures which must now be adopted .
The debate on this report looks set to run into the afternoon , but more specific information on the continuation of the debate and the organisation of business for today ' s sitting will be provided later on .
We shall now proceed to the votes .
Mr President , there was to have been a debate on the question of football violence .
The events last night in Copenhagen underline the importance of the European Parliament having this debate , as it decided to do earlier in the week .
Because of the natural difficulties about the location of the matches under Euro 2000 , the PPE-ED Group as a whole has decided not to support this resolution and to withdraw it .
On the other hand , the British delegation , which is now 36 members , has retabled the resolution in its original form .
Mr President , I ask you to rule it admissible for this debate to now take place , as was the wish of the House earlier in the week .
The debate will take place as proposed .
The exact time will be announced later .
Vote
Mr President , I am very surprised at the order of voting here .
I would ask you to reverse it so that the compromise resolution by four groups , including the two biggest groups , comes first .
Mr Purvis , the way we work is that the first resolution tabled is the first taken .
When a compromise is created , if it contains the first resolution , that compromise is taken first , no matter how many groups are involved in the compromise .
Mr President , the resolution by the Green Group was tabled first .
It is perfectly correct that we should vote on that text first as we reached a compromise with a number of other groups .
Indeed , Members throughout this House have supported it .
I hope they will do so during the vote - even some Members of political groups who have not supported that compromise - because the situation at Sellafield is serious .
Let us proceed with the vote and not reopen the debate .
( Parliament rejected the joint motion for a resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0414 / 2000 ) by Ms Ahern and others , on safety problems at British Nuclear Fuels ' Sellafield site
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on falsification of data concerning MOX fuels at Sellafield
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Report ( A5-0109 / 2000 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the draft Commission directive amending Directive 80 / 723 / EEC on the transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings ( SEC ( 1999 ) 404 - C5-0102 / 2000 - 2000 / 2065 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the external debt of poor countries
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Zimbabwe
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Report ( A5-0094 / 2000 ) by Mr Paasilinna , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission communication to the European Parliament , the Council , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the Fifth Report on the Implementation of the Telecommunications Regulatory Package ( COM ( 1999 ) 537 - C5-0112 / 2000 - 2000 / 2072 ( COS ) )
Mr President , I had requested the floor in relation to the vote on Zimbabwe , when we voted mechanically on 12 amendments presented by the so-called Technical Group of Independent Members , and having noted that in no case have they voted in favour of their amendments , they have systematically forced us to vote .
I say this in relation to the Provan report and the reform of the voting system in Parliament .
I believe this is an unacceptable way to proceed .
Mr President , I have an interest in a sector affected by the Commission communication which is the subject of this report .
As a result , I will not take part in any vote on this report .
I must do likewise with regard to the following report by Mr Alyssandrakis on radio spectrum policy , unless you can immediately formally acknowledge my declaration .
Mr President , Mrs Flesch quite rightly declares an interest in matters in which she has an interest .
I suggest that such a declaration is not necessary when voting .
When Members are speaking in debate , either in committee or in plenary , they should declare an interest , but that should not prevent them from voting on a subject .
I do not want to have a debate on this .
I do not want to dig the rules up .
My own memory of the Rules is that you should do it before votes as well .
I also have a financial interest in telecom and space so I will not participate in the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0122 / 2000 ) by Mr Alyssandrakis , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on : " Next Steps in Radio Spectrum Policy - Results of the Public Consultation on the Green Paper " ( COM ( 1999 ) 538 - C5-0113 / 2000 - 2000 / 2073 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0119 / 2000 ) by Mr Alyssandrakis , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission working document : " Towards a coherent European approach for space " ( SEC ( 1999 ) 789 C5-0336 / 1999 - 1999 / 2213 ( COS ) )
After the adoption of two amendments : Ford , Glyn ( PSE ) .
Mr President , on a point of order .
These two amendments are very similar to those which were rejected in committee .
Could we be clear that the rapporteur is giving the committee 's view and not his own ?
I think that is a matter for you to discuss in your committee .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0131 / 2000 ) by Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the communication of the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions " Towards a European research area " ( COM ( 2000 ) 6 - C5-0115 / 2000 - 2000 / 2075 ( COS ) )
Mr President , I wanted to make the following suggestion .
A number of amendments have been tabled which were , in fact , already in the text when the vote was taken in committee .
With your help , I would like to try to tidy up the report a little and remove a number of redundant items .
In addition , I have an oral amendment to paragraphs L , M , N and O which I have distributed to the different coordinators who assented to it .
This is a tidying-up exercise .
Are there any objections to that oral amendment ?
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
Mr President , in these circumstances , an own-initiative report and all this confusion , I propose that it be returned to the competent committee and that they do the work properly .
Mr Barón Crespo , is this a formal request on behalf of the Socialist Group ?
Mr President , this is not a formal request , it is an unavoidable comment about the way this House deals with important matters .
We can only vote here on things that have really been worked through in committee .
It really is unacceptable to work like this in this Chamber !
Mr President , with great respect to the rapporteur , she is making a point which was not made at all in the debate last night .
This is a report which had to be produced in great haste .
Two committees made substantial input to it .
It may be that , in the end , there will be some redundancy , but there are different points being made .
Last night the Commissioner gave no indication that he found anything ambiguous or difficult .
It is quite out of order that we should do anything other than vote on each of the points on the voting list .
I would like to thank everyone for their comments but I agree most with the comment made by Mr Hänsch .
Maybe it is useful occasionally to look at how we set about things here in Parliament .
This seems a very enjoyable exercise .
I do not want to start another debate .
The Bureau is looking at the working methods of Parliament .
You will all receive a copy of Mr Provan ' s excellent discussion document in the near future .
Mr President , the paragraph 13 which emerged from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , states that the Legal Affairs Committee agreed to request biennial reporting , that is to say , reporting every two years .
Whereas , perhaps owing to my curious accent , it was transcribed as " biannual " , which would require two reports a year and would be over-egging the pudding !
I therefore request that this be orally amended to " biennial " .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0125 / 2000 ) by Ms Smet and Ms Gröner , on behalf of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , on the follow-up to the Beijing Action Platform ( 2000 / 2020 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
President .
That concludes the vote .
Before the House adjourns you might like to hear the proposal for the organisation of business for the rest of the day .
We are proposing at 3 p.m. to have a debate on the Buitenweg report , followed by the debate on items of topical and urgent debate .
At 6 p.m. we will vote firstly on Buitenweg and then on the urgency resolutions and then after that , on all the other votes on which the debates have closed .
That will be the agenda .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Twice this week we have been in a situation where groups have made requests for a roll-call vote on the final vote of a report and , just before the final vote , the Chamber is told that the roll call has been withdrawn .
What is the situation , because if , for example , a request for a roll call has been made , other groups do not actually make a request so the opportunity to hold a roll-call vote on the final report is denied us ?
Could you explain what the situation is ?
I accept that it is unsatisfactory that groups can withdraw their requests at any stage .
All I can suggest is a belt-and-braces approach .
If you want to ensure that there is a roll call , make a request on behalf of your own group as well .
I accept that it is not a very satisfactory situation .
Mr President , I think there should be an opportunity for someone else to take over the request for a roll-call vote .
There must be a chance to do this if another group withdraws its request .
That was the point here !
This is a matter for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Under the present rules there is nothing to stop Members withdrawing their requests for roll-call votes .
Mr President , I did not understand what was to happen with Mrs Sörensen ' s report .
Will the debate continue following the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance ?
Otherwise , when is it intended that the debate should take place ?
According to the information I received earlier , we were to continue the debate on Mrs Sörensen ' s report today , following the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
You did not say that this was to be the case , however , and I should therefore like to have it confirmed .
That is correct .
As normal after the votes , we will continue with the debates and the first two are Sörensen and Karamanou .
So we will carry on with the debates .
Mr President , I would also like to say a few words on the order of business for this afternoon .
You have indicated that we will start with the Buitenweg report at 3.00 p.m. and that we will vote at 6.00 p.m.
On our desks , we have found an anonymous document which states that we will be voting on the Buitenweg report and also dealing with any remaining votes at 6.00 p.m.
Secondly , the document lists the urgency , debate on which has been concluded , and thirdly , contains urgencies which have not been debated due to a lack of time .
I would like you to confirm whether the third point is being considered and I would like to register a protest against it , because that would mean that we would have to vote on urgencies that have not been debated .
This seems unacceptable to me .
That is correct and that is what the House has agreed to , so that is what we will be doing .
Mr President , I rise on a similar point , because I am not clear what the House has agreed to .
We have agreed to vote at 6 p.m.
What we could do is reduce the amount of speaking time for urgencies so there will be an opportunity for a debate on each of them .
It is certainly not clear to the House that we have agreed to vote on urgencies that have failed to be discussed .
Mr Ford , that is not a matter for the President .
What we have decided is to allocate the first hour of what normally would have been the urgency debate to the Buitenweg report .
The house did that earlier .
That was a decision for the House .
The House is sovereign in these matters .
It is then up to the groups to decide how they allocate speaking time for the urgency debates .
If we have enough time we will do all the debates ; if we do not , we will not .
It will depend on how the groups allocate speaking time between the different subjects and that is a matter for the groups , not for the President .
Mr President , we agreed that we would take the debate on Buitenweg , not that we would spend one hour on it .
For example , I have been told that I will be speaking just after an hour into the debate , so I guess the Buitenweg debate will take probably an hour and a half at least .
It was not agreed we would reduce the time of that debate , let us be clear on that .
You are right .
I said an hour .
It was a slip of the tongue .
I believe it is scheduled for an hour and a half .
Again , it will depend on Members ' discipline , something that this House is renowned for .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I refer to the comments made in a statement this morning by Mrs Fontaine regarding certain logistical problems in the building .
In the interests of transparency and information to Members , we need to know the extent of the problem of legionella .
Could you provide us with information on that ?
What procedures have been put in place ?
Has the air-conditioning system now been switched off ?
Can we therefore assume that an operation has been undertaken to disinfect the system ?
Could you confirm this and , indeed , could Parliament ' s presidency confirm that there is no problem with asbestosis which , of course , would be in breach of our own EU directive passed over a decade ago .
I personally am not in a position to answer any of your questions .
I have no information on this subject .
You will have to refer the matter to the President and to the Quaestors .
I will certainly draw attention to your remarks .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Ferber report ( A5-0121 / 2000 )
Mr President , I was unable to assent to the Ferber report .
From Parliament ' s viewpoint , there is always a reason to ask for more money for our own operations .
But the European Union will not become more democratic if the European Parliament receives more funding .
Public opinion within Europe requires us to be frugal .
The money that is available should be spent on the needs of our 375 million people and on the protection of our environment , not on the European Parliament as an institution .
I am of the opinion that we could save ourselves a great deal of cost and unnecessary effort if we were to replace the system of reports and rapporteurs by getting the groups to react directly to the planned proposals , as is the case in most national parliaments .
Finally , I am also against donating tax money to European syndicates of political parties and against filling vacancies for interpreters in a way which offers newcomers a poor legal position .
Mr President , I was happy to vote for the Ferber report on the budget for the financial year 2001 , but I am not very happy with the minimal amount of space , money and European Union funds it allocates to supporting activities benefiting pensioners and the elderly .
I do not mean that we have to allocate to pensioners , the elderly and their problems the same proportion of our budget as they occupy of society , i.e. approximately 32 % at the last count .
I am not saying that 32 % of our budget should be allocated to activities related to the elderly , but I would , nevertheless , be very happy with at least 3 % , or even 0.3 % .
- ( NL ) I am 100 % behind the proposal to in fact allocate 35 vacant posts , funded from the enlargement reserve , to the language sector , provided , however , that all languages of the candidate countries are represented .
This is why I have voted in favour of Amendment No 2 .
It is essential that the European Parliament be well prepared for the forthcoming enlargement to include Central and Eastern Europe .
This should coincide with the timely training of professional and highly skilled translators and interpreters .
As previous enlargements have shown , it is not viable to wait for this to happen .
Multilingualism is a prerequisite for the smooth running of the European Parliament for three reasons .
Firstly , on account of the principle of equality , according to which all Members must be able to carry out their work under the same conditions .
Secondly , due to the democratic legitimacy of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament is the democratic representation of the people .
Thirdly , because of the requirement of usefulness .
Multilingualism boosts the efficiency of parliamentary work .
In order to give concrete form to this requirement of multilingualism , we need a debate as a matter of urgency .
In this connection , I would refer to the final report of the working party on " multilingualism " , compiled under the guidance of Mr Cot , in which various specific options have been suggested .
Whichever is adopted , it is clear that linguistic preparation for enlargement should not be postponed any longer .
- ( NL ) Democracy inevitably costs a great deal of money .
We are voting on a Parliament budget to the tune of nearly EUR 1 billion !
A huge sum , although it remains within the agreed 20 % of the estimate for all European institutions put together .
We owe it to the citizens of Europe - the taxpayers , who have to produce this kind of capital - to keep the costs in check .
Reading in paragraph 18 about the buildings which Parliament needs , we can only conclude that a considerable amount of Community money is being squandered .
Indeed , the European Parliament has no need at all for the building in which we are meeting this week !
We have everything we need in Brussels in terms of facilities .
Let it be clear that we have no need to buy this glass palace , whatever - I am sure - necessary conditions are being met .
Recently , more than 400 Members once again stated that we want to decide for ourselves where we meet .
We are hardly blaming the rapporteur for overlooking this in his report , which certainly deserves appreciation , for example , when he calls on the Council and European Parliament to agree on the statute of the Members .
This Parliament should be deeply ashamed of the fact that , one year after the elections , this is still not even in sight .
The budget line suggested by the Court of Auditors for European parties is really not necessary .
All-embracing budget lines of this kind blur our cultural and political diversity and increase the distance between ourselves and the citizen .
As far as the many thefts in the buildings are concerned , it is unacceptable that , despite an extensive security service , these can take place more or less on a daily basis .
With our vote against this budget , we want to send out a signal that a radical change is required in the priorities we set .
- ( NL ) I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Ferber , on his report , although I did not agree with everything and voted - against his recommendation - for Amendment No 2 and against Amendment No 8 of his draft resolution .
I have done so with great conviction because I am of the view that we as the European Parliament do not send out a political signal or pre-empt a political decision by adopting the Secretary-General ' s proposal ( and filling 35 vacancies in the language sector ) but accomplish this by doing the exact opposite .
As long as the House rules on language use are not amended , the candidate countries and ourselves can assume that the language arrangement will stay as it is , that is to say : first of all , that each MEP can use his own language at official meetings .
Secondly , that each MEP has documents in his language at his disposal .
Thirdly , that we in this way are not only treating the Members equally but above all , the citizens we represent .

- ( DE ) I voted for Mr Ferber ' s report on our budget for 2001 , but I cannot let this opportunity pass without protesting in the strongest terms against what can only be described as the blackmail practised against certain categories of officials , particular more junior ones , so that they find themselves ' voluntarily compelled ' to transfer from Luxembourg to Brussels , on the pretext that they are in Brussels or Strasbourg ' en mission ' , i.e. on business , for more than 50 working days per year .
The European Parliament now has three places of work : Brussels , Luxembourg and Strasbourg .
This was agreed by the Heads of State and Government at their summit in Edinburgh years ago .
We have to live with this , and with its financial consequences , which are not so great , and which are certainly justified by avoiding unhealthy centralisation in Brussels , as is unfortunately practised by a good third of the present Members of the European Parliament .
We are now suffering from an example of this centralisation at the hands of certain Green Members , who prevented a number of important votes on the Friday of the April Strasbourg part-session , because the quorum of one third of the Members present was not established .
I have been a Member of this Parliament since 1965 , with a break between 1974 and 1989 , so I have 20 years ' of attendance behind me , during which time I was present at every Friday sitting in Strasbourg .
The flimsy arguments put forward by those who want to reduce the European Parliament ' s five-day week in Strasbourg to four days , and who would also prefer not to turn up here on Mondays , are part of their salami tactics , which are obviously aimed at sabotaging Parliament ' s seat in Strasbourg for 12 sittings each year , not to mention their objective of transferring the offices of the Secretariat from Luxembourg to Brussels .
The Bureau now intends to present a working paper by a British Vice-President which proposes moving all the services and Directorates-General from Luxembourg to Brussels .
The idea is to keep at most the specialist services such as the printing and translating services in Luxembourg .
This cannot and will not happen .
It would be a clear infringement of the letter and the spirit of the decisions made by the Heads of State and Government about Parliament ' s places of work , and this needs to be said here in the clearest possible terms .
I have a word of warning for those people who are using these salami tactics against Strasbourg and Brussels .
We will thwart your highly undemocratic machinations against democratically reached decisions about Parliament ' s places of work and about the calendar of meetings - because we have right on our side .
Katiforis report ( A5-0134 / 2000 )
I voted for the Katiforis report on the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States because of the important points contained therein , but I did so unwillingly .
This was because this report repeatedly states that we must react to the fact that the population is ageing and control it - the number of elderly people is constantly increasing , making it difficult to maintain pension systems - and that we need to be vigilant and call upon the Member States to spend increasingly less money on pension payments for the elderly .
In my opinion , it is absolutely unacceptable that the elderly continue to be blamed for national budgetary difficulties .
Mr President , as the rapporteur rightly mentions in the second point in his report , budget consolidation must be given the highest priority at present .
We can only increase the confidence of the public and , above all , of the financial markets in the euro by means of consistent budgetary discipline .
I say all this bearing in mind that the euro yesterday sank near to its historic low of 3 May .
The rapporteur was unable to include the stability programme which has now been presented by the Austrian Government in his report .
I would therefore like to point out that the new government is determined to overcome the problems that the previous government left behind .
The old government led by the Social Democrats certainly did not bequeath it an easy task .
However , all the commitments in the Stability Pact should now be fully met for the year 2000 .
. ( EL ) Despite the objective of increasing productivity , investment and employment levels in the Union , the Commission ' s broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community are a set of negative guidelines : continuing budgetary restrictions which go beyond the requirements of the Stability Pact , wage restrictions , tax reforms for the benefit of the better off , further disintegration of the labour market and the crucial importance of competition policy , which brings pressure to bear on the principles of social justice .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Policy , despite the sensitivity of its rapporteur , Mr Katiforis , has maintained the spirit of the Commission ' s recommendation , which is why I shall vote against the motion for a resolution .
The Union should promote a policy which combines quantitative development with a reduction in working times , increased productivity , tax reforms to support society and development and the modernisation , not the eradication , of the public sector .
The Katiforis report is a crude apology for the broad economic policy guidelines of the Member States .
Of its 29 paragraphs , eight start by showing approval and four by being self-congratulatory .
For the working population and just about everyone else in the countries of the European Union , there is really nothing for which to congratulate oneself .
What good is the economic growth vaunted by the report when it is recommended that ' reasonable attitudes in wage negotiations ' are adopted , by employees of course , or when it is presumptuously claimed that ' a drastic revision of pension systems ' is needed with the aim of ' safeguarding their financial soundness ' ?
This is simply a way of acknowledging that , in this ' growth ' which the Katiforis report asks Parliament to congratulate , there is no room for employees or pensioners .
Once again , the Council and Commission are acting on behalf of employers and are asking Parliament to give its backing to this .
As far as we are concerned , we were not elected to congratulate governments which help employers and major financial groups to get rich by exacerbating inequalities , leaving 18 million men and women unemployed , making flexibility and precariousness widespread and drastically reducing the wage bill in order to ensure continued growth in capital income , including in its most parasitic and speculative forms .
If , as the report states , it is true that growth is returning , it is simply disgraceful that only a small minority in Europe will benefit from this .
As a result we have voted against the report .
I approved Mr Katiforis ' s approach and arguments in committee .
I was due to say this yesterday during the debate in plenary but a technical problem prevented me from doing so for which I apologise .
Like Mr Katiforis , I am delighted to see renewed growth in Europe .
However , also like the rapporteur , I know that this will not be enough to enable a return to a situation of full employment without the Member States adopting a proactive policy and , I would add , without a reduction in working hours .
Finally , I too would say that employment cannot be generated by unbridled liberalisation , accelerated privatisation and a reduction of social and labour protection .
I am not satisfied with everything on which we voted at midday but I have supported the rapporteur in the final vote .
- ( PT ) In its broad economic policy guidelines for 2000 , the European Commission makes it clear that it advocates neo-liberal policies , emphasising as it does the Stability Pact and monetarist policies , faster liberalisation of the telecommunications , energy , postal services , transport and financial services sectors , together with an increase in flexible working arrangements and in the modernisation of social protection systems .
This means that despite referring to the need for active employment policies to combat unemployment and to achieve full employment in the medium term , the Commission continues to prescribe the same solutions , which have not brought any net improvement in employment , since the current unemployment rate is even higher than it was at the start of the decade , as the Commission recognises .
In this European Parliament report , the rapporteur makes some criticisms of the acceleration of the convergence and stability criteria objectives , insists on the need to increase investment and accepts the adoption of global fiscal measures in order to combat financial speculation .
This is a positive step . Nevertheless , he accepts faster liberalisation of the transport and energy sectors , an increase in flexible working and the process of budget consolidation already under way , thus highlighting his own contradictions .
We have presented various amendments with a view to improving the content of the report . In particular , these are designed to strengthen the position of small and micro-enterprises and their associations , to advocate jobs associated with proper rights and reduced working hours , and to call into question the Stability Pact and the consequences of implementing it .
Unfortunately , with the exception of support for SMEs , we were unable to have any of these amendments adopted , and have therefore voted against the report .
I must firstly congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of his work .
The broad guidelines of European economic policy developed in this report seem to be heading in the right direction .
Full employment and the transition to a knowledge-based economy form our common aim for the first decade of the 21st century .
Whether or not the pessimists like this , all the economic lights are on green .
We must therefore be bold in order to continue the growth now being witnessed at European level .
The prospects for the years 2000 and 2001 are encouraging , with growth forecasts of over 3 % . This will reinforce social links , increase solidarity and equal opportunities and , in particular , eliminate the inevitability of the mass unemployment which we have been enduring for too long .
This last point clearly poses the main problem .
Although unemployment has already gradually reduced , it is still at an unacceptable level throughout the Community , given the forecasts for 2001 of 8 % unemployment among the working population . This is particularly true at the outer edges of the Community , in other words in the most remote regions .
As I have said many times before , the fruits of growth must be shared equally by all European citizens , both mainlanders and islanders .
This is the price of constructing a 21st century Europe with a human face in whose collective development everyone is involved . In this way we will all be able to make progress in our own individual areas , but still be heading in the same general direction .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Katiforis because I believe in this Europe .
The Katiforis report is an incredible demonstration of the lack of awareness among European capitalists .
It is based on a total misunderstanding of the reasons for the current recovery which is in no way the result of neo-liberal policies favouring wage austerity and a strong currency .
On the contrary , current job creations are due to an economic context characterised by an increase in consumption among wage-earners and a weak euro favouring exports .
Despite this convenient denial , the report proposes to plunge further into social regression .
It proposes increased flexibility in the markets , starting with the labour market .
It calls for ' wage stability ' and exhorts the unions to adopt ' reasonable attitudes ' in wage negotiations .
So as not to appear to be the direct spokesperson for employers , the report tries to include some social clauses .
Yet the contradictions are striking . How , for example , can it propose the reform or ' modernisation ' of social protection , which in practice means replacing solidarity with financial products , and yet invoke a ' spirit of social cohesion ' ?
How can wages be restricted ' in a spirit of fairness ' when profits reveal unashamed exuberance ?
The only other argument in the report invokes the use of new technologies to bring about modernisation .
But why should these automatically be allowed to threaten the European social model ?
This crude materialism , sometimes attributed to Marxists , has now been adopted by cynical capitalists whose only aim is to extend the rule of trade regardless of social needs .
We have therefore voted against a text which is both foolish and repugnant .
Mr Katiforis ' s explanatory statement is clearly better than the main body of his report which contains no hint of the criticisms that were set out on the Commission ' s recommendation .
I and the National Front Members have voted against this report as we feel that it recommends the same old ineffectual and even harmful recipes . There is still too much emphasis on the markets , which regulate nothing , on ultraliberalism , particularly in the public services which the Commission would like to see dismantled , on sacrificing social protection for public investment to ensure budgetary stability , and on price stability , whereas inflation was curbed ages ago .
For workers there is wage moderation , a reduction in unemployment benefits and a relaxation of employment protection legislation .
Two points have particularly shaken us .
The first is that the Commission recommends that my country , France , which is struggling under the weight of tax and social security contributions , should not take advantage of this growth to reduce taxes . The reason given for this is to avoid stimulating with the budget a level of economic activity which is already vigorous .
Can you believe it ?
Since when has growth been rejected in the name of outdated economic dogmas ?
The second point is the almost total absence of any reference to the euro . This famous single currency which , it was said , would bring us a prosperous future and be snapped up by the whole world eager for competition with the US dollar , has been cold-shouldered , not only by investors who are investing in dollars in the USA , but also by the central banks .
No one has any confidence in the euro , which is no longer a floating currency . Rather , it is a sinking currency , and nor do they have confidence in the European monetary authorities .
Wim Duisenberg is not Allan Greenspan , the ECB is not the Federal Reserve and the euro is not the dollar .
Europe has neither the employment rate nor the growth rate of the USA and it will take more than futile gestures to change this reality .
Pomés Ruiz report ( A5-0108 / 2000 )
- ( PT ) The Pomés Ruiz report rigorously defends the principles of the Solidarity Pact , particularly as regards fiscal consolidation as a means of ensuring the sole objective of price stability .
The analysis of the nominal convergence criteria is silent with regard to its consequences in terms of the risk of economic deflation , the adverse effect on public investment , economic growth and policies to combat unemployment .
However , the rapporteur goes even further in supporting the Commission ' s recommendations .
He believes that it is necessary to anticipate in good time the objectives put forward in the stability and convergence programmes , so as to take advantage of the current ' much-improved economic environment ' .
He therefore proposes swifter acceleration of fiscal consolidation , of structural reforms and of privatisation , and the " modernisation " of social protection , recommendations which have , in fact , already been made by the European Commission , particularly with regard to Portugal , in relation to the liberalisation of transport and energy and labour market flexibility , which is unacceptable .
We have accordingly voted against the report .
Goebbels report ( A5-0135 / 2000 )
Mr President , I have already declared , during the debate on the decision to allow Greece to enter the European single currency , that I am totally in favour of Greece ' s immediate entry , for it has met all the criteria required by the Treaties of the European Union .
I would stress that I particularly welcome the fact - and that is why I voted for this decision - that no more budgetary restrictions are to be imposed on Greece , for , sadly , the brunt of this could not fail to fall upon pensioners and the elderly , in this case Greek pensioners and elderly people , who would be the victims of the exacerbation of the situation as regards the country ' s budget , for Greece is willing to further reduce the negative elements of the Maastricht criteria and we have recommended that it do so , even though it does already fulfil these criteria , as has been stated .
- ( EL ) The legislative proposal of the European Parliament merely accepts the proposal by the Commission of the European Union , which confines itself to finding that " Greece fulfils the necessary conditions for the adoption of the single currency . The derogation of Greece is abrogated with effect from 1 January 2000 " .
On the surface , Greece does indeed meet the budgetary and monetary indicators required for EMU .
To this extent , and taking account of the position of my party , Synaspismos ( the Coalition of the Left and Progress ) , in favour of Greece ' s accession to Economic and Monetary Union , I have voted in favour .
Personally , however , I have strong objections to and reservations about the policies of EMU , which tie the Member States into rigid budgetary austerity , rising unemployment , worsening social conflict and unbridled competition , without being able to offer a strong European currency which is able to stand up to the dollar worldwide .
I am also totally opposed to the way in which the Greek government has achieved our accession to EMU , pursuing nominal rather than de facto convergence , making Greece one of the countries of the Union with the highest rates of unemployment and continually selling off the state ' s assets in order to cover treasury deficits .
Unfortunately , these policies will not end when we accede to EMU ; on the contrary , they will be institutionalised , consolidated and set in stone .
The Left and Progressive Forces of the Member States of EMU must extend their collaboration so that they can radically reform the way in which EMU is structured and so that priority can be given to social criteria and promoting the fight against unemployment , real convergence policies and viable and fair development policies .
- ( EL ) The European Parliament is being called upon today to give its opinion on the adoption by Greece of the single currency , now that the Commission and the European Central Bank have given the go-ahead .
We would start by pointing out that , as far as we are concerned , the matter is not technical , it is highly political .
It is precisely on the basis of the ideological and political aspects of the entire process of EMU and the single currency that we shall be voting against the admission of the drachma to the euro zone .
From a technical point of view , Greece has undisputedly managed to fulfil the criteria set in the Maastricht Treaty for entering the third stage of EMU .
The problem , however , is how we got here and what happens next .
The nominal convergence criteria have been achieved at the cost of intolerable sacrifice on the part of the Greek people and as the result of a harsh austerity policy , the main features of which were , and still are , reduced social spending , a highly restricted budgetary policy , wage freezes , limited protection for workers , deregulated markets and greater privatisation .
Unfortunately , this policy , which has reduced large groups of the population to despair and has resulted in a dramatic rise in unemployment , a mass exodus from farming and the closure of factories throughout the country , will not be repealed when we enter the single currency ; on the contrary , it will be stepped up .
Both the obligations imposed by the Stability Pact and the strict recommendations accompanying the reports by the Commission and the European Central Bank prove it .
Both demand that we continue the austerity policy , dismantle labour relations even more quickly , rush in measures to repeal the social security system and continue and accelerate the process of privatisation .
It is obvious that the workers have nothing to gain from Greece ' s accession to the single currency amidst disorientating celebrations ; on the contrary , they are even more certain to see a continuation , on stricter terms and with increased " supervision from on high " on the part of the EU , of the dead-end austerity policy which has been exercised for the last ten years .
Besides , those who speak of the need to safeguard the " sustainability " of the criteria seek solely to ensure that it is easier to harden the present policy and support the anti-grass roots measures yet to come .
The experience of other countries already in the euro zone proves that one new measure after another is introduced in order to reverse what has been achieved over previous decades and the " American model " is now the example to be followed by the famous European social model .
We , the MEPs of the ÊÊÅ , who stand by the positions to which we subscribed when the Maastricht Treaty was signed and which only the ÊÊÅ voted against when the time came to ratify it in the Greek national parliament , will be voting against Greece ' s accession to the euro zone on the grounds of the workers ' and Greece ' s interests .
At the same time , we and the workers shall continue to fight against this policy and to promote an alternative development policy which focuses on man and his needs and which takes the opposite line from the reactionary policies of the ' democracy of the monopolies ' .
- ( NL ) I have voted in favour of the Goebbels report and , as such , for Greece ' s joining the single currency .
I have voted with just as much conviction for the amendments to the Pomés Ruiz report .
These amendments specifically underline a sensitive issue which gave us plenty to talk about , not only in the plenary debate , but also in the Economic Committee meetings .
Many MEPs have expressed doubts about , in particular , the sustainability of the convergence and stability policy of the Member States .
We have all been able to see how the pleas addressed to Greece to make further efforts to reduce its debt and to obtain lasting stability do not only pertain to the situation of Greece itself , but also to the discontent about the way in which other Member States with a very high debt ratio have behaved , not making sufficient use of the options available to them , as a result of economic growth and low interest rates , to reduce the debt .
Let us hope that Parliament ' s subdued criticism gets through to the relevant parties .
This includes the Belgian government , which has already made so many pledges that even the press is starting to question the viability of this spending impulse .
Precisely because the hesitation expressed on the occasion of Greece ' s joining the euro does not so much concern Greece as represent a general criticism , I am of the opinion that Greece should not be allowed to become the victim of this hesitation .
Greece is welcome in euroland , and all Member States in the euro zone must respect the letter and spirit of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Sellafield resolutions
Mr President , the vote on Sellafield was a first for the European Parliament .
I think it is the first time that the European Parliament has spoken in favour of uniform safety standards for nuclear power stations .
I believe that the Council should , as a matter of urgency , and before the first accessions take place , resolve to draw up and implement such safety standards .
Randzio-Plath report ( A5-0109 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for the Randzio-Plath report on the distortion of competition where public undertakings are concerned .
When Commissioner Monti gave his response at the end of the debate , he declared that the aid provided for public undertakings must not be out of proportion with the quality of the public service provided .
So I wonder : there are public and private television broadcasting companies in Italy , for example , where a great deal of money is allocated to the public television services .
However , this is , in actual fact , excessive , for there is no difference between the service provided by the private broadcasting companies and that provided by the public broadcasting companies .
This is a distortion of competition .
Let us take another sector : state and private pensions .
State pensions are heavily financed but provide services which are inferior to those provided by private pensions : this is not true competition .
- ( PT ) On the grounds that it is necessary to identify and prevent the granting of subsidies that distort competition and to increase transparency in relations between the State and public enterprises , the Commission is creating bureaucratic arrangements and real restrictions which may undermine the delivery of high-quality public services .
By taking as its basic philosophy the need to ensure competition between the public and private sectors , the Commission has , in fact , ended up undervaluing the important role of public enterprises which provide public services , and this is unacceptable .
The rapporteur ' s original report recognised the value of " services of general economic interest " , but her report was subsequently amended , particularly with regard to public broadcasting systems .
We believe that it is right that the directive does not apply to public broadcasting organisations , in view of their specific nature , which cannot be divorced from the democratic , social and cultural needs of the various Member States , and the negative impact that this would have on their ability to fulfil their public service mission .
This was the reasoning behind our amendment , which was unfortunately rejected .
Resolution on poor countries ' debt
The external debt of the developing countries poses a major challenge .
The 50 poorest countries spend twice as much servicing their debt as they receive in aid .
The UNCTAD report on sub-Saharan Africa shows that African countries have not received any benefit from structural adjustment programmes for over ten years .
The proposal is very restrictive and is limited to the poorest , highly indebted countries .
It imposes far too many conditions on the countries requiring debt relief .
I regret any conditions which are imposed , particularly any link between debt relief and the application of structural adjustment measures .
This is why I have abstained from the vote on the motion for a resolution .
I am in favour of very substantial debt relief for all the countries concerned and debt cancellation for the poorest ones .
- ( IT ) I abstained from the vote on the joint resolution on poor countries ' debt because I feel that it is wishy-washy and ambiguous in the face of the financial mechanisms known to us all which plunge the greater part of humanity into the most abject poverty .
Today , even the multilateral organisations such as the World Bank and the IMF are talking of reducing the debt , for the mechanisms stifling the economies no longer make sense , even from a neoliberal perspective .
At the June 1999 G7 Summit , the United States , the United Kingdom and other countries talked of reducing the poor countries ' debt to 90 % .
If we look closely at these proposals , we see that they would not really be a solution , for if these measures were to be applied , they would only affect 8 % or , at most , 10 % of the debt of the 41 countries involved , which is , at the outside , 1 % of the total Third World debt .
But these same measures are given minimal application , which has tragic consequences for the indebted countries , but which benefits the creditors themselves in terms of export loans , financial bodies and multinationals , for example .
First of all , we must acknowledge that the Third World debt is illegal .
Therefore , the European Union should promote an international , bilateral and multilateral action cancelling the Third World debt with no conditions attached .
The Member States must cancel the debts of the poor countries in practical terms and urge the international bodies which represent them to take similar steps .
We must ensure that the cancellation of debts is not conditional upon cooperation , as is often the case , or linked to any sort of structural adjustment measure .
We have to influence the financial mechanisms which caused this debt and the structural adjustment policies which continue to contribute to it , spreading poverty throughout these countries .
Resolution on Zimbabwe
It is in the nature of things that the extreme right should put forward crass arguments to defend the right of 4 500 landowners of European origin to monopolise the best land in Zimbabwe .
Yet the fact that the joint motion for a resolution calls for law and order to be enforced and condemns ' the illegal occupations ' and accompanying violence is pure hypocrisy .
We might have more faith in the sincerity of the authors of this motion in ' deploring the recent murders , beatings and intimidation associated with the ... occupation ' if they at least deigned to recall the past massacres in which a handful of colonists dispossessed the indigenous population of its land and the decades of colonial violence and apartheid used to preserve this situation .
The Mugabe regime is authoritarian and corrupt .
Yet neither this authoritarianism nor this corruption bothered the defenders of the wealthy minority and the old colonial power until this authoritarianism was used to attack their interests and privileges .
We have therefore not only voted against this motion but must also denounce the cynicism and hypocrisy of those who defend the interests of the privileged whites in Zimbabwe .
It will be up to the poor population of this country to settle its account with Mugabe and his regime , and certainly not the political servants of those who have grown rich by pillaging this country .
Paasilinna report ( A5-0094 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for the Paasilinna report on the telecommunications regulatory package but I found it unsatisfactory as well .
Not enough effort is being put into these European Union directives on telecommunications , if it is true that the result is that , sadly , we are still without a European television frequency and we do not yet have a European television channel or even a mere radio station . Neither Parliament nor our meetings are broadcast anywhere in Europe .
European Union telecommunications directives ought to relate to the European Union .
- ( PT ) We feel bound to criticise the assumptions underlying this report , in particular those concerning faster liberalisation of the telecommunications sector , which are founded on the basic premise that this process has brought benefits to the users of these services . We only need to look at Portugal ' s experience in this respect .
Portugal Telecom , a public enterprise which has received billions of escudos of public investment , has been partially privatised , which has led to an increase in charges to what are called ' residential users ' - the majority of the population - who today face the ' highest charges in Europe ' .
As regards the workforce , thousands of jobs have been cut , stricter working conditions have been introduced , and in many cases workers are poorly paid and have few rights . In other words , the overriding aim has been to maximise profit in a sector which is already highly profitable , and this has led to cuts in investment which have affected the quality of the overall service provided for the majority of users .
We do not think this is the right way to proceed .
We need a modern public telecommunications service which embraces technical and scientific progress .
We need an affordable public service based on equal access and guaranteed users ' rights - a service that forms part of balanced development .
We also want to see improvements in conditions of employment for the workforce in this sector .
- ( SV ) It is extremely important that the EU ' s legislation and accompanying rules in the area of telecommunications should be updated concurrently with the explosive global development where digital and mobile communication is concerned .
It is also important that this should take place within the framework of the conditions of the internal market and with a view to safeguarding free competition .
In this context , the report illuminates a number of important aspects .
What the report does not discuss , and what the Commission ' s report does not take account of , either , are the different conditions prevailing in the EU ' s Member States when it comes to developing and maintaining different types of network .
When it comes to Sweden , which is sparsely populated and where there are significant distances between one locality and another , the public service element has a relatively larger role to play than elsewhere when it comes to the functions and investments of the telecommunications industry .
Where society ' s opportunities for investment and decision making are concerned , together with citizens ' ability to access functioning communications networks of equal quality , the consequences of completely opening up the markets for telecommunications networks in the way described in the report are unclear .
I therefore abstained from voting on this report .
Alyssandrakis report ( A5-0122 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for this report , which is the first Alyssandrakis report on radio frequencies , which are nowadays used chiefly to advance mobile phone communications technology .
This directive also has some shortcomings , for there is insufficient focus on adaptation , teaching , refresher courses and the use of these new communications systems by pensioners and the elderly .
I am not referring to pensioners and the elderly in general , but , in this case , I am referring to my mother .
My mother lives in Rome . She is 85 years old , it is true , but I have not yet managed to persuade her to let me give her a mobile phone because she would not know how to use it .
She would find it extremely useful and also a saving , but she will not be persuaded .
I offered to teach her , but she refused .
This means that the elderly are not able to benefit from progress .
Alyssandrakis report ( A5-0119 / 2000 )
Mr President , in relation to the second Alyssandrakis report , I must mention my daughter .
When I met her this morning - I did not see her last night for I was here , in this Chamber , speaking on this report - she asked me : " But Daddy , is it true that you want to become an astronaut and go to the moon ?
That is what they told me when I arrived here this morning . "
I had to reply : " Yes , it is true " , for when I took the floor yesterday - and I repeat the request again now - I called for progress to be made in European space research and I mentioned the fact that , in the United States , there was an astronaut , a politician , who went into space at the age of 69 , that is when he was a pensioner .
I would like there to be a European astronaut , also a politician , who will become an astronaut in 15 years ' time at the age of 69 .
I therefore put my name forward to become the first European Union astronaut .
Maybe you should give your mother the spaceship and your daughter the telephone .
Mr President , although I voted for the report , I would like the following point to be minuted .
Coordination of European research activity must not result in competition between research institutes disappearing .
The limits on communitarisation imposed by the principle of subsidiarity should therefore be kept in mind .
The standardisation of rights concerning intangible assets has already proved its value in the case of trademark law and copyright .
The present system for filing patent applications obliges the applicant to file a patent application separately in each Member State , which inevitably results in an undesirable fragmentation of the European market .
The logical conclusion is therefore to create a Community patent .
Decision makers at national level will have to be sufficiently far-sighted if this ambitious project is to succeed .
The competitiveness of the entire European Union must be taken into account when research contracts are being awarded .
Plooij-Van Gorsel report ( A5-0131 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for the Plooij-Van Gorsel report on the communication " Towards a European research area " , although I would have been very pleased if the decision had at last been taken to place all the research carried out throughout Europe at various levels of government under the same umbrella . Town , provincial and regional councils all spend money on research , the individual State governments spend money on research and so does the European Union .
All this money should be managed by a single expenditure centre : the European Union .
I am concerned because I would like to see more research in the field of science which aims to prolong human life .
I am concerned because I would not like the State budgets and pension agencies to try to hold back this research , which would have negative implications for them because of the greater expenditure they would incur .
- ( EL ) Although there are certain positive aspects to Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel ' s report , it is driven by the perception that the purpose of research is to serve corporate interests and produce new knowledge - mainly of commercial value - on demand , within the framework of the liberalisation of the market and of competition .
Any research policy based on this sort of perception and which serves this sort of policy is bound to distort the nature of research as a procedure for producing new knowledge and as a productive power .
What research basically needs is an increase in its funding , which is unacceptably low for the European Union as a whole ( 1.8 % of GDP compared with 2.8 % in the USA and 2.9 % in Japan ) , while countries such as Greece , which is at the bottom of the EU league , spend a miserable 0.5 % .
Increased funding will allow new research activities to be developed and use to be made of the plethora of unemployed , highly-specialised young researchers , of which there is an abundance , at least in Greece .
Funding must be provided by public agencies within the framework of research activity programmes which will support both basic research and applications , the final purpose of which should be to improve the quality of life for all mankind and not swell the coffers of the monopolies .
International collaboration plays a primordial role in the research process , and its further development , both between the Member States of the EU and with other countries , would be both desirable and welcome .
However , ensuring that overall research efforts in the countries of the EU serve the interests of big business , solely with a view to increasing their profits , is undesirable and constitutes a repulsive prospect for the future of mankind .
This is why the MEPs of the ÊÊÅ shall be voting against Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel ' s report .
- ( PT ) It is important to note that despite all the declarations of intent made by the European institutions about the new economy , and despite the trend towards a digital , knowledge-based economy driven by the existence of new goods and services , the European Union ' s total research effort as a function of its GDP has been in continuous decline for ten years . On average , the EU devotes just 1.8 % of its GDP to research , compared with 2.8 % in the USA and 2.9 % in Japan .
According to the Commission communication , the gap between total public and private expenditure on research in the USA and in the EU is continuing to widen , having grown from EUR 12 billion in 1992 to some EUR 60 billion in 1998 .
Similarly , in terms of employment , there are just 2.5 researchers for every thousand workers in European companies , compared with 6.7 per thousand in the USA and 6 per thousand in Japan .

Yet we know that research and technology contribute between 25 % and 50 % to economic growth and play an important part in the competitiveness , employment and quality of life of Europe ' s citizens .
This being the case , how can the Heads of Government of the 15 Member States of the European Union pledge to achieve a new strategic objective for the next decade , that is to make the European Union the most dynamic and competitive knowledge ­ based economy in the world , capable of sustainable economic growth , with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion , unless they significantly change their research policy , and particularly the budgets earmarked for this ?
It is in this way , through public investment and guarantees to respect workers ' rights , that we will achieve better levels of development , not by insisting on the liberalisation of key sectors and of essential public services or on flexible labour markets .
Smet / Gröner report ( A5-0125 / 2000 )
The recognition of women ' s rights as an integral and indivisible component of universal human rights requires the adoption of accompanying measures which will allow this recognition to be transposed into concrete actions .
It also requires a subsequent evaluation of those measures , above all , so that they can be adapted in the event that they are not sufficiently effective .
This is why the Smet-Gröner report , and the proposals contained in it , are so opportune and correct . I have therefore voted in favour of it .
Of particular importance is the request for specific preventive measures and measures to promote women ' s health and guarantee their right to genetic health , as long as this right is not understood to mean the right to abortion but rather the right to the protection of the health of the expectant mother and the unborn child .
With regard to the promotion of equal opportunities in the context of policies on cooperation with development , I would like to point out that , in my view , efforts in this area should concentrate especially on guaranteeing girls ' access to primary education , which means at the same time ensuring that it is free .
However , I regret the fact that the amendment that I presented on behalf of the PPE has not been accepted .
The prevention of adolescent pregnancies demands , above all , that we educate the young in the values which stem from their essential sense of self-worth and teach them to enjoy their freedom in a responsible manner .
. ( PT ) We voted in favour of this report because it highlights the most important aspects of our analysis of the follow-up to the Beijing Declaration and Action Platform .
We also think that the 2000 review process should in no way lead to a renegotiation of the commitments entered into in Beijing .
All the 12 key sectors are important and they must be tackled , given the sexual discrimination which exists in all areas , and since lack of progress in one sector will inevitably have repercussions on the other sectors .
We also believe that it is important to hold a further conference in five years ' time with a view to assessing progress for women in the fields of equality , development and peace .
It is also of fundamental importance for the Council , the Commission and the Member States to do everything possible to combat violence against women , especially in the home , at the workplace , in society in general and in armed conflicts .
The report by Mrs Gröner and Mrs Smet gives me the opportunity to look again at a questionable action platform .
As well as containing a Malthusian ideology , the Beijing Action Platform uses means of implementation which we condemn .
The UN already intends to rule the world by imposing a uniform vision , based on the western model , on all the regions of the planet , regardless of their existing cultures and laws .
In addition , in order to bypass the rules arising from its intergovernmental nature which subjects it to approval by its Member States , the UN is using the NGOs which it finances in order to implement its programmes everywhere and with much fewer constraints .
Where countries are reluctant , it is using blackmail based on financial aid to obtain the application , for example , of birth control measures .
Although it is vital for the specific role of women to be recognised in all societies , this must occur with full respect for the local traditions and regulations which are commonly accepted and which do not in any way prevent the dignity of women from being respected .
Such an approach ensures that the people concerned have a better understanding of these broad international texts .
We have also discussed and voted on Mrs Sörensen ' s report which deals with trafficking in women .
These two debates should make us stop and think about the real scope and aim of these major international platforms .
While they have succeeded in their aim of weakening still further the demography of western countries , they have not responded in a logical way to the more urgent question of protecting those women who are really in difficulty .
Once again , it is the ideology and egoism of some which have prevailed over concern for the common good . The culture of death has taken priority over the defence of life .
- The British Conservative Members decided to abstain in our vote on this report .
This should not be construed at all that we are not opposed to discrimination .
We are opposed to discrimination , we do believe in equality of treatment between men and women .
We do not accept , however , that the imposition of legal quotas is the way to achieve equality of treatment .
Quite the reverse .
We think quotas of themselves institutionalise discrimination .
We believe that women the world over and especially here in Europe are making a valuable and positive contribution to the democratic process .
We are convinced that role will develop fully and effectively without ' progressive ' or ' artificial means ' .
On the issue of making contraceptives more widely available we voted against the amendment because we believe these are issues of personal morality and conscience and not an issue where the European Union should be making a political stand .
For these reasons we voted against certain amendments and abstained on the final vote .
- According to the World Health Organisation , the definition of the term " Reproductive Health " includes the term " fertility regulation " which contains " interrupting unwanted pregnancies " , i.e. abortion on demand .
In the interest of subsidiarity , paragraphs and related amendments dealing with reproductive health should not be included in an EP document , unless clearly and honestly defined .
There is a worldwide commonly agreed terminology which is " Primary Health Care " defined at the WHO conference in Alma Ata , 1978 , which deals with Women and Mother ' s Health without including abortion on demand .
Furthermore , in paragraph 18 , the use of language leaves the meaning unclear and open to interpretation ; prevention of " girl pregnancies " has the unfortunate double meaning of specifically seeking to prevent pregnancies where the conceived child is a girl .
Ambiguities such as this should not be allowed to stand in a report conceived as instructions for the negotiating team in New York for the remainder of the Beijing + 5 session .
Regarding paragraph 26 , which states that " the respect of women 's rights should be one of the main conditions for the granting of aid and should be closely monitored in all external relations and cooperation " , the European Union must not tie any specifications to its distribution of aid nor impose any conditions for the reception of aid amongst women , realising that women are extremely vulnerable to the use of coercion and coercive techniques in order to realise their basic human rights such as shelter , nutrition , education and basic health care .
The EU must exercise extreme caution that current definitions should be consistent with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as women are not a minority group .
The report on the follow-up to the Beijing Action Platform notes that the situation of women , although improved , still involves major inequalities .
In terms of work , it would appear vital to do more than just evaluate ' the impact of part-time and atypical forms of working on [ ... ] the increase in poverty among women ' .
Women often actually do not have the option of choosing a properly paid full-time job , yet 85 % would like one .
Being forced into part-time work is clearly a source of poverty which is why we oppose this .
The wage gap between men and women of around 30 % still remains .
On this issue , the report should have introduced coercive measures to eliminate this state of affairs . This would , of course , require a political will .
Finally , over one thousand women ' s associations in 140 countries are this year organising a world march to fight against continuing violence and to fight for equality .
It is our duty to support them .
We have therefore voted in favour of this report despite its limitations and we will demonstrate in Paris on 17 June together with all those who are fighting for equality and women ' s rights .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.48 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Equal treatment
The next item is the report ( A5-0136 / 2000 ) by Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Directive implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin ( COM ( 1999 ) 566 - C5 ­ 0067 / 2000 - 1999 / 0253 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , it was fifty years ago last week that Robert Schuman , with his speech , laid the foundation for the ECSC .
Meanwhile , coal and steel have ceased being the cornerstones of the integration process .
Over the past six months , it has become evident that values are increasingly at the centre of the debate .
Europe as a Community of values .
The importance of the directive which we are debating today threatens to become lost in the commotion about the time of issue of the French translation , the deadline for the amendments and our Rules of Procedure , whilst its very content will probably explain why we are all fighting so hard .
A couple of months ago , when the content had still not been specified , all parties agreed to a swift passage of this directive .
During the Portuguese Presidency , there has been a political momentum within the Council of which I , as well as other MEPs , would have liked to have made use .
Technical problems were deemed subordinate to political will at the time , and this is still true for the majority of MEPs .
Therefore , in addition to the draftspeople of the opinion , I would also like to thank a number of people by name for their extremely constructive contributions to the report .
They are Mr Richard Howitt , rapporteur for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mrs Anne Van Lancker , Mrs Joke Swiebel , Mrs Sarah Ludford and Mr Arie Oostlander .
I would now like to move on to the Commission ' s proposal .
It embodies a sound minimum level of protection against racism by means of sanctions and independent bodies , by which we set great store .
The Commissioner has done justice to the wide range of areas across which discrimination can manifest itself .
The directive covers both direct and indirect discrimination , as well as the term " harassment " .
My report also calls for the inclusion of incitement to discrimination .
This is , for example , the case if an employer asks a headhunting agency to be selective on improper grounds .
I hope that this addition can be adopted by the Commission .
Parliament has also looked very carefully into the areas to which this directive applies .
I have understood that some people in the Council are in favour of excluding asylum and migration policy , as well as the issuing of visas , from this ban on discrimination .
I hope that I have got the wrong end of the stick here .
Indeed , although a distinction based on nationality may be completely understandable , it would , of course , be quite improper to let the colour of someone ' s skin be a deciding factor in their request for asylum or to treat the asylum request of a black person in distress differently from that of a white person .
These days , asylum and migration policy falls within the scope of the first pillar . The deliberate exclusion of this area could not therefore be justified .
A much-debated topic in this Parliament is the burden of proof .
Every Member State is by now familiar with this concept , whereby both the defendant and plaintiff have a role to play .
Indeed , the burden of proof has already shifted in cases where men and women are treated equally .
In this procedure , the plaintiff has to supply actual facts on the basis of which direct or indirect discrimination can be presumed , and the defendant subsequently needs to refute the charges .
This arrangement works well and has caused few problems .
Maybe those opposing this procedure could explain to me sometime during this debate why we nonetheless have to review it and , more specifically , why there is less protection against racial discrimination than against sex discrimination .
At the same time , I recognise the fact that even more protection is not essential .
I hope therefore that the House , in its wisdom , will decide tomorrow to adhere as far as possible to the Commission ' s original text .
Unfortunately , statutory measures against racism are necessary .
They provide victims with protection and a right to redress .
But it is also important in the forming of attitudes .
It makes it clear that Europe will not stand for racism .
It is this message which this Parliament needs to broadcast .
Everyone is different , everyone is equal .
I note what you have said , Mr Ribeiro e Castro .
I do not think it was strictly speaking a point of order , but I have taken note of it .
President , as co-rapporteur for this , Europe ' s first ever race directive , I and my party are proud to contribute to legislation which establishes common standards of protection for the victims of racial discrimination throughout our continent .
This will send a clear signal to the racist extreme right that they have no part in modern Europe and it closes the chapter of racism , anti-Semitism and xenophobia which tragically blighted our history in the century just past .
Racism is not an opinion - it is a crime .
The 24-year old black care worker set on fire in a racist attack in Britain , the 5 neo-Nazis convicted of beating two Vietnamese people in Germany , the French authorities cited by Amnesty International for torture of a Moroccan-Dutch national , all of which took place in Europe this very week are simply the most visible examples of racial discrimination which is the daily experience of black and ethnic minority Europeans in our businesses , communities and on our streets .
For example , the group from Watford in my constituency whom I met just last week , were witness to racist intimidation at a border post , which is sadly too routine even to be reported .
Let me be clear - today the European Parliament places on record our belief that this legislation will concretely tackle such racism .
The shift in the burden of proof because the discriminator holds all of the information will guarantee greater fairness in the way that complaints are heard .
The definition of indirect discrimination will enable covert action which is more pervasive , more insidious to be challenged and will permit implementation by genuinely independent bodies with sufficient funds to do their work so that our words are turned into reality .
The Commission for Racial Equality from the UK is just one example in Europe and I am pleased that some of the best lessons of the UK ' s Race Relations Act alongside best practice from other Member States are being translated into European law today .
The European Parliament should be aware that the elements I have outlined are intrinsic to the legislation and that Mrs Buitenweg and myself have come to a clear understanding with the Portuguese Presidency that , in return for our cooperation in accelerating parliamentary approval , those elements will form a minimum in the final directive agreed .
Let me turn to the specific improvements we propose and which we expect to be accepted : that incitement or pressure to discriminate is banned just as much as the discrimination itself ; that groups as well as individuals will be able to bring cases including a legal status for voluntary organisations to engage in civil dialogue , a partnership to implement the directive for the first time ; that the scope of the new law is clearly applied to all public authorities ; that conciliation is offered to resolve disputes without prejudice to the right of access to the courts ; and that the effectiveness of the new law is tested one to two years , not five , following its implementation .
In addition , I ask the Commissioner to address specifically in her reply our additional demands for application of the principles of the directive in the policies and programmes of the EU itself .
Second , to give public authorities the right to require companies to demonstrate compliance with anti-discrimination in awarding contracts .
Third , on the importance of statistical monitoring , if we are genuinely to combat discrimination .
Finally , I offer my sincere congratulations to Kathalijne Buitenweg for her work and I thank her for her cooperation in bringing this before Parliament .
Members should all acknowledge the campaign by the anti-racist movement throughout Europe .
National groups such as the UK Race and Europe Network in my country , the European Network against Racism and , in particular , the Starting Line group have worked for 20 years to get this legislation and for them today is still simply the beginning .
Mr President , I want to add my voice to those Members calling for the swift passage of this legislation through Parliament .
This is a Parliament with a proud record .
Since the 1980s we have led on action and on initiatives to combat racism , xenophobia and discrimination .
We now have , in the Buitenweg report , a unique opportunity to see those efforts incorporated into a package of legislation and an action plan .
I want to thank the rapporteur for incorporating the amendment by the Committee on Legal Affairs to extend the proposal to cover institutional racism .
We , too , believe that we have to see a ban on incitement to racism .
Groups and anti-racist organisations in my region , in the North-West of England , are eagerly awaiting this legislation .
For some of them , victims of racism , action cannot come quick enough and PPE pleading on respecting parliamentary procedure , I am afraid , will fall on deaf ears in my region ' s organisations .
Racism is on the rise again .
We all have our local examples .
For example , in Liverpool an Asian scriptwriter was attacked , his car forced off the road and local thugs then tried to impale him on a fence spike .
So vicious was this attack that Merseyside police called for an urgent press conference .
The Jewish community in North Manchester are persistently the subject of victimisations and racism , their property defaced and they are subjected to racial threats and abuse .
This has to stop .
This is why it is vital that Europe gives a strong public statement on racism and discrimination backed up by legislative action to ban this and to extend the scope of legal redress by shifting the burden of proof from the victim to the racist and allied groups and organisations to bring race discrimination cases to courts across the EU .
In voting through this report and its recommendations , this Parliament can give a strong signal that it is prepared to be tough on racism and tough on the causes and perpetrators of racism .
Those parties which seek to legitimise and promote racism and discrimination through the ballot box , and we have examples in many countries , should take note of this directive and incorporate the recommendations and its legal force in their own constitutions .
Firstly , I want to congratulate the Commission on this text .
It is a good text .
Many of the basic principles we wanted to see are in it .
I also congratulate the Portuguese Presidency because they have pushed this through and given it their political clout to make sure we get it on the statute book because , as Mrs McCarthy has just said , people who are victims of racism cannot wait until all the procedures are sorted out .
They want this legislation quickly and they want it now .
That is why it is important that we vote this afternoon .
It is important legislation .
In the context of what has happened in Austria , it becomes even more important .
There are a few things which would add to and strengthen the text .
Two things I would like to highlight : Amendment No 29 , which tries to make sure that there is no hiding place for racism , no hiding place behind considerations of religion , considerations of belief and considerations of nationality .
We need to make sure that these are not just covers for racism .
The second amendment , which is important , is the amendment on incitement to racial discrimination which is as important as the act of racism itself , and I hope the Commission will take it on board .
My own committee , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , thought it particularly important that we make sure that the applicant states are aware of the legislation and are in a position to implement it as soon as possible .
I hope the Commission will make sure in the Action Programme , proposed to accompany this package , that we have a lot of projects from the applicant states .
This directive will have a direct impact on the lives of many constituents of mine in Yorkshire , people from ethnic minorities and many thousands of people across Europe .
It is very important that we get it through today .
I hope that at the end of the afternoon we will have no more shenanigans , no more delays and we will make sure we get the vote at 6 p.m. so that we can get it through before the end of the Portuguese Presidency .
Mr President , first and foremost , I would like to warmly congratulate Mrs Buitenweg on the fact that she managed to finish the entire report , ready for discussion and vote , at the eleventh hour today .
That is the first point .
When I read the report and hear the discussions , I get a strong feeling of déjà vu .
Some 15 or 20 years ago in the Netherlands , I worked together with a Christian-Democrat member of government , Mrs Jeltien Kraaieveld , who was also involved in this anti-discrimination legislation in the field of discrimination based on sex .
All the points raised then , together with the hesitation and conflicts , have come up again now .
The hesitation mainly relates to what should and should not be included in the one report .
Then , too , we realised that it is better to address the types of discrimination one by one than to try to cram them all into one act or even one directive .
In addition , the rapporteur has persuaded me that it is preferable to leave out religion for that reason , because it merits a separate chapter .
What would really cap it all for me is if we could withdraw Amendments Nos 15 and 29 , in which religion is portrayed in a bad light .
This would then render my Amendment No 63 redundant , where religion is seen in a positive light , as we would thus redress the balance and have a clean report .
Mr President , I think it is important in this context to bring up the issue of the ' distribution of the burden of proof ' , also erroneously referred to as ' reversal of burden of proof ' .
In the past , we have had huge arguments in the Netherlands about how this should be done and whether this could be done .
We finally concluded that it was necessary and that it should also be tied in with the establishment of an independent council or independent committee for equal treatment - in fact , one of my best former collaborators currently forms part of such a committee .
This would then be able to look into the extent to which particular complaints should be taken seriously , whereupon we would go to court and , if appropriate , support the plaintiff .
It is then up to the party which is indicted to prove that we are wrong .
That is the type of distribution of the burden of proof which is not only already operational in most Member States in the case of men and women and , as from 2001 , will have to be extended to include everybody , but which also already exists in legislation on the environment , for example .
There , too , a reversal of the burden of proof applies , if necessary , or so I was told by an expert in the field a moment ago .
Indeed , these are phenomena which are extremely difficult to prove and which , using the traditional method , an interested party can try to wriggle out of , usually successfully , even if this is completely unjustified .
It is to be welcomed if legislation develops in this respect .
The distribution of the burden of proof is an important point which should be looked into by a committee such as the one mentioned above . As such , on behalf of those in my Group who welcome this , I am strongly in favour of the parts of the report which pertain to this point .
It is , of course , the case that in the traditional forms of administration of justice , some employers or people playing important roles used to be in a strong position , or those forming part of a majority always took exception to anti-discrimination .
Distribution of the burden of proof will affect their position .
As a Christian-Democrat , I think we have to side with those who are most under threat , those in the weakest position . As such , this is a positive development , in my view .
Also , I very much applaud the rapporteur ' s compromise to the effect that she is possibly prepared to reinstate in their original form those regulations which have been tightened up in ways not required by statute .
I consider this to be an important gesture , also vis-à-vis the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and this I very much appreciate .
Regarding the other points of the report , I do have to say that the nature of a directive is such that you do not need to be too specific .
A directive needs to be incorporated into national legislation .
Naturally , one could say , what if some EU government or other lost its faculties , you would need to specify all the steps one by one .
I assume , Mr President , pursuant to the principles of subsidiarity , that this kind of mental breakdown will not affect Member States and that they will transpose this directive into national legislation in a proper and reasonable manner , so as to meet the objective .
This is , after all , the nature of the directive .
This does imply for our Group - and I am speaking on behalf of the entire group - that a number of points are redundant , something which , in fact , the rapporteur has already hinted at .
Let us weed them out and exclude them from the directive .
In addition , we do not need to include a number of bureaucratic procedures of how everything needs to be done step by step .
We will not be voting in favour of this , or rather , we will be voting against this .
But this does not affect the core of the report , Mr President , which is what this is all about .
Needless to say , there are a number of points which we do want included , such as , for example , the right to perusal of confidential information , or whether it is , for example , necessary to establish whether a business administration is not secretly committing systematic discrimination .
On behalf of part of my Group , I also find it extremely important that elections of employees representatives are clearly provided for .
Naturally , these too should be held free from discrimination based on race or ethnic origin .
We must strike up a social dialogue where this type of issue can be discussed .
This very much strengthens the concept of subsidiarity because , where anti-discrimination is concerned , we should start at the basis , the very place where social dialogue is extremely pertinent .
Mr President , discrimination , especially based on ethnicity and race , is of great concern to me because it touches the very core of the European Union and European integration .
This is what it is all about .
We are gathered here , people from different nations and of different origins , and we are working together .
This is what the pioneers of the European Union once did and we must translate this now into legislation such as is before us today .
As a Dutch person , I have to say that I am also moved by the discrimination issue involving generations of Dutch speakers , often fellow believers , who kept the apartheid regime in South Africa alive .
This has made us particularly alert and , in my opinion , we should take the warning we received from this historic learning process seriously .
I am delighted that this subject is now being discussed in a proper manner .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am a Member of the group which has joined forces with the two rapporteurs , Mrs Kathalijne Buitenweg and Mr Richard Howitt , with a great deal of conviction in order to enable Parliament to deliver the parliamentary opinion on this Commission proposal this week , and I would like to thank the rapporteurs very explicitly and with all my heart for the extremely constructive spirit in which we have been able to work .
The Social Democrats in Parliament have fought doggedly to keep this item on the agenda and I am pleased that we managed to achieve this thanks to a sound proposal for compromise from the Liberals .
With all due sympathy and respect for the work which Mr Arie Oostlander and a number of delegates in the PPE-DE Group have put into this in order to win that group over too , I have to say that the continuous attempts at sabotage and procedural games which we have experienced here this week are , as far as I am concerned , proof that a hard core of conservative PPE-DE Members want nothing more than to undermine this report and the directive .
I am pleased , however , that we managed to stop them in their tracks .
We all know that the Portuguese Presidency is determined to bring this debate in the Council to a successful conclusion .
This will not be easy .
The majority of MEPs know very well why this directive is important .
By implementing the Treaty ' s non-discrimination principle swiftly and forcefully , Europe wants to give out an unambiguous message to the citizens in our own countries and those in the candidate countries .
This is to prove that Europe is serious about the fight for equal opportunities , irrespective of people ' s race or ethnic origin and also because it is a well-known fact that discrimination is still rife in our countries , and that there is still racism and extreme nationalism which , in fact , is more prominent than before because racist political parties are cashing in on the ' own nation first ' ideas .
I know that the debate in the Council is also a difficult one .
It is precisely for this reason that it is important that the European Parliament strengthens and supports the Commission 's position , because we will soon need a sound and efficient directive which fights any type of discrimination on the basis of racial and ethnic origin .
To finish off , I would like to highlight a number of my Group ' s priorities in terms of content .
Firstly , it is extremely important for the non-discrimination directive to have a wide and efficient scope .
This is why we are very much in favour of extending the directive to groups of people who are discriminated against and also to areas such as housing , education , public service operations and attitudes within the police force .
We are also pleased with the solution which we finally reached regarding discrimination on the basis of religion which should not be a covert reason for discriminating on the basis of ethnic origin .
Secondly , in our opinion , the strength of this directive will stand or fall with its enforceability , the extent to which it monitors discrimination , the efficiency of the measures taken against discrimination and , as such , the importance we attach to the possibility of organising collective actions to tie sanctions in with the directive .
With all due respect and sympathy , Mr Oostlander , but since you refer to the cleaning-up operation , I notice that this is precisely one of those cornerstones of our reinforcement plan which is being removed .
I do not agree with this . This is taking it much too far .
Moreover , my Group also supports the reinforcement of , and support for , the operation of , those independent monitoring bodies .
I am convinced that the centre for equal opportunities in my own country will be encouraged in its activities by this directive .
I should like to finish off with one last consideration regarding the shared burden of proof because I am really at a loss to understand the resistance on the part of some people .
Surely it should be clear to everybody that it is impossible for a migrant who is discriminated against to prove that he is being discriminated against at work or by house owners , unless the defendant too is at least asked to prove that the facts brought by the plaintiff are unfounded .
We women are already familiar with this procedure .
This is why we have fought for such a long time for a directive which distributes this burden of proof , and all we men and women of the Group of the Party of European Socialists are asking for is for migrants to be treated in the same way as women .
This is why we will also support the Commission ' s proposal and will not permit any amendments in this area .
Welcome
I have just been told that we have a delegation from the City Council of Munich , the capital of the Land of Bavaria , in the public gallery .
It is my great pleasure to welcome our colleagues from local government , and I am delighted that you are so interested in our work !
Equal treatment ( continuation )
I am delighted to have been able to work with Mrs Buitenweg .
She has done an excellent and inclusive job producing a balanced text , which usefully strengthens the Commission ' s hand .
This proposed directive is a landmark for Europe .
It is right that Europe should be legislating to guarantee the fundamental right to dignity , irrespective of ethnicity , and not to suffer discrimination .
It is also timely for Europe to legislate now with the alarming rise in the Far Right and racist violence .
I want to highlight a few aspects of the text .
Firstly , the very significant inclusion of indirect and institutional racism , and amendments have strengthened that aspect .
Secondly , the specific inclusion of housing , health and other public authority functions , including policing .
This is not interference in national responsibilities , but an assertion that the non-discriminatory delivery of these services is a European concern .
Thirdly , the inclusion via Amendments Nos 15 and 29 of disguised race discrimination .
My Group is not favourable to the inclusion of religion or belief in the scope of this directive because that needs much more thought .
However , we believe unequal treatment should be caught if it only pretends to be based on religion or nationality but is , in fact , race discrimination pure and simple .
Fourthly , the inclusion , as has already been mentioned , of incitement or pressure to discriminate - that is very important .
Fifthly , the role of the European Union Monitoring Centre in assisting the Commission in monitoring the implementation of this directive - and I hope the Commission will welcome that .
Sixthly , although my Group understands the thinking behind Amendment No 38 , the fact that it includes private clubs or associations is rather problematical .
To give you an example : I represent London and it could mean a problem for Caribbean people getting together to reminisce about life in the Caribbean in the 1950s if some white people were excluded .
I think that Amendment No 38 is not well drafted .
Lastly , on the adjustment of the burden of proof , and I am borrowing Mr Oostlander ' s phrase here , because he is quite correct to refer to it as ' sharing ' or a ' distribution ' of the burden of proof .
I am rather sorry that the Socialist Group insist on calling it a l of the burden of proof because that is slightly misleading .
It applies to the limited circumstances of equal opportunities law which is civil or administrative law .
My Group agrees that since the employer authority has most of the information , it must prove there has been no breach of equal treatment once the complainant has demonstrated a case .
Finally , there will be more heat than light from some speakers today and I am afraid I might include Mr Helmer of whose remarks I had a foretaste last night on the way back from the delightful asparagus dinner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , three years after the Treaty of Amsterdam was adopted and the famous and much-debated Article 13 was introduced , the Council is proposing two directives to implement the principles of this Treaty .
We can only congratulate the Council ' s willingness to make progress on this issue , particularly at a time when certain parties of the traditional right are starting to sign agreements with extreme-right movements . This has already happened in France , is now occurring in Austria and may soon happen in Italy .
The definition of a minimum European framework for the fight against discrimination is therefore urgently required .
The directive on the fight against racial and ethnic discrimination is heading in the right direction . In particular , it provides for the reversal of the burden of proof , the gradual establishment of positive discrimination - more effective than simple theoretical equality - and the recognition of indirect discrimination .
All these aspects reveal a clear desire to forge ahead .
However , certain shortcomings must be highlighted .
Some of these have been raised by our rapporteur , such as the issue of legal proceedings being free of charge for plaintiffs and the necessary extension of the right to take part in court proceedings to groups and associations .
There are also two other problems which I must raise .
The first is of a general nature .
How can the Council consider the issue of racial and ethnic discrimination without being committed to the creation of a comprehensive legislative framework for all discrimination ?
Singling out one type of discrimination gives the impression that some types of discrimination are less reprehensible than others .
This is unacceptable .
A second directive on discrimination at work is to be examined shortly .
The Council must therefore make haste and propose a draft directive encompassing all types of discrimination .
This is absolutely vital as the most excluded are those who suffer several types of discrimination .
Protecting them from just one type will only go part-way towards helping them .
The second problem concerns the exclusion of religious discrimination from this directive .
It is extremely regrettable that religious discrimination was not included with racial and ethnic discrimination as these different types of discrimination are closely linked .
For example , how do you define the Jewish identity ?
Surely the hatred for Jews which remains significant in many countries is due as much to anti-Semitism , and therefore to ethnic origin , as to religious aspects .
Discrimination against North African communities in Europe is also two-sided .
It may even often be said that the fear of Islam acts as a catalyst for racism towards these communities .
Therefore , limiting this directive to racial and ethnic discrimination risks leaving the door open to ambiguities in interpretation with which the courts might struggle to deal .
To conclude , it is essential that the Council adopts an integrated approach towards the legal tools to be established in order to apply Article 13 in our daily life .
Dividing the fight against discrimination among a number of texts is dangerous for the overall coherence of the anti-discrimination mechanism and therefore weakens it .
Mr President , thank you for welcoming the members of local government who are the very people who will have to implement what we decide here .
But first of all , we have to do our work .
I would like to point out that the amendments mentioned by Baroness Ludford are still not available in all languages this afternoon .
Before we proceed to the vote , would you please get the Sittings Service to establish whether the 24-hour deadline applies here and whether or not we have to defer this until tomorrow ?
I am not trying to start a debate on this subject now , but I would like you to clarify this once and for all , because there has been a lot of confusion here today .
Mr Posselt , we are used to confusion reigning in this House , but I will have this checked .
Mr President , this motion is positive and we will vote for it . However , its credibility will only be ensured if the Member States start by cleaning up their own acts .
For example , what credibility does Belgium have in this area when it is expelling large numbers of gypsy asylum-seekers to Slovakia and Bulgaria , despite Parliament ' s recommendations and the express request of the European Court of Human Rights ?
What credibility do the Member States have when they are discriminating in their civil services against the recruitment of third country nationals , thus condemning the immigrants who they do employ to constant uncertainty ?
What credibility does France have when a draft constitutional act recommending that immigrants from third countries be given the right to vote in local elections , adopted in the National Assembly on 3 May , is now being blocked by the hostility of the Senate and the President and the unwillingness of the government ?
How can we claim to be protecting from discrimination those to whom we refuse any citizenship ?
Discrimination will only be effectively combated when governments stop using double talk .
However , this text is a step forward on which we must build .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it would have been a good thing if the European Parliament had made a positive , informative and decisive contribution to the proposal for a Council directive , in line with the impetus given by the Portuguese Presidency .
Unfortunately , it is not evident that that has happened .
On some points , the amendments involve precise improvements to the text in question .
In addition to details , I myself wish to refer to the right of collective action , legal assistance and other aspects which are already covered by Portuguese law .
However , in key areas , the amendments that we are debating could potentially wreck everything .
It seems that the rapporteurs and others who support them have wanted to go too far , and in their desire to do so they may seriously affect the entire proposal .
There are three points that particularly worry us : the reversal of the burden of proof , which has not been clarified , and the issues of nationality and religion .
Reversal of the burden of proof is already a very sensitive matter in its own right .
Even so , there are areas in which it is clearly justified , but it is unacceptable that instead of applying the classic principle of in dubio pro reo , this is to be replaced by a principle of in dubio pro auctore , especially when there is no explanation as to whether this reversal is to apply to criminal justice cases , and we know that there are cases in this area that can come under the criminal justice system .
This would amount to a violation of the fundamental principles of our legal system and of basic rights of trial formulated in Latin , that is to say based on Roman law .
Secondly , there is the issue of nationality .
We Portuguese can perhaps boast the richest mix of blood and ethnic origins in the course of history .
I myself and my circle of friends have not the faintest idea of our ethnic background .
We would be a real puzzle for a Nazi investigator or for the chart of ethnic origins which Baroness Ludford admired so much a few weeks ago in another report .
We are familiar with the concept of racism , which has no impact on us , although we must combat it .
Above all , we must firmly combat racist violence .
But it is important not to confuse separate issues .
In other words , ethnicity is one issue and nationality is another .
If there is discrimination between a black person and a white person , or vice versa , for example if someone discriminates against a white Portuguese in favour of a black Portuguese , or against a black Portuguese in favour of a white Portuguese , this is clearly unlawful racism and should result in prosecution .
However , when it comes to applying for a particular post , if a Portuguese , be he Asian , black or white , is suitable for that job , in a way that does not apply to a Zimbabwean , be he Asian , black or white , then this is not a question of racism , it is about citizenship , and this can be legitimate .
The problem is that in many of the amendments these two concepts are confused , with potentially disastrous effects , particularly in areas such as public service , and even in other , unexpected areas .
The other vital area is religion .
We wish to make it clear that freedom of religious organisation is a fundamental civil right , which cannot be undermined , curbed or jeopardised , which would be the effect of some of the amendments before us .
Mr President , first of all , we would like to thank the rapporteur for improving upon the Commission ' s proposal , but we also feel that particular thanks should go to Commissioner Diamantopoulou for grasping the significance of the inclusion of Article 13 in the Treaties and her skill in converting an abstract norm into a package of directives .
With each passing day , Europe is becoming a continent which , as the United Nations ' reports on the European population trend illustrate , is host to citizens of third States but which , above all , needs their contribution , their culture , their potential and their initiatives .
In a context such as this , the Union must reaffirm the fundamental principles of democracy and ensure that all citizens and residents have the same rights and the same duties .
Having said that , we are sceptical about three points in the report and the directive : we are completely against the principle of the reversal of the burden of proof , which is contrary to fundamental legal principles .
We do not believe that the end justifies the means but that the means prefigure the end .
Moreover , we do not support the creation of independent bodies in the Member States , which would be responsible for monitoring racial and ethnic discrimination .
This is because , in general terms , we do not have confidence in institutions which , in violation of the democratic principle of the separation of powers , interfere with other institutions , with the result that they either upset the balance between the legislative , executive and judicial authorities or they find themselves without a specific function because everything is already being done by other institutions .
Finally , we do not agree with the references to positive discrimination .
We are opposed to positive discrimination in general when it is State-imposed , for we feel that merit should take precedence over the quota policy which , when all is said and done , discriminates between individuals who want to fight that very discrimination .
With these reservations , the Members of the Bonino List will support the report and the directive , in the hope that the European Parliament and the Commission will reflect upon the points we have raised and make the appropriate amendments .
Mr President , it is with mixed feelings that I am making my contribution to this debate .
This is largely to do with the way in which the discussion of this report has been forced upon us , against normal procedures .
Needless to say , I subscribe to the importance of equal treatment of persons irrespective of racial and ethnic origin .
But it is precisely because this is such an important topic that Parliament , and especially the Portuguese Presidency , would have done well to have set more time aside for it .
The enactment of the general act on equal treatment cost the Netherlands blood , sweat and tears at the time .
I am sure that other Member States have had similar experiences and these experiences should remind us to exercise caution and do our homework before discussing this draft directive .
This will require the necessary time , not least because the implementation of the current proposal will have a ripple effect within existing legislation and systems within the different Member States .
The change in the burden of proof is just one example of this .
Parliament ' s amendment takes the Commission ' s proposal one step further .
The Commission specifies that the principle of subsidiarity is still being enforced , but I question that .
The directive is said to have a supplementary function with regard to the political signal it sends out .
But this type of signal is being emitted with just as much power by long-standing national legislation , which is a great deal closer to the citizen , and by the widely known ECHR .
An in-depth discussion would have been desirable , certainly given the far-reaching consequences which this legislation can have on legislation and legal systems within the Member States and the fact that it will infringe on the Member States ' sovereignty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , dismayed as I am about the way the 14 Member States have prejudged Austria , I particularly welcome the Commission proposal .
It goes without saying that the principle of equal treatment of persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin should be applied .
There is no place for discrimination on these grounds in a modern society .
However , it is possible to overshoot the mark , even in the case of such an uncontroversial issue .
The reversal of the burden of proof proposed by the Commission would mean imposing an intolerable burden on small- and medium-sized enterprises in particular , as they would in future have to keep a record of every job interview , so that in serious cases they would be able to provide proof .
Arrangements like this do not result in greater understanding for the victims of discrimination .
Quite the opposite - it actually harms the cause .
The precision of the impact assessment form annexed to the Commission proposal is totally dependent on the use of the phrase " without apparent difficulty " .
The wording is as follows : " identical rules have already been applied without apparent difficulty " .
Mr President , I think that it is important and that it will simplify the debate if the honourable members know how the Commission has dealt with Parliament ' s proposal , as far as the acceptance of amendments is concerned .
As the House knows , I - as the Commissioner responsible - presented an anti-discrimination package a few months ago , containing two directives and a programme .
Today we are discussing one of these two directives and , allow me to say that this is only possible thanks to the brilliant collaboration and highly efficient work of the two parliamentary committees , the endeavours of which , I think , surpass all expectations .
This particularly complicated directive , which has multiple repercussions , involves national peculiarities and different views , and to which all the committees involved have made various contributions , has evolved into a report and a consensus has been found .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Howitt and everyone else involved , as well as the Portuguese Presidency .
I believe that this conference is of historic importance for two reasons : first , because the demand for this sort of legislative act was tabled over twenty years ago .
Social groups , political parties , parliaments , MEPs and international conferences have proposed and have insisted that we legislate against the huge issue of racism and the conduct of organised society .
Twenty years on , it is now coming true .
We are here discussing this directive .
The second reason is that , because of the current political climate , because of the political problems which have arisen within the Union over recent months in connection with racist clashes at political and social level , today ' s piece of work is the first to go beyond words , to go beyond resolutions and general political expression to specific policy making .
The European Commission has worked quickly following the presentation of your committee ' s report , with the collaboration of all the services involved , and I am pleased to say that over half the amendments have been accepted either in spirit or in part .
I must stress that the amendments which have not been accepted have mainly been rejected for administrative or legal reasons or because we know from our experience and from our collaboration over the years that the Council is sure to reject them .
As you know , our basis is Article 13 and it is an article which limits our room for manoeuvre .
I should like to comment on a number of amendments .
I am pleased to say that we agree with the amendments to incorporate the sexual dimension ( Amendments Nos 7 and 59 ) , the amendments to the material and personal scope ( Amendments Nos 5 , 30 , 31 , 34 , 36 and 37 ) and the amendment on taking positive action ( Amendment No 40 ) .
We also agree with the idea of conciliation procedures in Amendment No 42 , consultation with governmental organisations ( Amendments Nos 21 , 50 and 51 ) and with the amendments relating to previous acts of the European Parliament and the Council ( Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 8 , 9 and 12 ) .
I also agree with your proposal to define the role of the European Monitoring Centre - as contained in Amendment No 59 - although I should point out that our experience at the Commission tells us that the submission of reports by Member States every two years is a particularly demanding task and will not enable us to correctly assess the impact of the policies developed .
You also propose to amend the definition of indirect discrimination and one of the speakers also mentioned this .
I agree with the points made in the amendments and you may be sure that we shall use them to help formulate the definition in line with the interpretation of the European Court of Justice in the O ' Flynn case .
I should like to say a few words to clarify the article on balancing the burden of proof proposed in amendment 43 , even though the debate and the Council have made it clear that there will be problems in getting it accepted .
However , I should like to point out - because the Commission agrees with this approach - that a similar discussion was held several years ago along the same lines on the subject of discrimination between the sexes .
At that time , too , there was a great deal of concern about the repercussions which this would also have in the courts , where it was feared that a large number of cases would be filed , and in companies .
After many years in application , we have seen that these fears were unfounded and that there were no problems .
I think , therefore , that we can use this experience and be bold enough to take this approach .
I agree - and I welcome your persistence - that the directive should apply to all persons present on the territory of the Member States and not only to Community citizens .
I also agree with the proposal to make it clear that the directive will apply to natural and legal persons , but I must point out that your reference to non-formalised groups of persons cannot be incorporated because this concept is not legally recognised .
The content of the concept is understandable on merit , but it has not yet been legally recognised and will cause numerous problems .
I should also like to refer to an issue which appears to be of particular importance to the House ; I refer to the distinction between racial and ethnic origin on the one hand and religious conviction on the other .
Long discussions were held in the Commission when the proposal was drawn up as to whether a ban on discrimination on the grounds of religion should be included in this directive .
We understand the argument that it is often difficult to make a clear distinction .
This frequently applies in the workplace , mainly because there are problems in relation to prayer facilities , obtaining permission for religious events and special dietary requirements in the workplace , which is why the second directive in the package , which relates to employment issues and discrimination in the workplace , makes clearer mention of discrimination on the grounds of religion .
But we do understand how difficult and how complicated the issue will become if we have an extensive ban on discrimination on the grounds of religion , for example in education .
And how difficult it will be to negotiate the directive with the Member States , where there are diametrically opposed approaches .
However , we welcome the approach which you have taken , i.e. the fact that Amendments Nos 15 and 29 point out that some people will probably try to interpret discrimination on the grounds of racial origin as discrimination on the grounds of religion and I agree that the directive must be strengthened on this point and that the Member States must also clearly draw the attention of the courts and other competent authorities to this danger when dealing with the issue of the right to take legal action against discrimination .
I should also like to comment briefly on independent agencies . I agree with some of the ideas for their role which you put forward , especially the need for them to be independent , but we cannot specify how they are to be organised or how they are to operate because that is a question for the Member States themselves .
The number of amendments which has actually been accepted is very large and I imagine that we agree that we need to examine how these ideas can be incorporated into an amended proposal so that we retain the structure and balance in the text and the proposal has some chance of being approved by the Council , because I think that , for all of us , the best balance is between what we want and what is feasible .
I should like to refer very briefly to the more basic amendments which we are unable to accept .
The first concerns your reservations on the exclusion from the draft of a detailed reference to specific services , such as the police or the judicial authorities .
As the rapporteur rightly pointed out , the directive may only intervene where there is Community jurisdiction .
This does not apply in the case of judicial assistance in criminal matters and in the case of police cooperation , both of which come within the scope of the Treaty on the European Union .
We therefore agree with the reference in Amendment No 37 to public bodies in general but cannot agree to the specific reference to the police and judicial authorities .
A few words now on the huge issue of special problems in the area of immigration policies and asylum policies . The Commission prefers to follow a gradual approach due to the complexity of the issue and , when processing specific legislative measures on admission policies in these two areas , i.e. asylum and immigration , the Commission will evaluate the situation and decide to what extent the inclusion of an ad hoc clause against discrimination would be the most suitable response .
There are other points , such as public procurement , where the framework prohibits such criteria from creeping in , the issue of statistics , where I acknowledge and support your fear of a shortage of statistics - one of the basic objectives of the action programme is to create databases at European level - and finally , our obligation , as European institutions , to apply the same rules as those which we propose for the Member States .
The reforms which we are presently endeavouring to implement within the Commission have taken account of the entire framework of this directive .
Mr President , I should like to thank you for allowing me to run over time , but I needed to comment on a whole series of particularly complicated amendments and articles in order to give the House the best possible understanding of the points which can be accepted and , as you can see , they are numerous .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think that if we show the joint political will and continue our excellent collaboration , we can make the small vision of Europe ' s fundamental commitment on the issue of racism come true .
Mr President , the report we are debating here is , in my view , an extremely important one , and I would thank the Commissioner for her explanatory comments on the amendments .
The international community sets great store by the fight against racism and it is also high on the agenda of the Member States , but a great deal still needs to be done in order to protect human rights and fight racism , xenophobia and intolerance .
It is also becoming increasingly evident that cooperation within the EU is indispensable .
Certainly within an open , internal market which enjoys the free movement of goods , people and services , further harmonisation with regard to the scope , content and options for enforcement is vitally important .
It is with pleasure that I compliment Mrs Buitenweg on her report .
It is an excellent report which deals with the equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial and ethnic origin , in general .
I would like to point out , however , that women , in particular , are being disproportionately affected by discrimination and , among women as a group , it is especially women and girls who are often doubly discriminated against on the basis of their race and ethnic origin .
I have another four points I would like to make , Mr President .
It would be beneficial if organisations or other legal entities which intend to fight discrimination were to have the right to initiate the procedure to promote the observation or application of this directive or to support victims in the procedure .
I am also of the opinion that it is advisable that each of the Member States should have an independent body , such as we have in the Netherlands , to assess the complaints .
This body is called the Committee on equal treatment . It is an independent body which works extremely well and efficiently .
I am pleased with the amendment tabled by the PPE-DE delegate , Mrs Smet , who advocates that the directive should also apply to elections of employees ' representatives in works councils , for example .
This would be a gain , in my view .
Finally , I would like to say a few words on the already mentioned problem of sharing the burden of proof .
This is popularly termed the reversal of the burden of proof in the case of possible discrimination and already applies with regard to women .
The same system is now also being proposed with regard to this directive .
In order to actually tackle discrimination head on , it is extremely important - if not imperative - that this shared burden of proof enter into force .
As the Commissioner said , in practice , this has never led to any difficulties in other spheres before .
All the more reason to accept a swift implementation here .
- ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , without doubt , the extremely important " historic directive " , as you called it , and the corresponding European Parliament proposals have come at the right time .
And on time !
The need to combat discrimination on the grounds of racial or ethnic origin or religious conviction is taking on a sense of urgency on the continent of Europe .
The revival of fanaticism and Mediaeval attitudes , the emergence of parties based on racial perceptions and the increase in violence bear witness to the fact that respect for others who are different , which is a feature of advanced societies , has not yet been fully achieved .
Clearly , in the 21st century , ideological and political convictions will meet somewhere between the progressive , cosmopolitan perception which accepts a multicultural society , and fundamentalism , which approaches those who are different with fear and enmity and promotes racism and xenophobia .
This is why the European Union needs to be given legal armour and to speed up the procedures to complete a common area of freedom , security and justice for everyone living on the territory of the European Union .
Once the directive has been adopted by the Council , we hope that the Member States will quickly give immediate priority : first , to judicial cooperation and harmonisation of their criminal legislation ; secondly , to instructing state agencies and employers on how to apply the directive to all natural and legal persons ; thirdly , to applying the 1997 Charter of the European Political Parties on the defence of fundamental rights and the fight against all forms of racial violence ; fourthly , to the right of individual victims of discrimination to take collective action ; fifthly , to guaranteeing the access of minorities to vocational training , employment , health services and national insurance and pension schemes and their participation in economic , social , political and cultural life .
We still need public awareness campaigns on direct and indirect discrimination , to monitor the application of the Community institutional framework and to formulate our immigration policy on the basis of the principles which govern this extremely important directive .
This is the first directive that we are debating under Article 13 and it is a very good start in our fight against all discrimination across the EU .
MEPs and NGOs worked very hard to get Article 13 into the Treaty .
I look forward to seeing further directives , perhaps starting with disability .
Initially , I was against racism being taken separately .
I would have liked to see it taken with the directive on employment and with the Action Programme .
I was persuaded of the urgency , because of the current rise of racism across the EU .
A number of Members have cited individual cases today .
I hope the Portuguese Presidency can work very hard to push this through and make sure that we do get this racism legislation .
We have to send the message that we are opposed to racism and xenophobia across the EU .
I am glad for that reason that we are having the vote today .
May I turn specifically to some of the amendments .
I am very well aware that some European jargon excludes people .
This is the reason I wanted Amendment No 48 on simple language to go in .
Amendment No 43 : people have talked already about the burden of proof .
This is working towards a shared burden of proof .
The plaintiff does have to provide facts and it has already been said that equal opportunities for men and women cover this in European legislation as well .
Amendment No 51 : I am delighted that charities and non-governmental organisations are going to be consulted .
They are at the sharp end ; they know what they are talking about .
Finally , I would like to add my congratulations to Mrs Buitenweg and to Mr Howitt in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for working so closely together to put forward an excellent report .
Mr President , since the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere Justice and Home Affairs Summit , things have really got moving in Europe .
It is very pleasing to see this .
The action programme against discrimination , the Commission ' s two proposals for directives , the opening of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia , and lastly the adoption of Article 13 of the Treaty all give an irrevocable signal .
There was no anti-discrimination provision of this kind in the treaties before .
The European institutions can now , on the basis of Article 13 , take appropriate steps to fight certain kinds of discrimination .
The European Parliament has also made its own contribution .
My colleague , Mrs Buitenweg , has , under considerable time pressure , prepared a well considered report on this anti-discrimination package on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and we are now voting on that report .
In general , Mrs Buitenweg ' s 55 or so amendments make the Commission proposal much more substantial .
She has achieved a great deal .
The proposal before us is the first implementation of Article 13 .
It concerns equal treatment irrespective of the colour of people ' s skin or their ethnic origin .
It does not only tackle the most important areas of life , such as access to employment and equal treatment at the workplace , education , social protection and social security .
The Commission is also attempting to build on experience gained in the Member States .
The reversal of the burden of proof will make the directive a very important instrument .
The defendant will now have to provide convincing proof that there is no discrimination .
The scope of the directive has also been widened , with protection against discrimination being extended to associations and groups of persons .
A large majority of the committee went along with the rapporteur , and the vote today allows us to take that decision further in a consistent way .
I would like to expressly thank Mrs Buitenweg for her excellent work and I assume that we will adopt this report by a clear majority today , even if the Commissioner responsible has let it be known here today that she cannot accept half the amendments .
Nevertheless , a very important step is being taken today and we are giving a signal .
The previous speaker ' s intervention was not translated properly because it was delivered too quickly , so I would ask future speakers to speak more slowly so that the interpreters can keep up .
Yes , I asked Mr Sylla to slow down .
But he is free to accept or reject my advice .
However , you are right : the consequences are that what he is saying is not heard in the other languages .
Mr President , I wish to make three points .
Firstly , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , the draftspeople and the Commission - in particular Commissioner Diamantopoulou - on the directive and the report we have in front of us .
It has been a long time coming .
I was the chairman of the European Parliament ' s Committee of Inquiry into the growth of racism and fascism in Europe back in 1986 , when our rapporteur , Mr Evregenis , proposed such legislation .
I myself was the rapporteur for the Committee of Inquiry into Racism and Xenophobia in 1990 that reiterated that demand .
I suppose in a way it was worth waiting .
We have here legislation that will make a real impact on the lives of the 12 to 14 million third country nationals living in the European Union and the 4 million black Europeans .
Secondly , and without subtracting an iota from my support for the report and the directive as a whole , the Council will have to resolve a number of outstanding issues : on representative actions , on the definition of indirect discrimination and , as the previous speaker said , on the burden of proof .
The last of these must be workable , because otherwise we will keep the previous speaker happy !
The best basis is the existing burden-of-proof legislation , which is now underpinned by 25 years of case-law , and where the numbers are not available , expert opinion will suffice .
Thirdly and finally , I wish to warn my colleagues in the PPE Group .
Many of them - the large majority I believe - have been genuinely concerned that Parliament ' s procedures have not given them adequate time to consider the detail .
Yet a few clearly have darker motives .
With Mr Haider and Mr Le Pen lurking in the background , the Vlaams Blok and the Movimento Sociale Fiamma Tricolore promoting racism and xenophobia , the PPE Group , as a whole , should not be surprised if people conclude that if they continue with their technical objections , then this is a thinly disguised attempt to block these proposals which the vast majority of Europe so much welcomes .
Those who lie down with dogs get fleas .
Mr President , the Economist says that we need 13.5 million immigrants by the year 2015 in order to get everything done that needs to be done in Europe .
The International Herald Tribune says that we shall not succeed in obtaining that level of immigration and recruitment .
On other continents , there is an awareness of how racism is growing in Europe , and it is precisely because of racism that immigrants are choosing other continents , notably America , instead of Europe .
We are used to coming out against racism , because we want to combat intolerance and xenophobia .
Perhaps we must also combat these things for the sake of our own future .
Those who maintain that they speak for enterprise and for small businesses are speaking against their own better judgement when they do not support the present proposed directive .
I support most of the amendments , but on one point I am uneasy .
This is Amendment No 29 in which it is proposed that a difference of treatment on the basis of ethnic origin , which is presented as a difference of treatment on the grounds of religion , conviction or nationality , is to be deemed discrimination .
I am afraid that this may be self-defeating .
In Swedish law on measures to combat ethnic discrimination , it is expressly stated that , in using the term ethnic affiliation , the law means that someone belongs to a group of persons of the same race , skin colour , national or ethnic origin or confession .
There is a danger that what we believe to be an extension of the definition concerned may , in actual fact , be a restriction of it .
The general interpretation is , in fact , that ethnic affiliation embraces nationality .
I shall not , therefore , be voting for the present amendment .
It contradicts what I properly consider to be the case .
I would like to thank Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Howitt for the work that they have put into this , which has been both a personal as well as a political commitment .
As others have said , this is an aspirational directive about the sort of Europe we want to create .
It is directly relevant , for once , to the lives of many people living within the European Union .
From my constituency of London where a large portion of the population come from minority ethnic groups and where there is a growing number of children of mixed-race relationships , this is an exceedingly important directive .
It is even more important for those areas where people wrongly feel that there is no need for anti-racist or anti-discrimination legislation , because there are no visibly non-white people , but yet they will still vote for parties which espouse racist or anti-asylum seeker policies , because they are afraid of the unknown and the different .
I welcome the directive .
I am pleased Council feels a sense of urgency about it .
I assume this will be reflected in their willingness to take on board what Parliament is saying .
We have to acknowledge that in this House we regularly call upon other countries and governments to recognise the rights of ethnic minorities and to practice policies of universal human rights .
We have to demand the highest standards of ourselves .
It will not be easy to implement this directive and I am not referring to the votes .
It requires us to call into question the workings of all our institutions , including longstanding well-respected ones , and our own practices .
That will not be easy or painless .
In the UK we are gradually admitting to the institutional racism we practice and starting to examine the core values of our institutions .
That cannot be done unless the individuals within them examine their own beliefs and actions .
That is why the amendments about training , monitoring and implementation are so important in this directive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has become strong and we have learnt how to build bridges over the last 50 years .
We have paid very great attention to the social dialogue , which means talking with each other , examining problems and understanding each other .
Social partnership is an ideal model centred on partners who interact with each other and help each other .
We should also all be concerned about integration , about good neighbourliness .
We should endeavour to provide incentives and to act as a model .
I believe that in human society acting as a model is a particularly important characteristic .
Particularly as an Austrian , I can say that in recent years , with a population of 7 million , we have accepted a million refugees .
We are therefore the European country that has accepted most refugees per inhabitant .
We were a kind of life-raft in Europe , and we still are today .
We fight against extremism on both the left and the right , as well as against violence .
Austria has the world ' s strictest laws against fascism and against nazism .
We have learnt some lessons from history and we know how to fight these things .
We are now talking about discrimination .
First and foremost , I am speaking on behalf of small- and medium-sized enterprises .
We must make sure that we do not rob companies of working time and jeopardise their success by forcing them to spend more time on statistical form filling .
When I visit companies I often hear the complaint that there is too much bureaucracy and too many formalities .
Form filling is , of course , a very inefficient kind of work .
If , in addition , there are inspections , this also takes time and I believe that the vast majority of companies behave in a proper and decent way , and that relations between employers and employees are generally very good .
That is why I also believe that cancelling public contracts can also be provocative , and I am returning to the key issue now : reversing the burden of proof will have a knock-on effect if it is implemented .
It will encourage abuse .
People will need to protect themselves against such abuse .
It will be necessary to keep more evidence .
It will lead to risk limitation , by which I mean surveillance methods , video recordings and tape transcripts .
Everyone will try to protect themselves as well as possible so that if they are taken to court they can provide evidence .
I can see great dangers here and we must ensure that they are averted .
Mr President it is a measure of the effectiveness and importance of this legislation that even in the midst of a comprehensive series of reforms of race relations legislation in my own country , we have a situation where further improvements can be made .
I was going to make a speech of the normal variety , but having heard some of the responses across the House , I want to change what I was going to say , which is more in sorrow than in anger .
This House should recognise and change its tone on what it sees as Article 13 .
Of all the speakers , Mrs Diamantopoulou made the very effective point that words can be cheap in the question of anti-racism .
Posturing is easy .
Motivations are many and varied .
My friend , Mr Sylla , and I are concerned about two important things .
One is that we create a level playing field through Article 13 .
The burden of proof , the ability for organisations to take cases on behalf of individuals who have been harassed or discriminated against - all of these laws do not create an advantage for the majority of society .
They create the opportunity for people of talent and ability to release their talents and abilities to enrich what we have in Europe to create wealth , to create the culture and diversity of Europe , not to suffer disadvantage for small- and medium-sized enterprises or anyone else .
We must start talking positively about these proposals mainly because the Commission and the Portuguese Presidency , many who have created this report , many of my colleagues who have worked hard on their opinions , have responded in the way that we have because we understand that this legislation is not about victims , it is about enriching EU countries .
Many of those EU countries represented in this House do not pick and choose which race-relation legislation they have - they have none , many of them .
We have some - we can improve ours .
It is now an opportunity , a symbolic opportunity and an important practical opportunity for this House to make an historic judgement , to vote in full during a presidency which has helped us bring forward a law which I believe will enrich this House and that we , in time , will be very proud of .
Mr President , it was difficult to follow the previous speaker , who speaks from the heart .
So do I , for I applaud the fact that the Commission has been so quick in getting this proposal on the table and implementing Article 13 .
I would also congratulate the rapporteur on a splendid piece of work .
I am , of course , very much in favour of our arranging for the present directive to be implemented in the Member States as quickly as possible .
I would especially emphasise four factors which I think are particularly interesting about this directive .
Firstly , we have obtained a broad scope of application and , secondly , the directive covers both direct and indirect discrimination , including malice .
At the same time , a shared burden of proof has been proposed .
We have seen how this is an enormous advantage in connection with sex discrimination , and it is therefore good that it is now being introduced in this area .
Finally , it is also an advantage that this is a minimum directive , so that the Member States have the opportunity to go still further if they consider it right to do so .
However , the proposal also suffers , unfortunately , from a fundamental flaw in as much as it relates only to discrimination arising on the grounds of race and ethnic origin and does not cover the other grounds for discrimination listed in Article 13 .
In this way , the Commission is going to create a hierarchy of grounds for discrimination , a way of proceeding which I think is totally at odds with the wording , meaning and spirit of Article 13 .
It would be interesting if the Commission could explain to us what the motives were for creating this hierarchy of discrimination .
Mr President , our rapporteur , Mrs Buitenweg , deserves a huge pat on the back for her excellent report and the skilful manner in which she has led the consultation and negotiations .
We should , therefore , adopt this report without further delay .
This directive forms part of a larger package which implements Article 13 of the EC Treaty .
As others have already mentioned , this Article does not only pertain to combating discrimination based on racial or ethnic origin , but also based on other grounds .
I can understand why the Commission has decided to include the fight against racial discrimination in a separate draft directive .
I can also see why we are discussing this document expeditiously now and why , hopefully we shall be adopting it later today .
Far harder to accept is the fact that this draft directive against racial discrimination applies over a broader social range and , in terms of content , comprises stronger legal guarantees and control mechanisms than the second draft directive which is still in the pipeline and which is designed to fight other types of discrimination .
Together with the time lapse between the discussion of both draft directives , this difference in content entails the risk that there will be a hierarchy of types of discrimination .
This would give out the wrong political message which would , in particular , have an adverse effect on the fight against discrimination on grounds such as age , handicap and sexual orientation .
If anything , these so-called more recent factors deserve more , not less , attention .
I would therefore like to see the Commission and Council pledge their willingness to eliminate this form of discrimination between grounds for discrimination .
I have even less appreciation for the fact that there is no mention whatsoever of discrimination on the basis of sex throughout the package which the Commission presented in November , as if the fight against this was done and dusted . It was probably for fear of stating the obvious that no such mention was made .
In fact , there was no such risk .
Existing European legislation governing the equal treatment of men and women only pertains to the sphere of work and is still lacking in many other areas which , especially if we compare it to the directive which we are discussing today with regard to racial discrimination , need attention as a matter of urgency .
There is not enough time to list them all here , but I do not have the impression that a lack of knowledge on the part of the Commission concerning this matter is the problem .
I therefore hope that the Commissioner will pledge that she will start this exercise within the foreseeable future and will present proposals soon , as a result of which the equal treatment of the sexes in and out of the work sphere , but especially outside the work sphere , will be aligned to the directive which we are discussing , and will hopefully be adopting , here today .
Mr President , we are all opposed to discrimination and violence of all forms .
However , I do not believe extending EU competence to this area is either necessary or useful to its cause .
New laws will not change the hearts and minds of the people of Europe .
What we need is education , time and confidence building in a spirit of cooperation between the various ethnic communities .
We have in our own group two ethnic Members of the Conservative delegation who are extremely active and proud to be British Conservatives , in spite of what the other groups were saying earlier , and they will be voting against these measures .
The shift of the burden of proof , as called for by this draft directive , is both frightening and extreme .
Already in the UK , Mr Straw is planning that in rape cases the accused man will become guilty until proven innocent , on the basis of the testimony of one person - the woman in question .
This is a very dangerous precedent against all forms of natural justice .
Of course , we all condemn violent racist crimes and attacks .
I was not present , but I believe a number of allegations were made and cases cited by other groups earlier in the debate .
Criminal justice must remain the prerogative of the Member States .
Unlike previous speakers who have cited such cases , I oppose any erosion of national sovereignty in the area of criminal justice .
This must remain the prerogative of the Member States who will retain control of their own justice systems .
The EU has no competence in this area whatsoever .
The more the word ' racist ' is bandied about , the more it will become meaningless , devalued and ignored by the public at large .
I call on all those with any sense to oppose these measures .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place immediately following the urgencies .
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Sierra Leone
The first item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0432 / 2000 by Van den Bos , Malmström and Thors , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0444 / 2000 by Maes , Lucas , Rod , Schörling and Boumediène-Thiery , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0448 / 2000 by Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Schori , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0456 / 2000 by Van Hecke , Ferrer , Schwaiger and Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0465 / 2000 by Morgantini , Sjöstedt , Brie and Manisco , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group
on the situation in Sierra Leone .
Mr President , let us exercise honesty rather than hypocrisy .
The European Union , the United States and the United Nations have all displayed considerable concern about the developments in Sierra Leone .
We are not prepared to make any sacrifices .
The United States is paralysed by the Somalia syndrome .
The Union hides behind Washington ' s back .
We Europeans even leave the initiative to the Americans who send Jesse Jackson and let him loose in Freetown like a bull in a china shop .
The United Nations ' intervention has once again turned into a fiasco .
Only thanks to the United Kingdom were we able to stop the rebels in their tracks and arrest their leader , Sankoh .
This offers opportunities for a peace deal which far outstrips the laughable one which has been shot to tatters .
More than anything , we now need a watertight diamond boycott .
To complain about cruel massacres and mutilations becomes very hypocritical if we ourselves allow the diamond industry to earn a fortune on the back of blood-stained diamonds .
I would call for at least exercising more honesty when we discuss Africa .
Mr President , the violation of the Lomé peace agreement by the Revolutionary United Front in Sierra Leone is not only a human tragedy for the civilian populations , especially for children , but is also a political tragedy for the whole international community .
The impunity enjoyed by the rebels in Sierra Leone and the weakness of the peace-keeping forces , who can neither leave the country , for political and humanitarian reasons , nor effectively confront the armed rebels , are a threat to any future United Nations peace mission .
At the same time , this would be the third failure , after Somalia and Angola , of the Blue Helmets and the United Nations in Africa .
Africa , where the cruellest conflicts are taking place , is also , as far as peace is concerned , a forgotten territory .
The mandate of the United Nations mission in Sierra Leone is , by any reckoning , insufficient to achieve its objectives .
Its reinforcement , requested by the Secretary-General of the United Nations , depends on a decision by the Security Council , the same Security Council which gave the Blue Helmets the resources they required in East Timor and Bosnia , but which is much more reluctant to do the same in Sierra Leone at the moment .
The United States and Great Britain have only sent forces to the United Nations mission in order to guarantee the safety of the evacuation .
The only solution to the difficulties of the United Nations mission , in terms of achieving compliance with the peace agreement , is to entrust the political negotiation to the leaders of Liberia and Libya , whose record in seeking peace is very doubtful and also very worrying .
The liberation of some of the hostages and the arrest yesterday of Sankoh do not put an end to this conflict , but rather they may be a cause for even greater concern .
Only clear and decisive action by the international community as a whole can put an end to it : the arms embargo ; the control of diamond trafficking ; the deployment of a rapid intervention force , under the mandate of the United Nations ; and the prosecution of the perpetrators of crimes against humanity , the savage attacks against civilians , against international peace and security as well as against the United Nations forces .
The European Union must therefore support all these types of measures , within the framework of the CFSP .
Mr President , during the Sierra Leone debate in December , I , together with a few other delegates , warned against the risks involving the Lomé peace agreement .
This agreement not only lets the leader of one of the world ' s cruellest terrorist movements off the hook but , to cap it all , also rewards him with the vice-presidency and authority over the diamond mines .
But even that was evidently not enough for the rebel leader Sankoh .
He turned the disarmament pledge into a farce .
Murder , mutilation , abduction and rape simply continued as before .
His strategy is very much akin to that of his godfather , Charles Taylor , in neighbouring Liberia , who , by means of terror , forces the population to vote for him in the forthcoming presidential elections and establishes a new Mafia state in the heart of Africa ' s diamond industry .
The UN peacekeeping force , mainly comprising ill-trained third-world troops , is in danger of heading for a fiasco similar to those back in Somalia , Rwanda and Srebrenica .
Sierra Leone has made it clear once more that it urgently needs a permanent , international peacekeeping force which is well trained and equipped , and led by top commanders from the world ' s best armies .
It is a good sign that the rebel leader was arrested yesterday and that more than 200 UN peacekeeping troops were released over the past couple of days .
But the question remains of how the rebels will react to this and how the peace agreement will take shape in future .
In any event , the arms embargo must be supervised more effectively and perpetrators must be brought to justice .
More than anything , however , an embargo should be imposed on diamonds smuggled illegally from the country , estimated at USD 60 million annually , which is what is at stake for the rebels in their warfare .
I will call for a ban on these precious stones , which are stained with blood from thousands of innocent citizens , in my own country , Belgium .
Mr President , we are appalled at the present situation in Sierra Leone .
There is a dangerous trend towards the escalation of armed conflict , especially as the United Kingdom has now become militarily involved outside international law and the United Nations .
We demand an end to this military escalation and the immediate resumption of negotiations .
One-sided recriminations are neither appropriate nor helpful in this situation .
The RUF is known for its extreme brutality , but we should not overlook the fact that the government and the militias associated with it are little better .
We demand that the sources of the conflict should finally be tackled , by which we mean stopping the arms trade , halting the RUF ' s diamond trade via Liberia and Burkina Faso , and ending the interference of states that want to secure national objectives in Sierra Leone under the guise of humanitarian action .
I have the feeling that , economically speaking , the United Kingdom is acting in a neo-colonial way and that in political and military terms it is now acting like a colonial power .
It is very easy to get drawn into a war , but it becomes almost impossible to avoid the next logical step , military intervention , once the atmosphere escalates .
The military imposition of peace by international troops working with government militias against the RUF will not bring peace at all .
Quite the contrary , it brings with it the risk of uncontrollable escalation .
It is high time that the causes of this situation were addressed and a political solution was found .
Because of this , we need de-escalation in Freetown , not escalation .
Mr President , given the threats once again faced by the people of Sierra Leone , when they still have vivid memories of the horror and barbarity they have suffered at the hands of the RUF , we cannot content ourselves with simply condemning the events which are recurring .
Let us remember that amongst the objectives of the common foreign policy are the maintenance of peace and the respect for human rights , principles which are being totally disregarded today in Sierra Leone .
This Parliament must therefore urge the Member States to support the call of the Secretary-General of the United Nations so that the deployment of a rapid intervention force may proceed in order to re-establish stability in Sierra Leone and thereby contribute to preventing the danger of a new civil war which today hangs over that country .
However , our commitment must not end with this call .
We must also fight for an end to the impunity with which acts of genocide and war crimes have been carried out and for the people responsible for them to be brought before the Tribunals so that they may be judged .
We must also eradicate the cancer which has given rise to the destabilisation of that country .
That is why this Parliament must urge the OAU , the European Union , the Commission and the Government of Sierra Leone to adopt and promote whatever measures are necessary to end diamond trafficking and the control of that country ' s abundant natural resources by those people who , thanks to diamonds , have become men of war .
We are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Schuman declaration .
The best tribute we could pay to those people who , through that declaration , sowed the seed which has borne such abundant fruit in terms of peace and well-being , would be to commit ourselves to the cause of that beleaguered country , to decisively help the people of Sierra Leone to re-establish peace and , through peace , the full respect for human rights and the possibility of economic development which will lead it out of poverty and allow it finally to live in dignity .
Mr President , the fragmented society in Sierra Leone , the child soldiers and the fights between warlords make it extremely difficult to do anything of any consequence .
We stand here in moral indignation and are , at the same time , filled with a huge sense of powerlessness .
Politically speaking , in Europe , Mr Chris Patten and Mr Solana are two people from the European Union whom , in the event of foreign security conflicts , we can call on to use their political resourcefulness to both intervene in the region and to support the UN .
With everything which has been said about diamond trafficking and the halting of other dealings which finance the local war , and with everything which has been said about the need to intervene , what we need at the end of the day is a political solution .
As Mr Solana occasionally visits the Philippines and Mr Patten is actively involved in the Balkans , I would like to ask them both , on behalf of all of us , to jointly commit their efforts once more , focusing on political support , to reach an active final agreement there with the local regional authorities .
Mr President , Commissioner , any woman or man who , at any time in the course of the last few months , has bought any diamonds must have felt concerned that these might have come from Sierra Leone or Angola and must have wondered whether , in buying them , they had financed the mutilation of children or the drugging of child soldiers or had supported the abduction of the latter from UNICEF ' s rehabilitation camps .
We can condemn and we can make demands , but what we need to do , and can do , as a Parliament , is to come up with new ideas .
As was said earlier , we need a long-term strategy for Africa but also a Schuman-style plan for the joint management of those of Africa ' s resources which are being fought over , for example in Sierra Leone or in the Congo , so that the struggle does not lead to conflicts with fundamentally undemocratic warlords .
What do we now have to learn , fifty years after 9 May 1950 , that is to say fifty years after the Schuman Plan ?
We need an equivalent plan for Africa ' s resources , just as we need a movement in opposition to the diamond trade .
I feel that , from a human point of view , this is much more important than any amount of movements in opposition to the fur trade .
Mr President , we must not forget that the RUF is a vicious and brutal grouping .
We should congratulate the British Government on taking effective action in a peace-keeping capacity .
This is exactly the rapid reaction we are asking for within the European Union .
I find Mr Markov ' s remarks , in particular , slightly bizarre because we constantly need rapid-reaction forces to move in to preserve peace and prevent humanitarian disaster - exactly what has happened here .
Clearly , we also realise that peace keeping can only be carried out by the operation of effective force .
That is a lesson we have to learn if we are to have a rapid-reaction force within the European Union .
The other thing we should learn from this is that the Lomé peace agreement was imposed from outside by outsiders and was totally unworkable .
We should consider that lesson when we try to impose peace agreements in the future .
Mr President , once again the drama unfolding in an African country is bringing Parliament face to face with the daily horrors of a bloody conflict and civil war .
Certain kind souls are already pointing the finger at misgovernance and ethnic causes and indicating the culprits who should be eliminated .
As with the oil of Congo-Brazzaville , Angola or Nigeria and the mineral resources of Chad , Niger or the Democratic Republic of the Congo , and as in the latter generally or in Angola , Liberia and Sierra Leone , the causes are indeed economic and the fight for control of the diamond-producing areas is the basis and reason for this continuing conflict .
We are right to condemn the Revolutionary United Front or RUF for unilaterally resuming hostilities and for involving thousands of child-soldiers in the horror .
However , the Sierra Leone army and its militias should also come in for criticism .
We are right to condemn the use of diamonds by the RUF for war purposes .
But what are the economic interests behind the government ' s actions ?
We are right to condemn Liberia and Burkina Faso for their involvement in the arms trade and the recycling of diamonds .
But who is selling arms to these countries and who is buying the diamonds ?
We are right to send in a UN Implementation Force and to want to disarm those who are fighting . Yet without proper distribution of the wealth of these countries , as in other African countries , and if we continue to allow mining and oil companies to pillage these countries and to fund the groups controlling these resources , our intervention will once again be in vain as it will not tackle the real causes .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that the Commission very much welcomes the capture in the early hours of the morning of 17 May of the rebel leader , Foday Sankoh .
We understand he was arrested by the Sierra Leonean police and that he remains in government custody .
I am sure we all hope that Sankoh will now accelerate the release of the remaining hostages .
There are apparently about 360 of them .
We understand that has already commenced , but there is a long way to go .
Similarly , it is to be hoped that Sankoh will now honour the commitments he entered into last July when he signed the Lomé peace accord and that will allow a long-awaited peace and stability to return to Sierra Leone .
The Commission has been following closely and with very considerable concern the recent events in Sierra Leone which have derailed implementation of the Lomé peace agreement and called into question the commitment of the RUF towards restoring peace and stability in Sierra Leone .
That , if anything , is an understatement .
The European Union has issued two statements condemning the RUF ' s violations of the peace agreement and the abductions of UN peace-keeping personnel .
The statements have both called on the RUF to adhere strictly to their commitments under the Lomé agreement and , in particular , to the disarmament process .
We remain convinced that the Lomé agreement still offers the best chance for lasting peace in Sierra Leone .
We will continue to support the legitimate government ' s attempts to restore peace and stability to the country and to implement programmes of economic and social recovery .
The recent support provided to the UNAMSIL peace-keeping force by the United Kingdom is welcome - the honourable Member , Mr Titley , made the point well - as is the release last weekend of 139 of the 486 hostages , following the intervention of President Taylor of Liberia .
The Commission is aware of the reports concerning the involvement of neighbouring countries , in particular Burkina Faso and Liberia , in the smuggling of diamonds and in providing support to the rebels in Sierra Leone .
The Commission , together with Member States , is currently examining the regional dimension to the conflict with a view to formulating an appropriate regional response .
The Commission stresses the role to be played by regional organisations , for example ECOWAS , in the prevention of conflicts .
The Commission is financing with EDF regional funds the ECOWAS conflict-prevention mechanism , which could provide an appropriate channel for dialogue on this question .
As regards humanitarian assistance , through ECHO we are continuing to finance programmes in support of displaced and refugee communities through international NGOs .
Since the beginning of 1999 , ECHO has provided some EUR 14m of assistance , covering the supply of medical aid , therapeutic feeding , water and sanitation and psychosocial support to children affected by war .
In addition , this funding has covered support to amputees - the all too many amputees in the country .
This month the Commission will be seeking approval for a new EUR 12m programme of assistance to Sierra Leone , principally covering refugees and the internally displaced .
This programme will concentrate on providing support first to refugees in neighbouring Guinea and Liberia , second to internally displaced populations and , thirdly , to women and children affected by the war and , of course , the amputees .
Ex-combatant children will again receive psychosocial support .
For me the most interesting point to come out of this debate was not just the expressions of concern about the situation in Sierra Leone - one would expect that - but the number of honourable Members who have expressed very clearly and cogently their views on the diamond trade .
I say with some feeling that I very much hope that Member States will take account of what has been said in this Chamber .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6 p.m.
Sri Lanka
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0433 / 2000 by Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0449 / 2000 by Titley and Sakellariou , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0457 / 2000 by Van Orden and Deva , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0466 / 2000 by Frahm , Morgantini and Manisco , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0474 / 2000 by Lambert , McKenna and Lagendijk , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group
on Sri Lanka .

Mr President , the resolution initiated by my colleagues , Mr Van Orden and Mr Deva , concerns a matter that is highly topical and most urgent even though this is the first occasion on which Parliament has devoted time to the tragic conflict in Sri Lanka which has been going on for over 17 years .
The resolution sends out a powerful message .
The fighting has to stop .
The parties have to get round the table and reach a reasonable solution that will last .
In this regard , it can only be helpful for the international community , whether it is the UN , the Commonwealth or the European Union , to maintain a strong and current interest in developments .
This legitimate interest should not interfere with the work that has already been carried out by the Indian and Norwegian governments whose representatives have been engaged for some time now in the difficult and sensitive task of brokering negotiations .
I know that in spite of the dreadful atrocities that have been committed against the civil population and against members of successive administrations , the Sri Lankan government at the highest levels is willing to enter into negotiations and is setting no conditions .
We must all recognise the overriding importance of maintaining the territorial integrity of Sri Lanka .
Beyond that there are many political options that can fruitfully be pursued .
The international community , including the EU , should be ready to provide substantial material support in due course for whatever solution is worked out and to assist the economic and social reconstruction of the country after so many years of conflict .
Above all , Parliament ' s resolution is unequivocal in its condemnation of terrorism .
This is a scourge which affects us all .
There is no excuse for the indiscriminate acts of murder and mayhem carried out by the so-called Tamil Tigers against children and ordinary civilians going about their daily business and against democratically elected politicians .
This is an attack on civilised society and the democratic institutions which we all value so highly .
Inevitably , the people most effected and most helpless in these situations are the nationals of the target country who have fled the conflict and are trying to lead new lives in Europe .
These people are most vulnerable to threats and intimidation from organisations acting on behalf of terrorists such as the Tamil Tigers .
Of course , there are many other terrorist groups whose activities are sustained in a similar way .
They cleverly avoid breaking the laws of the host country and so can continue their ghastly activities with impunity .
This situation must change .
I commend the resolution on Sri Lanka to this House .
The issue of the place of the Tamils in Sri Lanka is a long-standing problem dating back to at least the year of independence in 1948 .
We have had agreements since then to grant autonomy to the Northeast Tamil region , which have been abrogated by the government .
In this conflict , far too many people have died .
There has been a growing catalogue of violence and human rights abuses on both sides - by the Tamil Tigers and , sadly , the government security forces .
These are well documented by organisations such as Amnesty and the US Department of State in its 1999 Country Report .
Young Tamil men in particular can find themselves being a victim of violent coercion by the Tamil Tigers and violent interrogation by the security services .
It is clear that thousands of people have been displaced within Sri Lanka .
Thousands more have sought asylum and the whole population lives in fear of violence .
We cannot say what the exact state of affairs is at the moment as there is a complete media blackout in force as part of a set of new restrictive laws introduced in May .
The resolution is clear .
Those laws must be lifted before the elections in August .
Something has to change .
We have to do what we can to work for a peaceful and lasting settlement .
It is clear that the international community is no longer prepared to see internal armed struggle as only a problem for the state concerned and that long-term political investment and negotiations are necessary rather than arms sales .
Northern Ireland is a clear example of the difficulties of such a process , but also the possibilities .
This resolution is important in its call for immediate cessation of hostilities and the lack of preconditions is a welcome move .
The situation would also be helped by agreement between the Sri Lankan political parties themselves and we welcome the efforts of the Norwegian and other governments and feel that the Commonwealth could have a very valuable role to play in this situation .
Mr President , this is an historic day and an historic debate because , after 17 years of war in Sri Lanka , the European Parliament for the first time is actually debating how to bring peace to this war-torn island .
In 1948 , when Sri Lanka obtained independence , it was one of the most prosperous countries in South Asia .
In 1952 , Lee Kuan Yew , the newly elected Prime Minister of Singapore , said : " My ambition is to make Singapore emulate Sri Lanka in prosperity , education and standard of living " .
Forty-eight years later , that beautiful island of Sri Lanka has been smashed by a terrorist group now recognised as the most powerful terrorist organisation in the world .
There are four million Tamils in Sri Lanka and there are 15 million Sinhalese .
One million Tamils live in the north ; the other three million live in peace in the south with the Sinhalese .
They hold high office in Colombo , the present foreign minister is Tamil , the country ' s leading businessmen are Tamil , so are judges , doctors , lawyers and cabinet ministers - the list goes on .
Yet this pointless war also carries on , to serve the single purpose of a terrorist leader pursuing his own ambition .
The resolution states how many people he has killed .
The LTTE has to be stopped .
I ask Member States to proscribe this terrorist organisation and to help build peace and stability in Sri Lanka and strongly support the initiative currently being taken by the Norwegian and Indian governments .
Mr President , here we are again witnessing a conflict between two diametrically opposed parties .
True , this is the first time we have tackled this issue , but we see similar cases every day .
Of course , we hope that peace will be preserved and that these issues will be resolved through negotiation rather than force .
However , we must not forget that the fundamental principle of self-determination is all too often disregarded , sacrificed on the altar of another , equally valid but opposite principle , that of the territorial integrity of the States .
At this point , a choice must be made between the two solutions .
I would not presume to say which solution is better but we must find the courage to consider all sides of the issue .
One of the Members referred to the case of the State of Singapore .
Singapore used to be part of Malaysia but it is now an independent State .
The division took place without conflict , and , today , Singapore is no longer part of Malaysia but has its own complete territorial and State independence . This was achieved without conflict , without murder , without torture and without acts of violence .
On the other hand , in the same geographical area , we have also witnessed another conflict , the conflict of East Timor and , with far too great a delay , Parliament declared itself in favour of the independence of the eastern part of the Island of Timor .
There it is . At times , I find it difficult to understand how the same people , the same Members of Parliament , are able to adopt different positions on situations which are , if not identical , at least similar in some respects .
The Island of Timor has been split into two parts and there are now two separate states , thanks to a referendum which was carried out democratically , although not in the best of conditions .
The people decided their future and , although this involved fighting , conflict and so forth , succeeded in obtaining what they wanted .
I wonder why this Parliament does not call upon Sri Lanka to hold a referendum as well , along the lines of the referendum held in East Timor , and to abide by the result .
Mr President , I yield to no one in my desire for peace in Sir Lanka and in my condemnation of all violence .
However , I say to Mrs Foster and Mr Heaton-Harris that they want to check their stories and sources because it needs both sides in a conflict to be committed if a lasting solution is to be achieved .
I know Sri Lanka , I have been there .
I can give you examples of what I have seen .
I have seen Tamil men being harassed on the streets by government troops .
I know that Tamil people need 11 pages of documents just to travel from Batticaloa in the east to the capital , Colombo .
And like everyone here in this Parliament , and all European journalists , I have been unable to go to Jaffna recently , nor have I seen any television coverage of the battle at Elephant Pass .
I have seen the fighting in Sierra Leone , Chechnya , Kosovo but nothing from Sri Lanka because the Sri Lankan Government does not allow press coverage .
That goes back longer than last May .
This is a government whose defence budget has risen by 11 % in a year and which , one day , will have to answer allegations of involvement in the assassination of leading Tamil figures and other human rights abuses .
Let us have a peace for all Sri Lankans , based on citizens ' rights , humanity and in which government resources are directed at building communities , not helping to destroy them .
Mr President , the Commission is as concerned as honourable Members about the tragic and dramatic civil war which has been continuing for the past 17 years , a civil war which seriously affects the whole population of Sri Lanka .
It is salutary to recall that over 60 000 people have been killed during the course of this conflict - people in both ethnic groups .
We appreciate the efforts being made in Sri Lanka to reach a peaceful solution to the conflict but we also reiterate , as I am sure all honourable Members would , our concerns for the respect of the basic rules of international humanitarian law .
The Commission shares the concerns of the European Parliament regarding the latest developments in and around Jaffna .
On 15 May , the presidency issued a declaration on Sri Lanka .
This called on both parties , firstly , to cease hostilities and to begin negotiations ; secondly , to ensure the safety of the civilian population and , thirdly , to cooperate with the Norwegian government in its endeavours to facilitate a negotiated settlement of the conflict .
I should like to say in passing that I would like to express my own appreciation of the role played by the Norwegian government , which regularly reminds us by its behaviour on the international stage what we are all missing in the European Union on account of the Norwegian people ' s referendum decision .
The presidency declaration also rightly called on the government to lift as soon as possible the restrictions on civil liberties and press freedom , which have been introduced under the emergency regulations .
As for our support for rehabilitation in the north and east of the island , a viable political solution has to be found and a measure of peace established before we could consider a major role in this process .
That is fairly clear and understandable .
Assistance in favour of refugees and internally displaced persons will continue naturally to be given through the UNHCR and non-governmental organisations .
The European Commission will continue to provide emergency humanitarian aid to populations affected by the conflict .
Through our delegation in Colombo , we are following closely the impact of the situation on the civilian population and we are in permanent contact with the ICRC , the UNHCR and the main NGOs .
I last visited Sri Lanka in the late 1980s .
I flew into Jaffna - I think I was the first minister from anywhere to do so - in the back of an Indian helicopter gunship .
Alas , 12 , 13 years later , the violence continues .
It has been a terrible blight on one of the most beautiful countries in the world , with some of the most talented people .
We are reminded of Sri Lanka ' s potential , which we heard about earlier , through the occasionally accurate words of senior minister Lee Kuan Yew .
That is a reminder of what has been missed in Sri Lanka as a result of this violence .
We all hope that it ends very soon .
If we can contribute to the work being done by the Norwegian and Indian governments to help bring the parties together , we would be happy to do so .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Philippines
B5-0434 / 2000 by Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0442 / 2000 by Collins and Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0454 / 2000 by Schori , Sakellariou and Linkohr , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0458 / 2000 by Posselt , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group ;
B5-0467 / 2000 by Krivine , Seppänen , Vinci and Cossutta , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0473 / 2000 by Isler-Béguin , Kreissl-Dörfler , Wuori and McKenna , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group
on the Philippines .
Equatorial Guinea
B5-0435 / 2000 by Gasòliba i Böhm and Sánchez García , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0455 / 2000 by Martínez Martínez , Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Menéndez del Valle , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0459 / 2000 by Ferrer , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group ;
B5-0468 / 2000 by Marset Campos and Cossutta , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
on Equatorial Guinea .
Iran ( press code )
B5-0436 / 2000 by Malmström and Ries , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0440 / 2000 by Belder and Van Dam , on behalf of the EDD Group ;
B5-0447 / 2000 by Rühle , Boumediène-Thiery and Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0450 / 2000 by Schori and Sakellariou , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0460 / 2000 by Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0469 / 2000 by Boudjenah and Morgantini , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group
on Iran .
Burma
B5-0437 / 2000 by Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0446 / 2000 by McKenna , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0451 / 2000 by Schori , Sakellariou and Veltroni , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0461 / 2000 by Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group ;
B5-0470 / 2000 by Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group
on Burma .
Football : " Euro 2000 " and preventing hooliganism - B5-0462 / 2000 by Stockton , Heaton-Harris and Perry , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group
on the right to safety at Euro 2000
Philippines
Mr President , Commissioner , the crisis in the Philippines we are discussing is a tragedy .
I represent one of the countries which has citizens as hostages there .
We appeal to the European Commission to ensure that its representatives continue actively to urge President Estrada to refrain from any assaults which might put the hostages ' lives at risk .
I also sincerely hope that the hostages will be able to benefit from any medical aid , for example , that Médecins Sans Frontières might be allowed access so that we may thereby protect the lives of those who are currently hostages .
There is , nonetheless , something to be learned from all tragic events .
I also believe that the Finnish people have learned that the basis for the present conflict is social injustice and that , far apart from one another though we may be , we are nonetheless affected by precisely such social injustices and violations of human rights .
Mr President , Commissioner , we must be very careful as Europeans about taking issue with separatist movements of the kind being discussed here .
I say that because many of the borders involved in these great island kingdoms - the Philippines , Indonesia , Malaysia - are purely and simply colonial borders that we drew artificially to suit our own political and economic interests and which destroyed historical structures .
To that extent , we are responsible for many of the conflicts in this region .
That does not mean that it is not up to us Europeans to ensure that these structures do not disintegrate , with all the dangers that would imply .
We should not put ourselves on a pedestal .
We have to recognise that we bear a lot of the responsibility for these developments .
Nevertheless , it is , of course , our task to create peace and stability in this area , and in particular to take action against all those criminals who , on a political pretext , have , in the most appalling way , kidnapped and maltreated innocent tourists who are citizens of the European Union .
There can be no political justification for ill-treating people as is happening there .
We therefore appeal to these criminals to release these citizens of the European Union and all the hostages immediately , and we give our full support to Mr Solana and everyone else trying to help to bring this hostage crisis to an end .
We should also take this hostage crisis as a warning to us to stop ignoring these parts of the world or simply pursuing our own economic interests there .
Instead , we should be helping to create stable and peaceful conditions there , because these areas of conflict are like open wounds that we ourselves have often inflicted in the past in these regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our thoughts are with our fellow citizens who simply wanted to discover another culture and who are now being held hostage by the armed group , Abu Sayyaf .
It is not clear whether this is a case of organised crime or political demands but the island of Jolo is now at the centre of the hostilities with this awful hostage taking .
In these islands , which are characterised by tropical luxuriance and unspeakable poverty , the machine gunning of villages , kidnappings , ransom demands and torture are common currency .
This hostage taking and the many violations of human rights show how these armed opposition movements have sunk into criminal excess .
Although we cannot tolerate these constant violations of human rights , we also deplore the failure of the peace talks with the Philippine Government .
We also know that the violence has its roots in poverty .
This is why we strongly support the appeal made by the Archbishop of Manila to President Estrada that socio-economic reforms should be implemented .
Without the political will to end the situation , the violence can only continue .
Equatorial Guinea
Mr President , we are currently discussing an issue which Parliament has dealt with on previous occasions .
It is the case of Equatorial Guinea , one of so many African countries which have undergone a very poor transition from the colonial era , during which former colonial relationships , on the one hand , and the ambitions of other Member States of the Union to extend their area of influence , on the other , have prevented the support necessary and conducive to the establishment of a genuine democratic system .
In 1999 there were general elections to the Guinean Parliament , during which the international observers noted that human rights , democratic guarantees and freedom of information had been violated .
The same situation may now reoccur during the elections on 28 May , which is why , as this resolution states , we demand the appropriate intervention of the European Union , in order to guarantee that democratic elections take place on this occasion .
Mr President , the reason for this resolution has already been explained : in Equatorial Guinea , the political and social situation is still extremely serious .
Firstly , no steps have been taken to establish a constitutional state based on a multi-party democracy which fully respects human rights .
Secondly , the population endures harsh conditions of poverty .
The government of President Teodoro Obiang has failed to comply with each and every promise of democratisation which it made to the international community .
The leaders and activists of the opposition parties face constant persecution , in the form of arbitrary arrest and sometimes torture .
Of course , they have no access to the media and they have to face corrupt electoral processes , in which transparency and fair play are totally absent .
With regard to the municipal elections of 28 May , there are grounds for concern , because to date there has been no guarantee of any democratic conditions for these elections .
We are therefore concerned and we ask that efforts be made to observe how the elections are carried out .
Guinea is sinking further and further into under-development .
Paradoxically , its income , which comes from oil , is increasing , but none of it reaches the inhabitants , being entirely purloined by the ruling classes .
Given this situation , as the resolution we have presented indicates , we demand that the government of Equatorial Guinea initiate a genuine transition to democracy , which we believe could begin by making these municipal elections free elections .
The Union must exert pressure in this respect , and not lower its guard or accept any more false promises from President Obiang .
Therefore , if the municipal elections take place in the current circumstances , with no form of guarantee , we must not resume any cooperation with Guinea , apart from purely humanitarian cooperation .
Article 5 of the Lomé Convention obliges the Union and the Member States to demand democracy and human rights in Equatorial Guinea .
We therefore believe that this House should follow that line .
Mr President , the calling of municipal elections by President Obiang should constitute a step forward on the path to democratisation in that country and , therefore , we should take a positive of view of it .
Even more so if we bear in mind that the President of Guinea is one of the signatories of the Cairo declaration and the action plan which accompanies it , which recognises the need to consolidate democratic principles , based on the right of all citizens to choose their leaders freely by means of free elections and , consequently , also the need to ensure that elections are transparent and free , and to adopt the necessary means for their effective observation .
However , the experience of previous elections , during which serious irregularities and a total lack of transparency were noted , as well the continuing lack of democratic guarantees in Guinea , requires not only that we observe very carefully how the coming elections are held , but also that we demand , forcefully , that President Obiang adopts the necessary measures to guarantee fair play in these elections .
We especially have to ensure that the process is open to all political forces - which involves the liberation of the political prisoners - and that the opposition is guaranteed the full expression of its democratic freedoms .
We should also demand the presence of observers who can monitor , in total freedom , the handling of these elections , and verify that democratic rights have been respected .
These elections may offer Guinea the opportunity to start along the path to democracy .
They could also lead to a rapprochement with the European Union and the granting of the aid which the European Union was prepared to give in the event that democracy was respected .
Therefore , as a Parliament , we have the obligation to exert pressure on President Obiang and demand that he allows these elections to be held in accordance with democratic principles .
This is the only way that freedom may be fully restored to the people of Guinea .
Mr President , we cannot and must not miss this opportunity to encourage the people of Guinea to take the democratic path or the opportunity it represents for its youth , since , in an environment of increasing poverty and inequality , the failure of democracy leads to a spiral of violence and repression , which in turn ends in an armed conflict which is often promoted from outside .
The European Union must , through all possible channels , demand that the Government of Equatorial Guinea free all political prisoners and end the coercion suffered by the democratic forces , in order to guarantee that the coming municipal elections bring hope to the people of Guinea and lead to fruitful relations between Guinea and the European Union .
Iran ( press code )
The struggle in Iran for reform and freedom is of great interest .
There have been considerable reasons for optimism in the election of President Khatami and the overwhelming vote for reformist candidates in the February elections but , as Human Rights Watch notes , the struggle to control the press is , in many ways , the struggle to control the future direction of the Islamic Republic as a whole .
The very success of the reformist agenda seems to have provoked a backlash by the conservative reactionary forces and an attempt to punish the majority who voted in February for reform .
They are targeting the independent press because it is a major channel for reformists .
These attempts surely cannot succeed in the long run because the youthful population is impatient for change showing that Islam and guarantees of rights and freedoms are perfectly compatible .
We must do all in our power to encourage and support reform , including especially basic legal safeguards for freedom of expression as required by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which Iran is a signatory .
In the meantime , we call on Iran to cease the persecution and prosecution of journalists and writers for views which do not threaten public order , or national security , but only the vested interests of conservatives .
Mr President , ' Bahar ' or ' The Spring ' is the name of a new independent newspaper in the Islamic Republic of Iran which we hope is still being published .
The name ' Bahar ' clearly refers to a political programme and undeniably supports President Khatami ' s reform policy .
This course probably coincides rather well with the pursuit of a civil society .
Iranian conservative circles saw this trend as a deliberate attempt to secularise their own state - and with good reason .
To their growing dismay , these fervent defenders of the political status-quo within the Islamic Republic have been pushed onto the defensive since President Khatami took office in 1998 .
This was underlined by a painful defeat in the parliamentary elections only a few months ago .
In order to turn the political tide , the hard liners in Tehran have not shrunk from using any means available to them .
Just cast your mind back to some eighteen months ago , when a number of independent clergy were killed in macabre circumstances , or to last year , when the student protest was ruthlessly repressed .
Incidentally , the followers of the revolution leader , Khamenei , attempted to systematically silence the independent and critical press by issuing publication bans .
This hit the ultra-conservatives during the parliamentary elections particularly hard .
Hence , their furious reaction last month when they closed all but a paltry three of the reform-minded daily newspapers .
The present joint resolution supports the persecuted and the journalists in Iran who are doomed to unemployment .
The latter knew and know that they can count on the support of the large majority of the population .
Why ?
Because they were not afraid to publicly turn against a far-reaching lack of freedom in society , which is perpetuated by undisguised terrorist tactics generated by the state machinery .
With this resolution , the European Parliament aims to encourage Persian editors in their fight for freedom of the press and to banish all fears at the writing desks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful for this opportunity to talk about Iran again today .
The reform process in Iran is at risk .
Even before the newly elected reform parliament has been able to meet , there has been a menacing intensification of the power struggle in Iran .
We are dismayed at the manipulative reporting of the conference held by the Heinrich Böll Foundation in Berlin , and we are deeply concerned about the arrests of journalists and critical intellectuals in the wake of this conference .
We are also concerned about the ban on all pro-reform newspapers and magazines published in Iran .
We call on the Iranian authorities to immediately release the conference participants and journalists who have been arrested , and to cancel all warrants of arrest issued in this connection , to lift the ban on the prohibited newspapers and magazines and , last but by no means least , to respect the political will of the Iranian people , which was so remarkably expressed in the election results .
We call on the Council , the Member States and the Commission to support these demands on Iran and to make respect for human rights a prerequisite for further cooperation with Iran .
Mr President , we are currently witnessing massive attacks on the freedom of the press .
Last week , Mr Putin ' s troops occupied the largest opposition publishing house in Russia .
Yesterday , the same thing happened in Belgrade to the independent radio station there .
In Iran , we have a situation where newspapers are being banned for simply acting as a voice for those forces and individuals who were so successful in the last election , and who embodied - and continue to embody - hopes of pluralism in Iran .
I therefore fully support everything Mrs Rühle has said .
We must take advantage of this phase to offer our firm support to democratic forces and forces for reform in Iran , because what we are witnessing at present is a fresh start and yet simultaneously a setback .
What is very much at issue here is that we should not allow those forces to be isolated , which is what the regime is working towards .
That is why it has also been so devastating that the developments at the conference in Berlin occurred , thus giving the regime a pretext for taking measures against the opposition in Iran .
I am convinced that a dialogue with Iran is , in fact , the only way to influence developments in that country .
We must not leave the opposition unsupported by adopting measures that encourage isolation . Instead , we should press , through intensive contacts not only with the government but also with the opposition , and by the Council , the European Parliament and the Commission bringing all their considerable influence to bear , for an end to these developments , and to ensure that the reform process in Iran , which is fragile but promising , is not once again choked at birth !
Burma
Mr President , it is an awkward situation , this tenth anniversary of the elections of the NLD in Burma .
Awkward because the Burmese junta was successful in obtaining international recognition .
I refer , naturally , to Burma joining the ASEAN .
It is quite possible that the other ASEAN Member States decided in favour of this with the best of intentions and in the hope that this would kick-start the democratisation process in Burma .
We have to ascertain , however , that this is not how it worked , that this attempt failed and may well have brought about the opposite effect , judging from the smirks on the faces of the Burmese rulers when they hosted the ASEAN meeting of Ministers for Economic Affairs earlier this month .
In our opinion , relations between the European Union and ASEAN should not suffer because of the problems within Burma .
These relations are too important for this .
It does mean , however , that , if this situation continues , we will need to discuss the situation in Burma in our contacts with ASEAN .
However , we have to ascertain at the same time that our own sanctions were not that effective either .
It may be opportune to consider whether we can take so-called intelligent sanctions against Burma .
After all , sanctions should just focus on the one goal , namely the reinstatement of democracy in Burma .
Yesterday , we saw the arrest of 95 members of the NLD and the situation in Burma has become untenable .
One of the key things we need to look at is the role of some European multinational oil companies , in particular the French-Belgium company , Total Fina .
We also need to criticise the French government for the fact that they are backing this .
Even the British government is more progressive when it comes to their policy on this .
The British government has actually called on Premier Oil to withdraw from Burma .
The French government should follow the example of the British government .
It is unacceptable that European multinational companies are investing in and backing up a system where large-scale gross violations of human rights are taking place .
When it comes to sanctions , we really need to answer the call that we should implement economic sanctions against the SPDC and that we should be ending all links between Europe and Burma based on trade , investment and , in particular , tourism .
It is unacceptable that we should be investing in tourism in a situation where gross human rights violations are taking place , where people ' s lives and liberty have basically been denied .
Mr President , it is now ten years since Burma witnessed a political drama .
After a period of uncertainty and conflict , open and fair elections were held in 1990 and Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi was voted President with an overwhelming majority .
In the parliamentary elections , the NLD won most of the parliamentary seats .
Shortly after this , the military once again seized power .
Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi was imprisoned .
Parliament was dissolved and many MPs were murdered , imprisoned or driven out of the country .
Since then , Burma has been the scene of unprecedented repression .
Thousands of people have been killed and hundreds of thousands of people have fled the country and are living in camps in Thailand , Malaysia and India .
In the country itself , entire population groups have been displaced in order to break up the minority groups .
There is talk of forced labour .
According to the Financial Times this week , Burma has more child soldiers than anywhere else in the world .
Burma can be compared with South Africa and Chile in the Eighties .
What action would we like the Commission and Council to take ?
First of all , we would ask you not to accept that the military regime in Burma should represent the Burmese people at the Euro-Asian Summit .
We also ask you to take a hard economic line against Burma .
We advocate economic isolation and an absolute investment ban by all EU Member States , as proposed several times already by the United States .
Moreover , EU citizens should be dissuaded by their governments from travelling to Burma for their holidays .
Many of these new facilities have been built using forced labour .
This is the core of our request .
Burma should not receive any better treatment from the international community than South Africa and Chile did back in the Eighties .
If it does , then we are using double standards .
Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi should at long last receive an effective response to her peaceful protest .
What would she otherwise gain from a Nobel Prize and Sakharov Prize if she does not actually receive support in order to free herself and her country from this terrible plight ?
Football : " Euro 2000 " and preventing hooliganism
Mr President , I must declare an interest because I am a Class I soccer referee and very active in that and have been involved in football at many levels for 18 years .
This resolution looks at the security and safety arrangements ahead of Euro 2000 so that decent football-loving supporters from across Europe can go to , watch and come away from football games this summer without fear or concern for their safety : a fairly apt thing to call for considering the recent events in Copenhagen .
Most Members will find this motion uncontentious .
However , I do understand that there are some queries about the question of the suitability of the Charleroi stadium and its ability to safely host the England versus Germany game on 17 June .
These I will tackle now because I believe these points are what people want to hear about .
I thank the BBC Watchdog Programme for providing me with details of the findings of a renowned British sports stadia expert , Dr Jim Dickey .
He found , after just a brief examination of the temporary structure above the north stand in Charleroi , that there were too many seats in the rows , the stand is too steep , the safety barriers are too low , the exits from the stand are too narrow and the stairways at the back of the stand are too wide .
This stand , like all the others , will be full to capacity on 17 June .
Meanwhile , a few miles up the road , the King Baudouin stadium , Belgium 's national stadium , and now probably one of the safest stadia in all of Europe , will lie empty that day .
I understand the regional pride of many members from Belgium and I do not question that much time is being spent by the organisers of Euro 2000 looking into the safety and security aspects of the competition .
But surely , common sense should prevail and the future of this particular fixture at its current venue should be actively re-examined .
I do hope that Members will support this motion , because this is something we can actually change for the better .
Why not look at an event beforehand and not worry about the consequences of the bad actions of a few violent people after such a football event .
Mr President , I hope there will be a great football match on 17 June between England and Germany .
Most people are looking forward to a good match and hope that it will be safe .
But , unfortunately , that is not the view of everybody .
The German police anti-hooligan task force has said that it is pretty confident there will be hooligans there .
I cannot say anything about German hooligans but I can talk about English football hooligans - I cannot say ' fans ' and even the word ' hooligan ' is not strong enough for them .
There is a group of people who very definitely are planning to be there .
If you doubt me , just look at the press photographs of the problems that occurred in Copenhagen last night .
As well as the problems my colleague referred to that could occur inside the stadium at Charleroi , there is a serious problem that may occur in the streets around that stadium .
The head of the Belgian Police Federation has said that he is concerned .
We are saying now to the Belgian authorities and the European football authorities that they should choose the option of a safer ground that is available elsewhere in Belgium , and the stadium in Brussels has been cited .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after discussing all these terrible events in the world , it is certainly refreshing to consider other problems even though , on reflection , these also involve images which cannot be tolerated .
I do not believe , however , that the motion before us deals with the problem correctly .
For example , paragraph 2 of the motion is wrong . In this paragraph Parliament expresses its concern about the fact that the Charleroi stadium , which is to host several games , in particular the England versus Germany match , does not meet the relevant Belgian safety standards .
This is wrong for several reasons .
The first is that the organisers of any game in Belgium and the promoters of any stadium must sign a public-law agreement with the municipality in which the stadium is situated . This agreement engages the personal responsibility of the burgomaster .
Our fellow Member has spoken of regional pride .
Belgians are aware of the good and bad sides of regional pride and , as a result , the use of a stadium requires not only the signature of the burgomaster but also that of the Minister of the Interior .
It is therefore completely wrong to talk of regional rivalries .
Furthermore , everyone knows or should know that it is not the inhabitants of Charleroi who chose this game any more than the others .
Finally , in the context of Euro 2000 , there is an additional requirement that the stadium must be approved by the European Union and UEFA .
For all the stadiums which have been converted to accommodate an adequate number of visitors , UEFA has not only given its final authorisation to the process but has also been involved in the practical organisation of the stadium reviews .
I know something about this as I have worked , in my capacity as burgomaster of the town of Liege , on the preparation of a similar stadium .
To conclude , I regret to say that our colleagues are using arguments which are inaccurate and which can therefore only lead to wrong conclusions .
I am not the only one to think this as Mr Desama would have said the same if he had been able to speak . Our Dutch colleague , Mr van den Berg , also agrees as he asked me to say that in this case he has witnessed , in addition to a responsible attitude from the Belgians , ...
... very close cooperation with the Dutch government and it started at the very beginning and we extended this cooperation with France on account of the lessons of the World Cup and a host of other countries , 14 , I believe , including the United Kingdom , of course , because we wanted to have contacts with the countries which might send teams to Belgium .
Mr President , I will conclude by saying that the third and last point is that I think Parliament should make rules and not bother about taking chances .
Are we going to deal tomorrow or next week with the trains leaving Paddington Station ?
Mr President , there are a number of advantages to this text .
Firstly , it gives us the opportunity to reiterate that we all condemn hooliganism and that we all obviously want to fight this phenomenon to the best of our ability .
I must also point out , however , that , for two years now , in both the Netherlands and Belgium , the sporting , political and police authorities have been preparing in a professional manner for Euro 2000 and , in practical terms , huge investments have been made .
Despite that , is there still a risk ?
Of course , but then there is always a risk .
When faced with such a phenomenon , you can never say that nothing will happen .
However , I must say very sportingly to our British colleague that this does not justify an event of this type being used from the outset to incite prejudice . It does not justify the attempt to spread incorrect information in official European Parliament documents either .
Paragraph 2 , as indicated by Mr Dehousse , is incorrect .
The Belgian authorities have given authorisation for the Charleroi stadium to be used .
Paragraph 3 , which indicates that the King Baudouin stadium in Brussels might be used , is wrong .
No authority and no official has indicated this .
We must therefore be reasonable and certainly not adopt texts like this .
Finally , our fellow member has cited information which he was delighted to indicate was given to him by the BBC .
I should like to mention something which was said on the BBC by someone who is not a football referee like you but who is the coach of the England team .
What did Mr Keegan say - I am nearly finished , Mr President - during his visit to Charleroi ?
He said that it is a suitable stadium for a high-level match .
He even said that this stadium differs very little from a large number of stadia in England .
So , be sporting !
As a referee , Mr Heaton-Harris , you have one viewpoint but I prefer that of Mr Kevin Keegan who seems to me to be better qualified .
Therefore , please withdraw your motion .
Mr President , there is no question in my mind that we all want to see the eradication of hooliganism in football at a European level and globally .
However , we must be careful not to do so in a manner that would restrict the enjoyment of the real supporters .
The issue must , therefore , be discussed at a European level , and we should guard against becoming embroiled in local discussions on the capacity and safety of specific stadiums , wherever they might be .
We must ask ourselves why measures taken in the past have repeatedly failed to create a culture of enjoyment in football for everybody .
I welcome the dialogue under way now between the Commission and sports and football clubs on how matters could improve .
The people who run the game are the people who , through constructive dialogue , will eventually be able to find answers to the blight of hooliganism and , it must be said , racism affecting this most popular of all sports .
Mr President , we must take these issues of hooliganism seriously .
We know now that there are tens of millions of people who are passionate about this sport and that , since the World Cup was won by France , they have been impatiently awaiting Euro 2000 .
Football has become a sport of the masses and we must think about the safety of our children , our little brothers and the youngsters who frequent the stadiums .
We cannot therefore just say that there are risks and there will always be risks .
We must try to counter this phenomenon of hooliganism to the best of our ability .
I say this because we cannot allow the good image of genuine supporters to be tarnished by the actions of a few violent extremists who use these major gatherings as a pretext for carrying out unacceptable acts .
The motion is good in that it indicates that adequate safety measures must be taken .
During the last World Cup you will remember that hooligans committed very serious acts of violence . One in particular involved an attack on a police officer who was in a coma for a long time and who is now paralysed for life .
All this is not inevitable and we must find the means , for example , of punishing hooligans in the countries of the European Union in which they commit their offences .
In this respect I believe there to have been a recent example in France which is very important .
For years , under the Nazi banner , French hooligans monopolised a stand at the Parc des Princes in Paris .
They took advantage of matches to vent their hatred , chant Nazi slogans and chase blacks and Arabs on leaving the ground .
The Paris St. Germain club allowed this to happen and even ended up blocking access to the stand in question for any dark skinned person on the pretext of safety .
Following a complaint from the French association , SOS-Racisme , and faced with the threat of prosecution , the club undertook to end this behaviour and to no longer allow the hooligans into the stadium by strictly screening people as they enter .
Before every match , right to the end of the season , Paris St. Germain now shows an anti-racist video clip which celebrates the values of friendship and brotherhood and the pleasures of the sport .
This proves that action can be taken and that violence is not inevitable . I truly believe that , when you think about what football has become , with tens of thousands of youngsters in these stadia , this shows that we really must try to be careful and not take these matters lightly .
Mr President , the PPE-DE does not support the resolution of the British delegates and has announced that it is to withdraw it later on , not because we would not want to condemn the increasing violence as a result of football matches , but because the resolution is too restrictive and insubstantial as it stands and , to that extent , does not belong in this Chamber .
Surely it is not up to us to get involved in the politics of one specific match at a specific venue and make technical statements about the suitability of one football stadium for one Euro 2000 match ?
It would have been much better to point out - and I would like to do so on behalf of many PPE-DE colleagues - that , first of all , safety is an essential good over which extreme care is to be taken and for which many efforts are being made with regard to Euro 2000 .
Secondly , all those responsible for safety at Euro 2000 are called on to operate in an extremely preventive manner .
Thirdly , the police forces of all participating countries must be encouraged to negotiate obstacles which would hinder extensive collaboration .
Fourthly , we would like to call on all those involved - organisers , players and supporters - to observe fair play .
It is unfortunate that this resolution led to a match between Belgium and England , first within the PPE-DE and later on in this Chamber , too .
I do hope that this match finishes in a sportsmanlike way and I hope that the Belgians will not just win here but also a number of matches during Euro 2000 .
Mr President , hooliganism is not a borderline phenomenon but clearly takes the form of a subculture and is , as such , difficult to control .
In my opinion , zero tolerance is the only way to systematically tackle any infringement and efficiently penalise any breach .
The content of the current resolution overlooks the causes of hooliganism , whether or not consciously .
It is clear that the initiators of the resolution are more concerned with slating the organisation of Euro 2000 .
The Liberals , however , refuse to play this game .
We can appreciate the enormous efforts which the governments of the organising countries have made in order to make Euro 2000 run as smoothly as possible .
All we want to do on the eve of Euro 2000 is to call on each and every one who bears responsibility to exercise the greatest possible alertness so as to reach the set goal , namely to turn Euro 2000 into a party for hundreds of thousands of spectators and millions of viewers , a party which should help us project a positive European image .
Mr President , we are unable to support the submitted resolution .
I was in favour of discussing the topic of hooliganism but this resolution can at best be described as agenda pollution .
This Parliament should not be discussing safety during one particular Euro 2000 match under pressure from what I assume is a portion of British public opinion .
It is also an insult to - in this case - the Belgian organisers of this game and the international authorities involved .
This is a great pity because extensive discussions can be held about the fight against hooliganism itself .
In addition , we continue to learn important lessons , such as for example , how we should really guide the fans ?
How can we better educate club managers and organisers of games ? Attention should also be given to the so-called ' second opinion ' which is now being applied , by means of which a group outside the organisation analyses the measures taken and suggests improvements .
Mr President , hooligans have managed to spoil the fun of the real fans too often .
It will be different at Euro 2000 , as this will be a football party for everyone .
Mr President , I will begin in the Philippines and end , such is the reach and range of the European Parliament , with football .
The Commission shares the honourable Members ' concern for the health and safety of the hostages in Jolo and Basilan .
We strongly condemn such terrorist actions .
We were , of course , fully associated with the decision to send the EU High Representative , Javier Solana , to the Philippines .
Mr Solana was sent to convey personally to the Philippine government the European Union ' s message concerning the safety of the hostages .
He received assurances from the government of the Philippines that military force would not be used to liberate them .
We are following events in Mindanao and the neighbouring islands closely .
We are concerned at the escalation of political violence that has taken place after the suspension of the peace negotiations between the government of the Philippines and various armed groups .
We believe that only an early resumption of peace negotiations , as requested by the leaders of civil society and of religious groups , offers prospects for a lasting improvement of the situation in Mindanao .
I should wish to add one final point about the 21 hostages - seven of them are European Union citizens .
Obviously , we all hope for their early release . Our thoughts are , I am sure , with their families .
I hope , too , that we will receive early news about the welfare of the journalists who went to cover the story and have subsequently gone missing .
I hope that their whereabouts will soon be discovered .
Moving on to Equatorial Guinea .
We have been closely monitoring the human rights situation there for several years . We share the concerns of the European Parliament about the local elections there .
Those concerns were reflected in the presidency declaration at the beginning of May .
During a recent mission by the Commission services , the issues that Parliament is addressing were raised directly with the President .
An official request for an electoral monitoring mission was sent on 2 May by the Equatorial Guinea government to Commissioner Nielson .
An answer containing detailed reasons for the refusal is being sent by the Commission to President Obiang .
The request from the government of Guinea-Bissau arrived very late and , in keeping with our guidelines , electoral observation missions should be prepared at an early stage in the electoral process so that we can ensure that the process is accurate and fair .
It is relevant that the opposition parties in Equatorial Guinea have contested the electoral lists and have already decided to boycott the ballot .
We therefore consider that , at this stage , the presence of international observers would not only fail to improve the quality and the transparency of the local elections , there is also a very real risk that this mission could be misused by local authorities as a way to legitimise an unsatisfactory process .
However , we intend to involve ourselves in promoting the process of democratisation in Equatorial Guinea .
On Iran , the Commission fully shares Parliament ' s concern over the lack of freedom of expression there .
In the comprehensive dialogue between the European Union and Iran , questions regarding human rights , including press freedom , are regularly raised by the Commission .
The Iranian authorities are well aware of the importance we attach to these issues .
Clearly the present position is a very delicate one : the opponents of reform have used their control of the judiciary and of the security forces to intimidate intellectuals and to ban reformist papers .
The current trial of the 13 Jews on charges of espionage is also very disturbing .
The reformists have remained calm , and so should we , hoping that the convening of parliament will shortly help improve the situation .
I turn to Burma .
We deplore the continued violation of human rights by the Burmese military regime .
In particular , we deplore the continued extra-judicial killings , the widespread imposition of forced labour and the forced displacement of local populations , as well as the repression of political opponents and the prevention of the free functioning of legitimate political parties .
This includes the restrictions on the freedom of movement of Aung San Suu Kyi and other members of the National League for Democracy and the routine practice of arbitrary arrests .
We have strongly supported the EU common position on Burma and the decision of the April 2000 General Affairs Council to strengthen that common position .
We use every opportunity to press our Asian partners to urge , what is called - with a touch of George Orwell - the " State Peace and Development Council " to enter into a substantial dialogue with the democratically elected representatives and the ethnic minorities with a view to arriving at a mutually agreed internal solution to the problems of Burma and to respect for international human rights standards there .
Lastly , on football hooliganism : the responsibility for ensuring adequate safety for spectators and players during the Euro 2000 matches lies with the relevant national authorities and the relevant football associations .
I just wish to make two additional points .
Firstly , we want Parliament to recall that , last June , the Justice and Home Affairs Council requested Member States to step up cooperation in order to prevent and control violence and disturbances in connection with international football matches .
At the same time a handbook was made available with examples of working methods to police forces .
Secondly , the Community ' s programme for police and customs cooperation finances a project prepared between the police authorities of the Netherlands and Belgium in which police forces from other Member States participate .
This aims at drawing lessons from the organisation of Euro 2000 in order to improve , when necessary , the organisations of future similar events .
I would just like to add one point .
I very much hope that Euro 2000 is a great success .
However , I hope with equal fervour that the games during Euro 2000 are a great deal better than the one I watched on television last night .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6 p.m.
Mr President , on a point of order . I will be very brief but I rise on a matter which is dear to the hearts of most Members here .
On a number of occasions this week the Members bar has had in it visitors from outside Parliament and , actually , just members of the public .
I know a number of Members during the week have been unable to get any food .
Could we have some clarification from the Quaestors so that we can have a Members bar ?
We have a Members bar in Brussels .
I am not against taking one or two members of staff or whoever it might be into the bar , but to bring visiting groups of 20 or more into it is wrong .
I hope we can have some clarification .
Thank you , Mr Sturdy .
We will refer that to the College of Quaestors , as you requested .
Mr President , I understand that we are to vote on the last two resolutions , concerning Guatemala and the non-proliferation agreement , without a debate .
I am not going to object to that , but I would note the anomaly in Parliament being able to devote half an hour ' s discussion to football hooliganism - and I am nonetheless a great football enthusiast - but not having a spare minute to discuss the biggest form of hooliganism we have , namely the presence of nuclear weapons in the world .
Your point is well made .
The decision was taken this morning that we would vote at 6 p.m. and that the urgencies not reached would be voted on even though they were not debated .
The matter of football hooliganism was under the human rights matters .
That debate has been concluded . So we have finished that whole section .
I do not want lots of debates .
We have a lot of voting to get through tonight .
Mr President , I quite understand that you want to avoid a long debate now , but I do not think it was clear when we decided on this this morning that the urgencieswould simply go by the board .
If that had been the case , some Members might have voted differently .
This House should certainly not get into the habit of letting subjects which have been on the agenda since the beginning of the week go by the board .
We were going to discuss Guatemala .
MPs from Guatemala have been with us the whole week , and we are trying to convince them to improve their democracy and their respect for human rights .
I do not think we will be setting a very good example if we then fail to even discuss this issue !
I would just point out to you Rule 50 , paragraph 6 : " The President and political group chairmen may decide that that the motion for a resolution shall be put to the vote without debate " .
That was the rule under which this practice has been established .
I agree with you that it should not become a precedent .
Let us move forward now to the vote .
Mr President , I rise to make a point about the vote : it would be quite possible to challenge this vote either because of non-observance of the 24-hour deadline , or , possibly , because of the quorum position .
I do not want to do this , but I would like to ask Mrs Buitenweg and her friends to call a truce tomorrow and to refrain from their sabotage tactics in this House !
Mr President , I rise to make a point of order along exactly the same lines as my fellow Member .
I regret that Mrs Buitenweg has involved herself in sabotage tactics and I would like to respond to the repeated claims we have heard from Mrs Buitenweg , Mrs Van Lancker and Mr Howitt , who are accusing others of sabotage , when , in fact , it has been Mrs Buitenweg herself who has been at the forefront of the action to sabotage the functioning of this Chamber .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I should like to move that we proceed to a vote straight away .
We had the debate on this this morning , we made our decision , let us just get on with it .
Vote
Mr President , people are different , yet of equal value .
In our opinion , human society should be based on solidarity , human dignity and equality .
Everyone is entitled to this .
Unfortunately , there is a long tradition of unequal treatment , first and foremost by people who have the power to make other people dependent on them .
They can treat those who are dependent on them unequally by rewarding or punishing them for features which are out of their control .
This was not only done by slave owners and colonial military , but has also been the tactic of employers and those with political authority .
There is also discrimination if the basic requirements of people are made unnecessarily scarce .
If everyone has to fight for a job , a place in education or house , a battle of interests will ensue .
People then start to think along the lines of : if the others were not here , there would be more for us .
From a racist angle , the question then simply is : who can have those scarce provisions and who cannot ?
Anyone belonging to a different group can be seen as an unwanted competitor on the job or housing market .
In Western Europe , employers and the police are still ruled by prejudice and a tendency to treat people unequally .
In addition , there are groups who seek political gain from scarcity and short-sightedness by setting people against each other .
The fact that in the recently formed new states of Eastern Europe , the language of workers and farmers has become the language of the state and education , forms part of the necessary democratisation process but should not go hand in hand with discriminating against , and even driving out , minorities living within the particular state ' s territory .
Everyone is entitled to protection from those seeking political and economic gain from discrimination .
Vital tools for achieving this are suffrage for newcomers , humane treatment of political refugees , equal treatment of all residents of the European Union , irrespective of their nationality , and the reversal of the burden of proof in legal cases .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left has opted in favour of maximum reinforcement of the position of the victims of discrimination and against all attempts to prejudice this protection .
Mr President , I voted for the proposal for the race directive .
I did so very willingly and , particularly in my capacity as representative of the Pensioners ' Party , I am glad to have been able to use my vote to contribute to the adoption of this directive .
Today ' s pensioners and elderly people lived through the Second World War : they know what racism means .
They hoped that the issue would never have to be raised again , let alone regulated by laws banning racist acts .
I hope that this law will soon be out of date , for that will mean that antiracist behaviour has ceased .
I hope that this and every other law against discrimination will become obsolete .
Since , sadly , this is not the case at present , Europe is acting wisely in publicly making its position so clear .
The Commission ' s proposal for a directive on implementing in Europe the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin clearly shows that it is better to let well alone . This is even truer with regard to the Buitenweg report to the European Parliament .
The proposal initially seemed to be well intentioned as it aimed to improve protection for victims of racism in the European Union .
In reality , however , the text before us is so obsessed with hunting down discrimination that it completely loses sight of the basic principles of the rule of law and even , to crown it all , the principle of equal treatment between persons .
In addition , the proposal for a directive as usual fails to respect subsidiarity and allow the Member States the necessary room for assessment .
On the issue of the rule of law , it is particularly astonishing to read in Article 8 of the Commission ' s text that if , in a given situation , a case of discrimination is assumed , it is the defendant ' s responsibility to prove that there has been no violation of the principle of equal treatment .
This flouts the traditional principle of our law which states that it is the responsibility of the accuser to provide proof of the culpability of the accused and not the responsibility of the accused to provide proof of his innocence .
The effect of such a provision would be all the more devastating as the assumed discrimination could be ' indirect discrimination ' which occurs , according to Article 2 ( 2 ) ( b ) , ' where an apparently neutral provision , criterion or practice is liable to affect adversely a person or a group of persons of a particular racial or ethnic origin ' .
However , this dedication to anti-discrimination soon comes to a halt in the Commission ' s text as Article 5 states that specific measures may be adopted to compensate for the handicaps of a supposedly disadvantaged ethnic group .
This sows the seed for the famous American policy of ' positive discrimination ' which is nowadays much disputed , even in the USA .
And this is just the Commission ' s text which is the most moderate .
The European Parliament report adds to this in all respects .
Some people in the Commission seem to be having doubts as they have taken the trouble to add a form to the proposal for a directive which explains the possible impact of the directive on enterprises .
This unusual procedure clearly shows that the issue is not cut and dried .
In this form , the Commission simply states that " the Directive will strengthen the competitiveness of European companies by ensuring that they have at their disposal a wider pool of skills and resources than at present and that use is made of such skills irrespective of racial or ethnic origin " .
Unfortunately , this statement , which is solely intended to give the authors a clear conscience , is completely false .
It is quite clear that employers risk being plagued , particularly in the area of recruitment , with threats from people whose applications have been rejected .
Yet it cannot be denied that the immigrants currently entering the European countries are mainly unskilled and come from countries where work experience in businesses such as ours is very scarce .
Threatened by this new legislation and in order to keep the peace , employers may be forced to employ people without any real justification which will hinder the competitiveness of their companies .
For all these reasons , we reject the Buitenweg report . We hope that the Council , which must act unanimously pursuant to Article 13 of the EC Treaty , will in turn reject the Commission proposal .
We have voted for the Buitenweg report which supports and improves , in several respects , the proposal for a Council directive on implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin .
However , as we said during the vote on Amendment No 39 , we totally disagree with the wording of Article 4 of the draft directive . By providing that " a difference of treatment which is based on a characteristic related to racial or ethnic origin shall not constitute discrimination where , by reason of the nature of the particular occupational activities concerned or of the context in which they are carried out , such a characteristic constitutes a genuine occupational qualification " , this totally contradicts the provisions of the international and European conventions on human rights and the elimination of all forms of social discrimination .
It should be noted that these conventions are binding on the European Union and the Member States which have ratified them .
This wording also contradicts the laws and constitutions of several EU Member States .
This article cannot be transposed into French law , for example , as the Constitutional Council would rightly be forced to oppose this .
If retained in the final version of the directive , this article would , for the first time , constitute a legal basis for discrimination in the right to work based on ' a characteristic related to racial or ethnic origin ' .
We were anxious to accompany our vote with this reservation which also applies to the totally inappropriate use in several articles , in the French version at least , of the word ' race ' .
In Article 2 , for example , it is used to describe ' a group of persons ' and not as a characteristic of unacceptable discrimination . This therefore seems to justify this concept and allows it to be validly and properly used to describe a person or group .
The fight against racism is clearly based precisely on the rejection of the concept of race , on its denunciation and on the refusal to place men and women in this category and to divide humanity according to this concept .
- I am voting in favour of the Race Directive for the following reasons .
As a British Asian woman , I have experienced first-hand the damaging effects racism can have on people and communities .
Although there have been tremendous strides over the last few years to fight racism in all its forms , it still continues to blight people ' s lives .
For example , in my own region , the West Midlands , we have recently seen some worrying instances of racist violence .
The attack on the white partner of the world-class black athlete Ashia Hansen is a sickening example .
This report is a real breakthrough in reversing the burden of proof in civil race discrimination cases .
Once the facts of the case are established , it will fall to those accused of racism to prove their innocence .
I particularly welcome the measures included in the directive which will allow individuals to take civil proceedings if they are victimised on the grounds of race .
I am also glad that the legislation takes account of the notion of " indirect discrimination " , where apparently neutral provisions can have an adverse effect on a person or a group of a particular race or ethnic origin .
Right-wing extremism is increasing , not just in Austria , but throughout Europe .
This directive provides some of the most effective anti-racism legislation that Europe has ever seen , and the most effective piece of race relations legislation to affect my own Member State since the 1976 Race Relations Act .
Minority groups must be given a greater stake in Europe .
The EU should pay more attention to their problems and aspirations .
We need to connect EU institutions to all the communities of the Union .
Europe must be inclusive , not exclusive .
We must tackle racism wherever and whenever it occurs .
The race directive is a stand against racism and a major step towards stamping it out .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the report by Kathalijne Maria Buitenweg on the Council ' s directive for implementing the principle of equal treatment for all , irrespective of race or ethnic origin .
We were delighted to do so , because the European Parliament is hereby complying with its task in connection with implementing Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
According to Article 13 of the Treaty , the European Parliament is merely to be heard on this matter .
In our voting , it has therefore been important that Parliament ' s opinion - both the individual points and the opinion as a whole - should have very broad political backing .
We have nonetheless been unable to vote in favour of those amendments directly affecting matters which come within the sphere of the Member States ' criminal law .
These matters continue to be national concerns .
In connection with the debate on the report , we have pointed out that the present directive only deals with discrimination on the grounds of race or ethnic origin .
But what about all the other protective considerations listed in Article 13 of the Treaty ?
We are concerned that , by only proceeding on the basis of these two considerations in the present directive , the EU will , in practice , create a hierarchy of possible grounds for discrimination .
We would therefore especially draw attention to Amendment No 6 concerning a new consideration which is absolutely crucial for ourselves .
- Given the worrying evidence that racism is on the rise I warmly welcome this report which aims to ensure equal treatment in the employment and social sector between persons of all ethnic backgrounds .
The rapporteur seeks to ensure a common minimum level of protection including the reversal of the burden of proof in civil race discrimination cases and giving individuals the right to take civil proceedings if they are harassed or victimised on the grounds of race .
The Portuguese Presidency is to be congratulated for their readiness to put this matter on the Council ' s agenda .
The fight against discrimination is an issue which has been on the agenda of the French Assembly since 1979 . Two inquiries on racism have already been established and the French Parliament was the instigator in 1986 of a joint interinstitutional declaration .
However , such initiatives are no longer enough .
We must go further and legislate .
The Buitenweg report is timely as racism and anti-Semitism are still of concern in Europe .
Is this the right moment to reiterate our vigilance with regard to certain parties now in power ?
With Mr Deprez and Mr De Clercq I tabled an amendment to the title of the directive .
In the French version the Commission ' s initial text uses the phrase ' sans distinction de race ou d ' origine ethnique ' .
The concept of origin is fundamental as discrimination may relate not only to the current status of an individual but also to his origin and descent .
We wanted to introduce the same nuance and precision with regard to the issue of race and therefore proposed ' d ' origine raciale ' .
This amendment was adopted in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights but I note now that it has simply disappeared from the text submitted to you .
We should like an assurance that this will be duly corrected .
Also , although the issue of religion has been excluded from this directive for legal reasons , it is vital to reiterate that we are definitely not ignoring the forms of discrimination based on religious beliefs . Parliament has still to examine another Commission text in this respect .
To conclude , the Buitenweg report is inspired by a proactive and progressive approach which I have supported .
The risk of a resurgence of the neo-fascist and racist hydra requires close vigilance from us , more so now than ever before .
We must lead the way in this fight .
That concludes the vote .
Trafficking in women ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on trafficking in women .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on the magnificent work she has carried out on such a serious problem .
The trafficking in women is having a very great impact , especially in the border countries of the European Union , where mafias are forming which deceive women with promises of employment and a better life , and which lead them eventually into prostitution and , in many cases , into situations which can only be described as slavery .
This is a phenomenon related to our current society , in which immigration is beginning to cause a serious problem , since we are seeing significant movements of people who are seeking the kind of welfare society which we enjoy in the majority , or practically all , of the European Union countries .
This situation requires a series of new measures , most importantly aiding victims and prosecuting the people involved in the trafficking in women and children - since it is not just a problem for women , but children as well - for sexual exploitation .
Amongst the measures proposed in this report are basically aid to victims and the request that Member States amend their legislation in a way which will allow quicker and more coordinated action amongst the various countries in order to resolve this very serious problem .
The victims do not only require material aid , but also legal assistance - because we are generally talking about people with no documentation , with no options and who are living in fear and need help - which , at the same time , protects their identity and guarantees that they will not suffer even worse problems if they return to their countries of origin .
The different countries of the European Union must harmonise their legislation in this respect and implement sufficient measures to help these victims .
The trade in sex is increasing at an alarming rate .
Women and children are involved .
I believe that the media should also aid this process , because we are seeing more and more adverts in the press - sometimes in the very serious newspapers - behind which lies the trafficking in women and exploitation .
However , it is not only through legal assistance and through protecting the victims that we must address the problem , but also through information campaigns , mainly in the countries of origin , so that these women know what they are really exposing themselves to , since the majority of them are being deceived and do not realise the hell they are about to walk into .
Mr President , every year , half a million women are tricked or forced into lives as sex slaves .
This greatly increasing trade is more profitable than drug smuggling and is increasingly being directed by an organised mafia for trafficking in women .
Despite this grim reality , the penalty for trafficking in women is exceedingly small compared with that for serious drug smuggling .
It amounts to perhaps two years ' imprisonment compared with ten to fifteen years for serious drug-related offences .
Few offenders are brought to court , and still fewer prosecuted .
The EU has so far exemplified the fact that words are not always translated into reality .
Despite a number of statements from the EU about the appalling traffic in women , there is still no complete database with information about victims , trade routes , legislation or measures to be taken .
The European women ' s lobby reports that only 0.036 per cent of the EU ' s budget for the year 2000 has been set aside for issues of equality and that only a fraction of this fraction goes on measures to combat trafficking in women .
A growing number of women are being smuggled in from the candidate States .
In spite of this , the EU has not made demands upon these countries to prevent , and to introduce measures against , trafficking in women , similar to the demands that have been made regarding economic and environmental objectives to be attained by the candidate States .
By not complying with existing laws and not creating new laws to tackle the mafia concerned , the governments of Europe are indirectly allowing this demand-driven trade to increase .
There is a lack of legislation , not only in terms of measures to combat the aforesaid mafia , but also in terms of laws to protect the victims .
All but two Member States send victims of the trafficking in women back to their countries of origin , in spite of the possibility that their lives may be in danger .
We are voting today , or hopefully tomorrow , on an attempt to convert rhetoric and fine words into concrete measures .
The Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities is demanding that the Member States provide women who give evidence with protection and refugee status .
We demand tough , exemplary penalties for trafficking in women , together with national informants on trafficking in women , able to inform their governments about developments in their own countries , as well as in other countries .
We demand measures to combat the increasing use of the Internet for the purpose of trafficking in women , and we demand that national police forces and embassy officials be given appropriate training and that increased resources be made available for the voluntary organisations which provide aid to victims .
Before the end of this year , the governments of the Member States will presumably have decided upon a new Treaty .
We assume that this Treaty will contain a clear legal basis for combating all forms of violence against women , including , of course , trafficking in women , and that we shall be devising a common European policy for combating the trade in human beings .
Among the issues which should be covered by this policy is that of immigration and asylum , especially that of the right to asylum on the grounds of sexually motivated oppression and sexually motivated persecution .
In the United States and Russia , slavery was abolished in the 1860s . It has to be said , however , that the incidence of slavery is increasing , despite the fact that we have now entered the twenty-first century .
This new form of slavery mainly affects women and girls but , irrespective of who is being enslaved , the mere presence of slavery is humanity ' s best evidence of poverty .
Many now support the demand to put a stop to the female slave trade , but more is needed in terms of manpower , intervention by governments and concrete action .
Mr President , it is quite incredible to stand in this Chamber - I can hardly call it an Assembly right now - and realise that we , in fact , have an on-going slave trade in the European Union , too - here , where we commend ourselves for creating peace , freedom , democracy and human rights .
It is a serious matter that we should have this type of trade , because it is often not even adult women who are affected but near-children and very , very young people .
This trade is very closely linked to drugs and money laundering .
Presumably , it is different types of mafia which control it .
This report is very good .
Like the previous speaker , I want to emphasise that we need to see action taken and that police cooperation needs to be developed and more information made available .
I am often sceptical about the very large demands , for example with regard to the environment , which are being made of the candidate States .
At the same time , I think it would be reasonable to demand that information be provided to the countries ' own citizens , with other information being directed specially at young women .
This measure would not , in fact , require large resources , and it is entirely feasible to implement it .
I can therefore only appeal to everyone to vote in favour of the report and to go home and work on their own governments , organisations and the media , too .
Mr President , prevention is better than cure .
This seems to be an impossible task in the case of trafficking in women .
Within EU territory and especially in the Central and Eastern European countries , the commercial exploitation of women is flourishing .
In the rapporteur ' s report , it appears that the measures taken so far have been to little avail .
If we really want to prevent trafficking in women , we will need to adopt a different approach .
We cannot put a stop to this trade by amending immigration and asylum policy and the legalisation of prostitution .
And although I am generally in favour of good working conditions , these too cannot halt the trafficking in women .
After all , as long as the demand for prostitutes is still there , there will always be women who , enticed by better prospects presented to them , will - often unwittingly - make themselves available as merchandise .
It is not only heartless criminal organisations , but also rich , and not so rich , customers who help perpetuate the slave labour of these women who have no other prospects .
We cannot bridge this chasm between rich and poor with a few initiatives organised at Community level .
In addition to a sound and generous development policy in order to improve the living conditions of women in our own countries , it is necessary to question the lack of moral standards within our society .
By imposing heavy penalties on criminal organisations which indulge in trafficking in people , we clearly denounce this type of practice .
Only in this way can trafficking in women be effectively pushed back .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for her very valuable report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in 1996 , we more or less got the political go-ahead to tackle trafficking in women at European level , and I am delighted to tell you that the then Belgian government played a vital role in bringing about this green light .
But I think we need to ask ourselves whether , after four years of work , Europe is sufficiently equipped to be able to fight this trafficking in women effectively .
I think I can assume that the Sörensen report makes it abundantly clear that this is not the case .
We back Mrs Sörensen ' s report 100 % and I would like to congratulate her on her sterling work .
I would especially like to re-emphasise the fact that the resolutions , which we will be approving tomorrow , fail to display a coherent legal framework for tackling trafficking in women , an issue which , in fact , the Belgian government made a point of hammering home at the time .
I think that everyone by now realises that a coherent approach to trafficking in people first and foremost presupposes a clear definition of trafficking in women , which , indeed , is not restricted to forced prostitution , although this is very important , but encompasses all types of trafficking in women and which is linked to deterrent sanctions involving trafficking in people .
I think it is beyond dispute that the national laws and methods for tracing victims and prosecuting offenders within the world of trafficking in women should be harmonised as a matter of urgency and that it is important that police forces work together more effectively .
A second point which is essential to us in this report - and we have been hammering on about this for a while now - is the fact that we need to continue to be committed to the protection of women who are the victims of such types of trafficking .
All too often in many countries , those women are criminalised whereas , in fact , they are the victims .
What we are advocating is a legal residence status for those women so that they can be protected .
Thirdly , I think it is clear that without such a legal framework , we will never reach a solution to this problem .
In fact , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Vitorino at this stage on his intention to present a framework decision to the Council within the course of this year , as a result of which we would then be able to resolve a number of these bottlenecks and issues .
Patsy Sörensen , our rapporteur , knows the topic of her report like the back of her hand .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner , since he is here , when drafting his future policy on trafficking in people , to talk to police forces and the civil service - this goes without saying - but I would very much urge him to make ample time for workers at base and aid workers in the field .
After all , it is also their expertise which can ensure that our approach to trafficking in women is coherent and all-encompassing .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Sörensen for her report , which contains many proposals , and for the emphasis placed on the fact that trafficking in women and children is a violation of human rights .
The body and the human person are not commodities .
Even though many women choose to become prostitutes as an easy way of making a living , I would make no distinction between voluntary and forced prostitution : all prostitution is exploitation .
I would like to stress three points : firstly , trafficking and immigration .
A closed border policy prompts immigrants to turn to criminal organisations in order to procure visas or enter the country concerned illegally .
The Member States must develop a more united , responsible policy .
Thirdly : the victims ' rights .
It was proposed that the European Union issue temporary residence permits to victims which would be conditional upon the victims giving evidence against the traffickers , but , as yet , Italy is the only State to issue permits which are not conditional upon the giving of evidence .
I would like to finish by raising the question of clients .
Commissioner Vitorino repeatedly stated the need to take into account the demand of this market , that is the clients .
But who are the clients ?
They could be our fathers , our sons or ourselves .
It is our duty to do our part to bring about a radical change in the mentality and culture of our society .
This means promoting policies which support women .
Mr President , if we are to discuss trafficking in women , we have to be aware that we are talking about a form of slavery , a modern form of slavery in which the majority of the victims are women subjected to trafficking run by organised crime networks .
Trafficking in human beings supplies various markets : the market in organs for medical transplants , the market in new-born babies for those who do not have any children and the sweatshop market .
However , the greatest area of crime involves women , the majority of whom are victims of trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation .
The poverty and marginalisation of the women in their countries of origin , the high earnings guaranteed to traffickers and the low risks they incur , and the substantial demand for women for prostitution and other forms of sexual exploitation are the factors behind the growth of this trade .
The Tampere European Council recently charged the European Union to fight against illegal immigration and , amongst other things , against those who profit from the trafficking in human beings .
Mrs Sörensen ' s report goes beyond this perspective and gives absolute priority to the fight against trafficking in human beings .
It is estimated that 500 000 women are trafficked every year , the majority of whom then work illegally , but the underground nature of the trade means that the true extent of the problem is unknown .
The contribution of non-governmental organisations in revealing the causes , methods and consequences of the trafficking in women for sexual exploitation , and the support they provide for the victims , has brought about greater awareness of these issues .
The STOP and DAPHNE programmes already represent a major contribution of the European Union , but we must not stop there .
Mrs Sörensen ' s excellent report stresses the links between the trafficking in human beings and the policy on immigration and asylum , and calls , in the first place , upon the Intergovernmental Conference to bring about integral communitarisation of European policy in this field .
As the report requests , it will therefore be necessary to establish a legal framework and effective prevention , protection and victim support measures at European level .
On the other hand , the Member States and candidate countries must intervene themselves at legislative , administrative and police levels in order to eliminate this crime and , at the same time , increase international cooperation with Europol and Interpol to fight criminal networks .
At national level , refugee status must be granted to the victims of trafficking and they must be issued with residence permits .
Some countries - Italy and Belgium - assisted by NGOs , have already introduced some early measures .
Furthermore , information campaigns must be launched in the victims ' countries of origin and an awareness action pursued in the Member States to raise public awareness , in particular , among the male population .
- ( EL ) Mr President , with millions of people victim to the criminal activities of worldwide international trafficking gangs throughout the world and the terrifying spread of these networks to the European Union , we urgently need to take steps to fight this contemporary Lernaean Hydra .
The Union and the Member States currently have no powers whatsoever to intervene efficiently and break up the gangs operating almost undisturbed in our midst and in our neighbourhoods .
The public in Athens was shocked recently at the revelation that an Albanian immigrant , who had declared that he was a doctor , had kept a 13-year-old girl imprisoned in his apartment in a peaceful neighbourhood of Athens for nine months and prostituted her to some 50-60 respectable customers a day .
I personally advocate therefore that all the strategies used to fight trafficking in and the sexual exploitation of women and children should call for harsh punishment , both for those who profit from the trade in human beings and for those who use the services of prostitutes , as is the case under Swedish and Canadian law .
It would appear that the increase in human trafficking has coincided with the recent mass migration of people and the impoverishment of large sections of society .
Le Monde recently published shocking information on the activities of human traffickers , who are taking advantage of the situation in Kosovo and working with international illegal immigration organisations in order to sexually exploit some 300 000 women in France , Germany and Belgium , women mainly from Kosovo , but also from Moldavia , Romania and Bosnia .

Women are being held in concentration camps in conditions of true slavery and are being tortured before being forced into prostitution .
What is happening is a disgrace to Europe in the 21st century and betrays a lack of political will and commitment to prioritise this issue .
The Commission communication is satisfactory and Mrs Sörensen has presented an excellent report , but good intentions alone will not combat international organised crime .
We need initiatives on several fronts : legislative and administrative measures , harmonisation of legislation and prosecution methods , harsh punishment , protection for victims and collaboration between police and judicial authorities .
We also need to strengthen Europol with more funds and more staff so that it can start making joint prevention and prosecution plans with all the Member States and , of course , we need to strengthen non-governmental organisations .
In other words , we need to implement all the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere conclusions immediately . All these are issues , Commissioner , on which we are making no progress whatsoever .
Mr President and honourable Members of Parliament , the Commission welcomes the opportunity of participating in this debate on how to develop our common efforts in the fight against trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation following the Commission ' s second communication of December 1998 .
I take the opportunity of paying my respects to my predecessor , Mrs Gradin , who was the author of that communication .
May I extend my congratulations to the honourable Member , Mrs Sörensen .
Her report is a very valuable contribution towards continuing our work .
Before going into the more substantial parts of this subject , I would like to state that the Commission remains fully committed to keeping the fight against this degrading form of violation of human rights and human dignity high on the political agenda .
We have proved that in the proposals that we put to the European Council of Tampere last October .
As several Members have already emphasised , preventive and repressive measures , as well as measures to support the victims , together with international cooperation , must be given further encouragement .
I noted that the resolution that you are going to vote on tomorrow and the report that we are discussing today contain a large number of requests to the Commission .
I will therefore try to address a few of these key issues .
I wish first of all to address the matter of improving existing penal law in the Member States as regards the criminalisation of traffickers of human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation .
As a starting point in this exercise , we have here the February 1997 instrument , but it has become quite clear that it has its shortcomings .
As I understand , during the hearing in August , the Commission will present at the end of this semester a package of proposals on trafficking and the sexual exploitation of women and children .
We have , in my opinion , a firm basis for this in the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Vienna Action Plan of 1998 and the conclusions of the European Council in Tampere .
Therefore , we do not need to wait for any change in the Treaties : we have a clear legal basis to address this issue of making trafficking in women a criminal offence .
Mrs Van Lancker said the proposal is based on a Council framework decision which will look in particular at how to ensure that all Member States have common definitions , common criminal offences and common sanctions .
In addition , we need to consider in the drafting exercise horizontal judicial issues such as defining the competent jurisdiction , the rules on extradition and seizure of the proceeds of crime .
One important aspect for the future is that when finally adopted , this proposal will form a part of the acquis communautaire .
This means that the candidate countries will have to take it on board in the context of enlargement .
Another important element closely related to improving efficiency in the conviction of traffickers is , as I have already mentioned to Parliament , granting temporary residence permits to victims of trafficking who are willing to give evidence .
This was one of the Commission ' s suggestions in its second communication .
The package of proposals that I mentioned before will , therefore , be completed a bit later this year with a proposal for a directive that will cover the issue of temporary residence permits so as to ensure the protection of various victims of trafficking including the victims of trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation .
This element must , however , be seen as a crucial complement to the first set of initiatives .
As a matter of fact , there is a real difficulty in convicting those who are responsible for trafficking .
Without the cooperation of the victims , we can never make sure that those who profit from this traffic are brought before a court and are duly convicted .
It is extremely important to couple these two kinds of measures : criminalisation of trafficking and , at the same time , having a proactive policy on promoting the cooperation of the victims with the police and with the judiciary in convicting those who are responsible for such degrading activity .
Talking about significant developments in the field of trafficking in women at European level , we also need to take a look at the various activities that are , and have been , supported by the STOP programme .
Previous and future projects under the STOP programme cover several points that are highlighted in Mrs Sörensen ' s report .
In particular , I would like to mention two of the priorities set for this year , namely , assistance to victims and prevention .
In applying a multidisciplinary approach , this will involve NGOs as well as law enforcement services and I believe that it is necessary to promote closer dialogue between the NGOs that act in this area and the law enforcement authorities .
As the STOP Programme is now in its last financial year and has made a valuable contribution to the fight against trafficking at European level , the Commission will put forward a proposal for a renewal of the programme for another five-year period starting in 2001 .
The proposal will , of course , build on experience gained from the first programme .
We also intend to offer the possibility of running multiannual projects which will improve the efficiency of the programmes .
A word also needs to be said about implementation of the new DAPHNE Programme following the DAPHNE initiative adopted in 1997 .
Its scope , as you know , is to prevent and combat all forms of violence against women and children . This includes trafficking in women and the sexual exploitation of women .
The programme will allow us , in addition to the STOP programme , to help victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation by providing a financial contribution of EUR 20 million in the period from 2000 to 2003 .
In addition , more focus has been given and needs to be given to developing our cooperation through specific projects with the candidate countries such as several Members have mentioned of Parliament .
We share with these candidate countries a serious common problem , since there is a clear trend involving the Central and Eastern European countries as the most important region of origin of both victims of trafficking and perpetrators .
The Commission has , therefore , opened DAPHNE to the candidate countries and will do the same under the STOP Programme .
Finally , the Commission has also mobilised other sources of financing to promote both support to local NGOs in the candidate countries and prevention campaigns in countries of origin .
In the framework of the new Transatlantic Agenda and in cooperation with the government of the United States of America , it has , for instance , carried out various information campaigns in Poland , Ukraine , Hungary and Bulgaria , to raise an awareness within the population and the public bodies of these countries .
For the future we are exploring the possibility of new campaigns targeting new areas and new countries .
This is an issue that has a relevant role to play in the Stability Pact for the Balkans .
Last but not least , I wish to clearly underline the importance of the Union being involved in wider forms of international cooperation .
The Commission is now actively participating in the work on the draft United Nations protocol on trafficking to supplement the draft convention on trans-national organised crime and I sincerely hope that the members of the United Nations will be able to adopt this new convention in autumn this year .
In conclusion , I would like to draw your attention to a point that we need to keep in mind when working against trafficking in women at European level .
That point is that even though the European Union can , and must , play an active role against trafficking , the Member States have the prime responsibility .
This means that we need to be careful when talking about measures such as automatic non-criminalisation of victims of trafficking , possibilities of NGOs bringing court action on behalf of the victims and investigative methods in criminal matters .
In other words , we need to be clear about which objectives can be better achieved at European level taking into account the level of cross-border cooperation in place among the Member States .
Honourable Members have an opportunity of adapting what I consider a piece of good work that not only confirms a coherent and multidisciplinary European policy on trafficking but also adds new impetus for further actions which are undoubtedly necessary at European level .
I want to thank Mrs Sörensen for her knowledge , her expertise and her contribution to this common fight .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Readmission of third country nationals
The next item is the report ( A5-0110 / 2000 ) by Ms Karamanou , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Initiative of the Republic of Finland with a view to the adoption of a Council regulation determining obligations as between Member States for the readmission of third country nationals ( 12488 / 1999 - C5-0319 / 1999 - 1999 / 0823 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , my report does indeed concern the proposal for a regulation submitted by the Finnish Presidency on the relations and obligations as between the Member States for the readmission of third country nationals inside the European Union .
I am really sorry to have to say , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , that the proposal for a regulation has not been given the due attention , study and careful preparation needed when handling such a delicate and complicated matter .
This lack of preparation has resulted in serious reservations , rejection or a lack of interest in the proposal for a directive by the European Commission and the Council and by the parliamentary committees responsible , i.e. the Committee on Freedoms and the Committee on Legal Affairs , as well as on the part of non-governmental organisations , which the Finnish Presidency does not appear to have consulted .
The Tampere conclusions noted that the Union needed a comprehensive approach to the phenomenon of immigration , which is clearly linked to a whole series of political questions which have remained unanswered .
It is linked to respect for human rights and to the economic , social , political and cultural conditions in the person ' s country of origin .
As far as the question of readmission is concerned , the Member States already have the experience of agreements under European Political Collaboration and Schengen-type cooperation .
This is a sensitive issue which calls for diplomatic collaboration .
As far as the content of the Finnish initiative is concerned , there is no explanatory statement attached to the draft regulation .
The initiative does not show any strategic vision .
The draft seeks to lay down a Dublin-style system for illegal immigrants , following the model of the Convention on asylum seekers , the application of which , as we know , has proven to be highly problematic and ineffective .
Priority is given in the proposal for a regulation to send back foreigners illegally present on the territory of Member States under a system of compulsory readmission operating between Member States .
The regulation aims to determine which Member State is obliged to readmit a third country national in order to implement the agreement in question .
The draft regulation does not debar a Member State from sending a foreigner who does not meet the conditions of entry or residence in a Member State back to his or her country of origin or another third country .
This provision seems to empower Member States to take more severe decisions outside the scope of the proposed regulation .
Other points which deserve criticism are the fact that any kind of solidarity between Member States is precluded , in particular as far as illegal border crossings and responsibility for the external borders of the European Union are concerned .
The proposal is perhaps a way of exercising indirect pressure for the borders of the European Union to be fortified .
Similarly , absolutely no consideration is given to the particular circumstances of persons who may have spent a long period of time in a Member State before being classed as illegal .
Residence permits for asylum seekers are not included in the documents provided for in the regulation , thereby creating the possibility of undermining the protection afforded to them .
The regulation permits readmission to another Member State to be requested within six months from the time when the authorities of the requesting Member State became aware that a third country national may be ( not " is " ) illegally present .
In other words , the proposal allows entry to the territory of a Member State to be proven on the basis of hypothetical evidence .
The way in which the data required to identify persons to be readmitted is determined is open to every kind of abuse .
However , the basic problem appears to be that no strategy or European policy has been devised on immigration .
I consider , Commissioner , that we urgently need to prepare legal tools for the immigration directive , rather than confining ourselves to suppression and policing measures which are not subject to democratic control .
We urgently need to implement the Tampere conclusions and devise a common European policy on asylum and immigration based on European humanitarian values and respect for fundamental human rights .
Finally , we call on the European Commission to take the necessary legislative initiatives on all the issues which touch on immigration and , of course , to define the mutual obligations as between the Member States .
We are aware , Commissioner , of your personal interest and of the difficulties facing the Council and assure you that any initiatives which you may table in this direction will have our undivided support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank Mrs Karamanou for cooperating in such a straightforward and excellent way .
I know that we all had to work very quickly on this document , and at that time she was under additional pressure because of commitments at national level .
She has already mentioned very many points , and I would just like to say that , as regards content , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was in agreement , as it was with the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
We only differed on a formal detail .
On behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , we are also requesting that this Initiative of the Republic of Finland should be withdrawn .
I am certain that it was very well intended , but it has not been thought through sufficiently .
Legally speaking , it has thrown up more questions than it has supplied explanations .
I would like to add a few important points .
An initiative of this kind should not mean that people can just be shipped back and forth within our territory .
Furthermore , as Mrs Karamanou has just said , this represents a programme singularly lacking in solidarity between the Member States .
With regard to readmission agreements , they should not be used as a possible way of twisting the arms of countries in receipt of development aid by saying that they will only receive development aid and funds or cooperation if they also sign readmission agreements .
This is bordering on blackmail .
Last but not least , I would like to say that the readmission of persons illegally residing in our territory is another problem that can only be solved jointly , by working together to fight the root causes and to finally address the issues of integration and asylum in cooperation .
Mr President , allow me to begin by highlighting the work of both the rapporteur and Mrs Echerer , the draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I have had the opportunity to work with the rapporteur in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and it has been an honour for me to chair the committee that voted for Mrs Echerer ' s excellent opinion .
Mr President , we are facing a situation which is real problem : the progressive disappearance of internal borders means that non-EU citizens in both legal and illegal situations are moving freely amongst the Member States .
If we are going to be realistic , this is a problem which , as the two rapporteurs have stressed , we must deal with fully , and , I might add , as a matter of urgency .
My view of the Finnish initiative is much less critical than theirs .
I believe we should stress the fact that the Finnish initiative was a very significant step forward from the moment it was put on the table , because it led the Council to get involved in a very urgent issue .
In other words , at the time , the Finnish initiative played a fundamental role , and we might say that it has died as a result of its own success .
The thinking behind the Finnish initiative means that its proposals no longer have any point , because they have now been fully adopted .
What we need now is not a provocative initiative which points its finger at the problem and starts a debate , but rather we need to get down - calmly but immediately - to resolving this problem .
Apart from that , I agree with many of the criticisms that have been made .
I also agree with one which has been made implicitly but which has not been stated directly .
We , as a legislating institution , cannot amend just any text ; there are texts which are not amendable and texts which require a complete amendment .
This is what we have done in the case of the Finnish initiative , at least in the PPE Group .
We welcome the courage of the Finnish initiative , but we believe that this initiative will not seriously enable us to carry out the responsibilities that the European public has entrusted to us .
Why not ?
For the reasons which have been expressed , and which I would probably just be repeating : this initiative takes account of one aspect , the most repressive one , but that is only one aspect of the problem .
What we need now , given the developments since Tampere , is a more global vision .
The rapporteur is absolutely right to point out that this initiative does not take account of questions of procedure , or fundamental guarantees for the procedure , nor does it provide the necessary protection for the fundamental rights of those people who will be caught up in this type of procedure .
Finally , it has not been pointed out - and I think it is important that it is - that what we do in this area must be coherent with the Member States ' principles regarding readmission of third country nationals .
All these types of bilateral agreement that are required are being negotiated .
The PPE has presented two amendments which I hope this House - to take up what the two previous speakers have said - will support in tomorrow ' s vote , thereby sending a political signal , and we ask the Commission to present a complete and coherent text sooner rather than later .
Mr President , I would first like to thank the rapporteur and the draftsperson for their report and opinion .
I would also like to say on behalf of my Group that we fully support the proposal to refer this initiative back .
We did not come to this conclusion because we wanted to make things easy for ourselves and not table any amendments , but because - as emerges from the explanatory statement , which is very comprehensive and convincing - too many fundamental requirements have simply not been met .
We have heard about these shortcomings in the debate as well as reading about them in the reports .
However , it is not because of these shortcomings that we are recommending that this specific initiative should be rejected . What is at stake here is whether it makes sense for the Member States to have the right of initiative in these areas of competence .
The proposals on which Parliament has been consulted up to now under this right of initiative have not , on the whole , been very convincing - including an Austrian proposal that had both technical shortcomings and problems in terms of content .
What these proposals have had in common has been a failure to fit in with a coherent set of measures .
Something else they had in common was that they either conflicted with existing legal instruments or duplicated them .
The advantage of the Commission alone having the right of initiative is surely that this ensures a systematic approach and guarantees that we have documents that are more precise and free from technical and legal contradictions . This applies in particular to matters for which Commissioner Vitorino is responsible .
Another clear indication of the shortcomings of Member States ' right of initiative is that they are seldom received with very much enthusiasm , even by other Member States .
This also applies to the initiative before us today , which the Portuguese Presidency is no longer treating as a priority .
So , as a Parliament , we have more reason than ever before to be sceptical about this right of initiative on the part of Member States . This is not only because this right skews the balance between the institutions but also because , up to now , it has never really been convincingly exercised .
I would also like to touch upon another problem connected with this , which might perhaps warrant a joint initiative by the Member States .
Officials working at the Schengen external borders are constantly telling us that the residence permits presented by third country nationals and issued by other EU Member States still vary widely and are often difficult to identify as such .
This does not seem to fit in with the Joint Action concerning a uniform format for residence permits .
The Member States should take the initiative here and act in compliance with the EU format in their own administrative area .
Mr President , Commissioner , I want to say that I am speaking as much as a Finn as in my capacity as a representative of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
I would thank the rapporteur and the draftsperson of the opinion for the frank , direct and sincere words they have written about Finland ' s initiative .
The report states that the initiative was poorly planned , that it contains no justification section , that it was prepared without organisations such as ECRE or UNHCR being consulted and that the relationship between the principles of readmission between the Member States and the principles of readmission to third countries is not made clear .
Furthermore , the report states that there is a lack of strategic vision , something which the rapporteur also said .
No distinction is made between those who do not fulfil and those who no longer fulfil the conditions in force for residence here .
It is all too reminiscent of Austria ' s initiative on that famous first day of Austria ' s Presidency .
There are also no procedural safeguards , which does not surprise me because , less than two months ago , the same Ministry of the Interior which is behind the present initiative proposed that Finnish immigration law be changed to include rapid repatriation .
My party , the Swedish People ' s Party , voted against this initiative , really for the same reasons that Finland ' s constitutional committee had when it considered that the same proposal was unconstitutional because , in the case of rapid repatriation , no one has the right to be heard .
It would be wisest , therefore , if Finland were to comply with Parliament ' s proposal and withdraw the proposal , as both the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs propose .
I would point out that , of all the members of the Committees , only two supported this initiative .
I regret that the Council ' s and Parliament ' s time has been used in this way .
I think , like Mrs Berger said , that it could have been used for other things , for example , purely administrative procedures .
The issue of women as asylum seekers might also have been reflected upon , because we need to look at the Tampere decision in its entirety with a view to improving the asylum process .
I would emphasise that I am speaking as a Finn and as a representative of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
Mr President , the Karamanou report asks the European Parliament to reject the Finnish proposal to establish , within the European Union , a system for returning illegal immigrants to the Member State responsible .
According to this initiative , a Member State which arrests illegal immigrants in its territory could return them to the Member State through which they entered , with the expectation that the latter would probably return them to the third country from which they originally came .
This idea is interesting for three reasons .
Firstly , it responds to a genuine problem caused by the abolition of internal borders within Europe . It therefore fills a legal void by establishing a system for the return of illegal immigrants based on the Schengen acquis and modelled on the Dublin Convention of 1990 on asylum seekers .
Secondly , it forces the Member State which is negligent in monitoring its borders to take responsibility for illegal immigrants who use it to get into neighbouring countries .
Thirdly , it shows the usefulness - whatever the previous speakers may have said - of the Member States ' right of initiative which the Treaty of Amsterdam retained as a transitional measure in matters relating to immigration and the movement of people .
In these areas , it is important that the national governments , which are still closer to the people than the Commission , should retain a full right to make proposals and , of course , decide on these .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights totally rejects this Finnish initiative however , and , in so doing , shows a tendency to exaggerate .
It uses the pretext of legal shortcomings to reject the whole proposal whereas it could very easily , in a more positive spirit , have itself proposed corrections .
However , this initiative is disliked by the federalists who would prefer a less intergovernmental and more Community-based approach , in other words granting more power to the Commission and the European Parliament .
It is also disliked by the pro-immigration pressure groups whose influence is apparent in the explanatory statement which highlights the positive contribution of immigration and rejects a supposedly repressive initiative .
This reasoning is , of course , diametrically opposed to ours .
Mr President , the Commission would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her report .
Since we completely agree with her analysis and conclusion and share the view that it cannot be adopted , as it stands , I shall be very brief .
Mrs Karamanou ' s report has clearly demonstrated that the subject of readmission rules between European Union Member States , although a very technical and specific issue , touches upon some very sensitive policy issues that simply need more thorough reflection and preparation before they are again tackled by the Union .
I recognise that this initiative has drawn the attention of the Council to the necessity of drafting a coherent and consistent approach to immigration policy .
That is why I stated to Parliament the Commission ' s intention of presenting to the Council and Parliament in the autumn of this year a communication on immigration policy , precisely to give us the broader picture within which these partial and sectoral issues can be fully and properly integrated .
I can assure you that the Commission thinks that we should not start with this question of readmission .
We think that though questions of readmission are no doubt relevant , they should be mainly addressed in the readmission agreements that the Union is now negotiating with third countries .
Nevertheless , for the time being , it is better to see the whole picture before we start discussing small details .
So the Commission can subscribe to the approach of the rapporteur and , apparently , the large majority in Parliament , in the sense that this initiative , as it stands - and I am not passing judgement on the intention behind it - is unacceptable .
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , a gross mistake has found its way into Item 34 of the Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting concerning the adoption of the resolution on Euro 2000 .
The Minutes show this resolution to have been adopted by Parliament when in fact it was rejected by an overwhelming majority . Moreover , the resolution is also listed among the texts adopted whereas notification of its rejection should appear in this part .
This will obviously be corrected .
Madam President , following your statement yesterday regarding the state of the air conditioning in the building , I have a slight problem in my position as Chairman of the Delegation for relations with Canada .
I have a group of Canadian members of parliament coming to the next part-session in Strasbourg .
I will have to take a decision on Monday as to whether they will be travelling to Strasbourg or Brussels .
Bearing in mind the French position on the precautionary principle , can a decision be taken rather sooner than a fortnight on where we will be meeting next month ?
Mr Sturdy , as you know , and as the Quaestors point out in the memo which you have received , checks will be carried out at Parliament ' s three places of work , that is to say , Strasbourg , Brussels and Luxembourg .
Unfortunately , we will then have to wait for the result of these checks .
I would therefore advise you to contact Mr Poos , so that he can keep you informed of the situation .
Madam President , I rise on the same point of order as my colleague , Mr Sturdy .
It is essential that this Parliament should show by example and precept that it follows the same standards that it imposes upon everybody else .
It imposes standards on beef in Britain and cheese in France and it must follow the same example in relation to its own conduct .
I am perfectly prepared , in an extreme situation , to die for my country and my family . I am not prepared to die from legionnaire 's disease because I have to sit in Strasbourg in June .
Therefore we should do something about it now and not just talk about it .
This is why , ladies and gentlemen , we are taking every necessary precaution at all Parliament ' s places of work .
Madam President , as you may well expect , we will not enter into a debate between French and British beef producers now . However , I have two questions to ask .
Firstly , could the same checks be carried out for Parliament in Brussels ?
Secondly , in accordance with the precautionary principle , can Brussels continue to be a place of work for Parliament since it is not equipped with air purifiers ?
I have already answered the first question , Mr Daul , since I told you that the checks would also be carried out in Brussels as well as in Luxembourg where many people work , and this must not be overlooked .
The checks will therefore be carried out at all Parliament ' s places of work , but Mr Poos will be in a much better position to answer you than myself .
Madam President , thank you for giving me the floor .
I would like to inform and at the same time reassure the Members who have just spoken on this important and serious matter .
I should like to point out to them that the College of Quaestors has acted in accordance with the precautionary principle .
In fact , if the College of Quaestors had not ordered an air quality check in these buildings , the problem would not even have been mentioned today in plenary .
This check has therefore been carried out and , as you know , it proved negative on two points .
We took the necessary steps immediately , namely closing the buildings where the problems were observed .
After technical changes had been made , we carried out a second air quality check , the results of which are available for asbestos .
The second check did not reveal any more asbestos fibres , suggesting that they had been brought in from outside , or could well have been .
We are quite certain that asbestos was not used to construct the building .
Furthermore , a second check has been carried out for the ducts contaminated with legionella bacteria , but the results of this are not available yet for purely technical reasons , as well as biological reasons , because the cultures take about a fortnight to mature .
At any rate , the results of this second check will be available by the start of the next part-session in Strasbourg , and rest assured , ladies and gentlemen , that if they should be positive , i.e. if these pathogenic elements are found to be still present , then the College of Quaestors will advise the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents to take the necessary action .
There is therefore no cause for alarm at present .
We shall wait for the results of these checks and we shall take the necessary steps in accordance with the precautionary principle .
Madam President , in Item 5 of the Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting on the withdrawal of Mr Le Pen ' s mandate , there are two half truths in the references to my speech and to that of Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi and two half truths can add up to one untruth .
Firstly , the Minutes state that Mr Medina Ortega ' questioned whether the letter from the committee ' s chairman truly reflected the opinion of the committee as a whole ' .
What I said was that the letter read out by the President and sent by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi was not the opinion of the committee . It had not been adopted by the committee and therefore was not its opinion .
It is not a question of whether or not it reflected the committee ' s opinion : reflecting an opinion is not the same as being an actual opinion .
Secondly , the Minutes then state that Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ' confirmed that the letter faithfully reflected the committee ' s position ' .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi is not here but , if I remember rightly , what she said was something along the lines of it being her opinion of what had taken place in committee , although it had not been adopted by the committee .
Although I am aware that I am splitting hairs here , I should like to make it clear that what I said was that it was not the committee ' s opinion and that , in some way , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi acknowledged that it was her opinion of what happened in committee .
In this way , the two half truths could be turned into two complete truths .
Mr Medina , I suggest that we listen again to the recording of the sitting and , if necessary , make the changes you specify .
However , given that this is a very delicate area , I think we must listen to the recording of the sitting first in order to see whether these changes are really necessary .
If they appear to be necessary , the changes will indeed be made .
Madam President , it is all very well Mr Poos saying that the Quaestors asked for the air quality check .
I understand that the staff asked for an air quality check before this building was opened .
I asked for an air quality check in January .
Why has it taken so long to get that air quality check ?
Usually , in a lot of countries , if legionella bacteria is found in any part of a building , that building is closed .
Are there any other comments on the Minutes ?
There are no further comments .
( The Minutes were approved )
Vote
Madam President , I rise under Rule 126 ( 3 ) so that I might question whether a quorum exists for this vote .
Despite the unprecedented presence of some French Members , my assessment is that Fridays in Strasbourg do not function properly and effectively for this Parliament and we should transfer more of our parliamentary work to the capital city , Brussels .
- ( PT ) Madam President , I would like to speak in reaction to the blatant hypocrisy of the request that has just been made .
During yesterday ' s vote on the Buitenweg report , we witnessed some very serious goings-on in this Parliament .
Rules of Procedure were brushed aside so that we could proceed to the vote on the Buitenweg report , which bears the name of one of the leading lights of the group , whose spokesperson today is Mr Duff , perhaps because of some embarrassment on the part of Mrs Buitenweg .
Given what happened yesterday , which none of us has forgotten - we were forced to listen to hypocritical statements about great principles when , in the April part-session , for example , a motion on Ethiopia was sacrificed - I would ask the leaders of this group to show , at least in this part-session , some remorse at what they have done and some respect for their colleagues .
Madam President , I should like to convey our support and sympathy for the people of Paraguay in the light of another attempted military coup .
That is all I wished to say .
I should like the position of this House to be made very clear .
Madam President , due to the absence of two dozen Members and the request for the quorum which we would have established without any difficulty , our Group yesterday chose to refrain from preventing the Buitenweg report from being put to the vote when this would have been quite possible .
According to the agenda , the vote should have taken place today since the amendments were not put to the House in time yesterday .
I appealed to the House to act fairly .
I would urge the Members dealing with this matter to declare a moratorium .
We are about to take up the matter of enhancing the status of Fridays .
Of course , the best way to do this would have been by voting on this important report today .
However , I believe Mrs Buitenweg cannot attend today ' s sitting .
In any event , we must nevertheless enhance the status of Fridays .
Our Group is in the process of taking appropriate precautionary action .
I would urge you to let us work fairly and to stop deliberately disrupting our work .
As I already said yesterday , I can tell you again that within the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents , we are in fact in the process of enhancing the status of the work undertaken on Fridays .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to address the mover of the motion , Mr Duff , since this is still , after all , a question on a point of order which is to be debated in this House .
Mr Duff , yesterday a vote was taken in the House on the Buitenweg report , as a result of which , the Karamanou and Sörensen reports have to be put to the vote this morning .
This is also the reason why Mrs Buitenweg , who is otherwise requesting a quorum on this , is nobly expressing her reservation because she knows that voting on these reports this morning is the fair thing to do .
In this respect , Mr Duff ' s request might have been overlooked among the large number of requests made .
He has not been given any information , which explains why he has made this request now .
I would therefore urge Andrew to withdraw his request , since Mrs Buitenweg and others want a vote to be taken on the Sörensen and Karamanou reports this morning .
I would certainly suggest that Mrs Buitenweg and others refrain from making a big fuss about it this morning in order to avoid embarrassing scenes .
Madam President , the issue of requests for the quorum to be tested does not have anything to do with whether we work in Strasbourg rather than in Brussels .
Personally , I would prefer to work in Strasbourg , but I consider that if we have decided to work on Fridays - and this seems to me to be the issue here - then on Fridays the quorum needs to be present .
I do not feel that it is right to vote in favour of working on Fridays and then be absent .
With regard to whether requests for the quorum to be tested are intended to sabotage proceedings , I would refer you to events in the Italian Parliament .
I myself have requested that the quorum be checked many , many times , and , on most of those occasions , the quorum was not present .
Yet I have never been accused of sabotaging proceedings and I doubt that the war which has broken out between Ethiopia and Eritrea was caused by the fact that , last time , the quorum was not present .
Madam President , as Chairperson of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , I was a touch surprised at the request to establish that a quorum was present today .
We moved our two topics so that Mrs Buitenweg ' s report could be discussed and voted on yesterday .
Mrs Sörensen ' s and Mrs Karamanou ' s reports were therefore moved to yesterday evening to be debated , and were to be voted on today .
I think it is odd , to say the least , that our colleagues should behave in this way .
It may perhaps be possible for my colleague to withdraw the proposal and appreciate the need to realise that half the earth ' s population consists of women .
It is an extremely serious document which Mrs Sörensen has written and which we shall be voting on today .
I would most earnestly ask my colleagues to stop trifling with this Parliament and withdraw their proposal - perhaps with the help of Mrs Buitenweg .
Madam President , I just wanted to correct what Mr Posselt said .
He said that he did not think there was a quorum on the vote on Mrs Buitenweg 's report .
By my calculations , 242 people voted on that report including about 35 Members of the PPE , and they should be congratulated on supporting that excellent report yesterday .
Madam President , before we take a vote - and I would rather a vote not be taken straight away - I should also like to join Mrs Theorin in appealing to Mr Duff as a friend and colleague to withdraw his request to establish the quorum .
Last time , at the Friday sitting here in Strasbourg , a request of this type had a disastrous effect on the European Parliament ' s image .
It was broadcast on television the same day that there were not enough Members present in plenary to discuss aid to Ethiopia .
Pictures of children who had died from famine and starving people were shown at the same time by the same channels .
The same thing will happen today with the fight against trafficking in women .
Pictures of poor girls living in districts that are unfit for habitation will be shown , and it will be broadcast that not enough Members were present in Parliament to discuss the matter .
So , please , I beg you to withdraw your request to establish the quorum , and let us take a vote !
Mr Duff , do you uphold your request ?
We shall then see if 32 Members join you .
Madam President , should these reports be serious then they certainly deserve a quorum .
What I will do is to press my point of order .
Very well , so are there 32 Members to support this request ?
( 24 Members rose ) The request is therefore withdrawn .
We shall now proceed to the vote . First , we shall examine the text of the initiative from the Republic of Finland .
The Commission proposes that the initiative be rejected .
Madam President , I think you are mistaken as the voting list is different .
If we want to reject Finland ' s initiative , we must vote against it .
That is primarily what we are voting on .
So whoever votes in favour , votes for the Finnish proposal which was rejected by committee .
Whoever votes against , rejects the Finnish proposal and thus gives the Commission the responsibility of presenting a relevant proposal , as represented by the subsequent amendments tabled .
Madam President , this is a very complicated process as Mrs Karamanou has already explained .
I would therefore urge you to allow me to very briefly explain the process once again .
I have also agreed to do this with the member of the PPE Group who works as a coordinator in our committee , since the PPE has proposed two amendments , although only for the legislative resolution .
The text of the resolution itself should be rejected .
However , I would urge a vote to be taken on the legislative resolution , together with both amendments , in which it is pointed out that we invite the Council to put forward a new draft text .
The present text should therefore be rejected and the Council invited in the legislative resolution to submit a new text .
It therefore comes down to the rather unusual process of the text which is actually to be voted on being rejected , but a vote then having to be taken on the legislative resolution .
I would urge that this rather remarkable procedure be carried out .
It gives us the chance to obtain a new text .
Indeed , it is quite complicated .
You would therefore like me to put the draft initiative from the Republic of Finland to the vote straight away .
( Parliament rejected the proposal , which was referred back to committee ) ( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
( A5-0127 / 2000 ) by Mrs Sörensen , on behalf of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament " For further actions in the fight against trafficking in women " ( COM ( 1998 ) 726 - C5-0123 / 1999 - 1999 / 2125 ( COS ) )
Before the start of the vote

Madam President , on the same point of order that Mr Duff raised earlier , the roll-call vote has just shown that we are not quorate , so therefore , under the same rules , I would like to ask for the quorum to be established and I call on Members to support me by standing .
( 19 Members rose )
President .
The request is withdrawn .
Relating to Amendment No 10
Madam President , with regard to this amendment , there is a linguistic problem .
The French version contains the word " délit " , whereas this is written as " crime " in the English version .
As you know , Madam President , this does not have the same meaning in French .
The amendment seeks to correct this .
I am not the one who tabled the amendment , but it does seem to me that this is the point of it . I wanted to point this out .
Relating to Amendment No 5
Madam President , in the course of discussions with Mrs Martens of the PPE-DE Group , we decided to alter the amendment to paragraph 19 in this way .
It stresses the vital role played by the NGOs , which might also include humanitarian organisations in Europe that have set themselves the task of receiving and supporting the victims .
I endorse this amendment .
You are therefore proposing an oral amendment to replace the words ' the churches and religious organisations ' with ' humanitarian organisations ' .
Madam President , I am not quite clear as to whether the words ' church organisations ' should appear in the text .
If not , I should like us to return to the original wording .
You , Madam President , said one thing and Mrs Sörensen another .
Would you be so kind as to repeat what the oral amendment should really consist of ?
In order to make things crystal clear , I think that the best thing would be to listen to the rapporteur again so that everyone understands in his own language exactly what the oral amendment which you are proposing would consist of .
I apologise for the lack of clarity .
The oral amendment alters Amendment No 5 to paragraph 19 as follows : we want to keep " stresses the vital role played by NGOs " and then the words in bold in the original amendment are to be altered thus : " which may also include humanitarian organisations in Europe that have set themselves the task of receiving and supporting the victims " .
And so ' the Churches and religious organisations ' is to be replaced by " humanitarian organisations " , because that is a much broader concept .
I think that things have now been made quite clear .
Are there at least 12 Members who are opposed to this oral amendment being considered ?
( As more than 12 Members were opposed , the oral amendment was not considered )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Sörensen report ( A5-0127 / 2000 )
Madam President , it was with great pleasure that I voted for the Sörensen report .
I fully approve the contents of the report , but , sadly , I feel that it fails to get to the root of the issue .
The motion for a resolution states that 500 000 people , victims of trafficking in women , enter Europe every year .
The true responsibility for trafficking in women lies with the men who take advantage of them in Europe - in the order of 180 million people , according to my calculations .
The point I am trying to make in this explanation of vote can also be found on page 11 , line 14 of the report , and it is the only line out of the 722 making up the report which reaches the crux of the matter : it states that we must fight for " information and awareness-raising activities with a view to reducing the demand side " .
Out of the 7 213 words in this report , a mere handful are dedicated to the truth .
- ( FR ) Once again we are confronted with one of the most sordid aspects of contemporary society : trafficking in human beings .
And once again , Parliament responds to this by using an incoherent form of language whose repetition is discouraging .
Indeed , whilst the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities rightfully condemns trafficking in women and children as an intolerable violation of basic human rights , at the same time it denounces what it considers to be the disastrous effects of the prohibition of prostitution .
But are the measures which we are rightfully calling for from national and Community institutions any good if we politicians fail to proclaim , beforehand , that this truly basic right to human dignity is being violated by sexual exploitation , particularly prostitution ?
Let us take advantage of the fact that Parliament is presently involved in the work of the Charter of Fundamental Rights to think about the direction we want this to take .
Is it about proclaiming a vision of the human being , and the sacredness and intrinsic dignity thereof , or recognising the rights of individuals in isolation and of separate impenetrable communities ?
I will be told in reply that prostitution has always existed and that we should instead try to limit the damage it does .
This scourge , like so many others , has certainly always existed and regrettably will no doubt always exist , but our task as elected representatives forces us to take a better and wider perspective , regarding what destroys the human being not as an inevitability but as a crime to be combated .
The libertarian decriminalisation measures have proved to be inefficient and dangerous no matter what the field .
Let me remind some of my colleagues of the role played by these laws : by prohibiting certain practices , they set limits intended to protect those persons , male and female , who for different reasons are easy targets for criminal networks which exploit , and prosper on , their poverty .
If these laws are not enough to break up the networks , then we must also provide the competent authorities with the means to conduct a campaign which is all the more efficient since it will be supported by unambiguous legislation .
The unspeakable excesses of some people are often a sign of some distress which must also be put right .
It is criminal to use the weakness of certain individuals to promote a libertarian ideology which spreads distress further afield and ultimately smells of death .
- ( FR ) The Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities proposes a large number of ambitious legal measures in the Sörensen report .
Nevertheless , all the proclaimed rights , protective measures and international cooperation are only any good if they are inspired by the higher fundamental principles which they are intended to serve .
It would therefore be useful for us to start by solemnly reasserting that the dignity of all human beings is at stake here , and that any compromise with practices violating this is irresponsible and criminal .
When you know about the terrible things that go on within paedophile networks , when you see women displayed as goods for sale in shop windows in European capitals , and when you are aware of the distress suffered by the victims of this exploitation , you can only reject the thoughtless and criminal texts which suggest decriminalisation based on a libertarian ideology with no regard for the need to protect , albeit imperfectly , the weakest members of society .
It is essential that , in Member States and in any cooperation between them , the basic principles of human dignity regain a central place , and are promoted and defended by policies to protect victims and prosecute those responsible .
It is essential that an ambitious development aid policy is implemented beforehand .
This must be concerned with offering poor countries the means to develop , so that they can give their inhabitants the chance of a decent life : this process has an economic facet , but also in particular cultural and educational aspects .
Admittedly , there is a constant demand for what is called ' the sex industry ' , but we must try to prevent adults from selling themselves or their children to such networks because it is the only means of meeting their needs .
It is particularly through educating young people as well as adults that these people will be able to create their own means of subsistence in their respective regions .
At the same time , it is also up to us to create in our own countries the legal and social frameworks necessary for helping the victims and fighting against a scourge all too often presented as an inevitability or even a quaint tradition .
Non-NAFO vessels
The next item is the report ( A5-0101 / 2000 ) by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation laying down certain control measures in respect of vessels flying the flag of non-Contracting Parties to the North-West Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) ( COM ( 1999 ) 570 - C5-0041 / 2000 - 1999 / 0231 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , regional fisheries organisations , which regulate fishing operations outside the 200 miles of exclusive economic zones , play a fundamental role in the regulation and rational management of fishery resources in international waters .
They will be called upon to play an even more important role in the immediate future .
As a result , the European Union must strengthen its presence in such regional organisations , in those that already exist and in those that may be created in the future .
Unfortunately , in terms of human and technical resources , the European Commission is , in our opinion , currently unable to be present in each and every one of these regional fisheries organisations with the commitment they deserve , or in a way that reflects the important interests the different Community fleets have in the various oceans on this planet .
NAFO is an exception and has perhaps become the best attended , most regulated and most monitored organisation of them all .
It is also true that the Commission is paying greater attention to some of these organisations , as in the case of the ICCAT .
This is certainly an organisation that is no stranger to pressure from this House and , more specifically , from our Committee on Fisheries .
However , there are a number of other organisations - to mention only those that relate to the tuna species - and , alongside the aforementioned Atlantic tuna organisation , there is a pressing need for our presence in , and commitment to , the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission , the IOTC , the Inter-American Commission for Tropical Tuna , the IATTC , or the MHLC , the Multilateral High Level Conference , which is negotiating the convention that will govern the Western Pacific Council .
The European Commission needs to have an effective presence , both in terms of human and technical resources , in all these organisations and , as I said , in those that may be created in the future .
Parliament will help , and we shall spare no effort in ensuring that , in such organisations , the European Union has a level of influence that corresponds to our fisheries sectors . These sectors are calling for such an influence in view of third countries which , incidentally , sometimes defend their interests more vigorously than we defend ours .
NAFO has served as a model in many cases .
The regulation we are now considering represents an attempt to incorporate decisions adopted by the organisation in 1997 , 1998 and 1999 into Community legislation to make our internal measures more effective .
In this case , we are dealing with the thorny issue of trying to ensure that vessels which are not part of the organisation respect the rules laid down by regional fisheries organisations . Such vessels , whether operating under flags of convenience or not , simply act freely whilst others respect provisions on the conservation of resources and , of course , contribute to these respective laws .
We support the measures drawn up , measures which are still scarce and difficult to apply , but which will continue to increase the world ' s awareness of responsible fishing and trade and make such awareness more effective .
The measures suggested by this House ' s Committee on Fisheries are along these lines . They are measures which clarify some concepts to ensure greater accuracy and improve , as far as possible , upon the already significant control measures in NAFO waters .
As we all know , a Community vessel that was operating in NAFO waters , the Santa Mafalda , has been ordered into the Portuguese port of Aveiro with Canadian NAFO inspectors on board .
Whilst we await the findings of the port inspection , we ask everyone to comply with the NAFO fisheries ' regulatory measures . These measures on the conservation of resources are essential if such resources are to be maintained .
We also call on the Canadian authorities to behave in accordance with NAFO control measures and not to exceed their authority .
During the plenary sitting on this matter , Mr Kinnock , Vice-President of the Commission , acknowledged that they had exceeded their duties in appropriating the ship ' s documentation without the authorisation of the captain of the vessel .
Attitudes such as these remind us of a time we thought we had left behind , a time when Canada created a crisis , which we do not wish to see repeated under any circumstances .
Therefore , we ask for a forceful response from the European Commission to Canada over their behaviour and - I should like to stress this and then conclude - we ask everyone to behave appropriately in order to conserve resources and we ask them to comply strictly with the rules laid down by NAFO .
Madam President , Commissioner , for some time we have been observing with increasing concern an influx of vessels , which do not belong to NAFO , the North-West Atlantic Fisheries Organisation , into the North-West Atlantic .
To be quite frank , the owners of these vessels are stealing fish .
They deliberately refuse to join NAFO , of which the European Union is a member .
They think they can shirk all their responsibilities by doing so .
We have known for a long time what kind of problems the fishing industry as a whole has to contend with .
Overfishing certainly plays an important part in this regard .
What we therefore need , at the end of the day , is a coherent fishing policy , not just in our waters , but worldwide , where all parties act in concert and cannot play their own game .
This concerns everyone : the international community , individual countries and the European Union .
NAFO is therefore more important than you would think for everyone , and not just for the European Union .
The consequences of uncontrolled fishing have already been disastrous , particularly for cod and redfish , two highly valued sources of food .
Regulations - that is , either a total ban on fishing or at least clear restrictions on fishing - have been in force for both types of fish on the part of NAFO ever since the 1990s .
In spite of all the efforts even simply to make these often stateless vessels comply with the protective and conservation measures , fishing continues to proceed unabated .
The problem for the European Union was previously the lack of a unified system of control when checking vessels of non-contracting parties in EU ports because they are obviously not subject to Community law .
By transferring the NAFO regulations as international law directly into Community law which is in force in all EU Member States , the regulation presently under discussion thus gains importance .
The NAFO regulations - and their assimilation in a unified system - which control and , if necessary , sanction the non-contracting parties and their frequently stateless vessels and fishing , are therefore the most important matter dealt with in the regulation .
Those who took part in a psychological study which exists in Germany , and which is appropriately named the ' Fishing Game ' , always headed for a resources catastrophe when they acted in isolation .
In the final analysis , every one of them always took whatever was still left and this could no longer be replaced at the end .
If we do not want to just have the choice between unreliable sources of food or unreliable fishing , then a functional form of cooperation between all the parties involved would be in our interests .
As a member of NAFO , and with a large number of Member States of its own , the EU fulfils the requirements for this .
We therefore welcome this initiative , but would like a few minor points to be clarified in our motions in order to achieve greater coherency between NAFO and the EU .
A final word on this interesting term ' international law ' .
EU law also has its origins in international law .
Certainly , we must now realise that EU Community law has become a term in its own right , and that this must be analogous to the evolving definition of the term ' European Union ' .
Mr President , in his speech , Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna has already mentioned the forceful response from the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Kinnock , to my question on the boarding by Canadian inspectors of a Portuguese fishing vessel in NAFO waters .
If we are to maintain the balance in this important organisation - and in what is an extremely important fishing ground for the Community fleet - then the only way to do so is for everyone to behave responsibly .
The proposal for a regulation under discussion today , on control measures for vessels from countries which are non- Contracting Parties to NAFO , is very much linked to this sense of responsibility that is so necessary in the fisheries sector .
I am referring to the responsibility we all share for managing marine resources , in accordance with rules accepted by all parties to guarantee that such resources are preserved and that ours will not be the last generation to see cod , redfish or American plaice .
Regional fishing organisations have played an increasingly important role over recent years in the management of resources .
In this respect , we , the Socialists , would like to continue developing the idea that encourages this sense of responsibility .
Legal philosophies dating from times gone by have been left behind , times when man felt how small he was in relation to the immensity of the Earth , which appeared to be a planet with infinite resources .
The lack of ownership of the seas and the principle that the sea belongs to no one sprang from such ideas .
However , nowadays , in a world that is becoming ever smaller , a world dominated by new technologies that make the world even smaller and with resources we know are becoming more and more scarce , we , the Socialists would like to move forward on the principle that the sea belongs to everyone .
For this reason , we would like NAFO to be - and indeed it is - an organisation open to countries that have vessels operating in this area .
In this way , such countries would play a part in creating regulatory measures and would share responsibility for managing resources .
If this does not happen , flags of convenience , euphemistically known as ' non-Contracting Parties ' , will benefit , not to mention the piracy which lies behind the euphemism , ' stateless vessels ' .
Such vessels - which we are often keen to believe have nothing to do with us - do not come from remote southern seas , but rather almost always originate from European ports , from Community ports .
They fly strange flags and their aim is to practise social dumping . In so doing , they avoid regulations on the rational management of resources and pay no attention to workers ' social rights .
People who idolise the market should note from this that neither fish nor people gain anything from their hypotheses .
Lastly , it is extremely important that countries with vessels operating in NAFO waters are Contracting Parties , just as it is important that the European Community is also a Contracting Party to regional organisations being set up in the South Atlantic and beyond the area the Community fleet currently operates in .
Our fleet , the Community fleet , does not wish to be seen as a pirate fleet , as a fleet without nationality , nor as an intruding fleet .
To conclude , the Group of the Party of European Socialists would like to state that it wholeheartedly agrees with the content of this report although it regrets , as does the rapporteur himself , Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , that there is a lack of proposed measures from the Commission on combating the main enemy of our fleet and of the conservation of fishery resources today .
This enemy is none other than those vessels flying flags of convenience .
I would very much like to support this report .
It is extremely important and it is very important to support the attempts of NAFO to halt this very problematic activity of non-contracting parties .
The reality of the situation is that " vessels from non-contracting parties " usually means vessels flying flags of convenience or flags obtained from countries which have open registers .
These are countries which will allow shipowners the right to fly their flag if they pay the country a fee .
Under international law , it is the responsibility of the state whose flag vessels fly to ensure that they abide by the relevant rules and regulations ; for example , conservation measures , safety and labour standards , etc .
The big problem is that these countries selling flags of convenience have no intention of enforcing these rules , and that is the main reason why they appeal to these unscrupulous shipowners who can do what they like .
They can flout the law and no one is going to try and enforce it .
All the shipowner has to do is pay a bit of money to the country to get the flag which will allow him to fish with impunity .
This really has to stop .
The list of these countries is very long , but the traditional ones are Belize , Panama , Honduras and St Vincent and the Grenadines .
Many of these vessels have been active in the NAFO area , but that is not the only place where they operate .
Very large numbers have also been fishing for tuna in the Atlantic where the regional organisation is ICAT .
ICAT has done more than any other regional organisation to try and combat fishing by flags of convenience .
Most dramatically - and this is something that other people should take their lead from - is that it has now imposed import bans on bluefish tuna from one of its own members , Equatorial Guinea .
ICAT really does mean business and other people should follow suit .
Organisations like ICAT and NAFO cannot solve the problem on their own .
The responsibility lies in many other quarters and this responsibility needs to be taken seriously .
Many shipowners like to use flags of convenience for it lets them get away with just about anything .
There is no way of enforcing the law .
The countries that sell allow them to fly their flags ; they turn a blind eye and do not care .
This is why it is so popular .
The EU is among the worst in this sense .
According to Lloyd 's Maritime Services , in December 1999 there were 1,323 vessels over 24 metres flying flags of convenience .
Of these , 168 were owned by companies based in EU Member States .
By far the worst , of course , and not surprising , is Spain with 116 vessels , but of course they are not alone .
Each country tends to have their preferred flag use .
For instance , the French vessels tend to use flags of Réunion , St Vincent and the Seychelles .
For Greece it is Cyprus and Panama .
The Dutch use Belize and St Vincent and 4 vessels , of course , from my own country are flagged in Belize as well .
The preferred British countries are Panama and Belize .
It is not surprising that Belize is there , considering last year ' s revelations about Michael Ashcroft , the Tory Party treasurer ' s business connections there .
The Spanish fleet is distributed across a very long list including Belize , Honduras , the Netherlands Antilles , Panama and many others .
The only place which has more of these flags of convenience is Taiwan , with 117 , which just beats Spain into first place .
Last year , the Commission was actually trying to do something ; it proposed refusing to grant subsidies for transferring ship ownership to countries with open registers .
The Council refused .
It wants to use public money to fund ways of breaking the rules , and that is not acceptable .
At least one organisation is trying to draw this matter to the public 's attention .
For the past two weeks , Greenpeace has had a ship in the middle of the South Atlantic where they have found plenty of vessels catching tuna , flying these flags of convenience .
They have also found a transport vessel , flagged in Panama and owned in Japan , both contracting parties to ICAT by the way , which was receiving fish from non-contracting vessels from Belize .
This is very much against ICAT rules and I really think we have to address it .
The European Union has to take responsibility on this issue .
Mr President , I too should like to welcome this proposal for a regulation from the Commission which improves upon certain control measures within NAFO .
I have often voiced my opinion that NAFO fishing grounds are undoubtedly among the most regulated in the world . Such vigilance is sometimes the result of excessive mistrust , on the part of some Contracting Parties - who have almost unlimited power in NAFO - towards other parties who operate completely legitimately .
We all remember the unjust and regrettable incidents that took place a few years ago , regarding a Community vessel . These incidents were the product of suspicion bordering on persecution which has often concealed a desire to throw a smoke screen around management errors in some coastal states .
This is why I must applaud the fact that this proposal aims at incorporating into Community legislation three NAFO recommendations on controlling activities of vessels of non-Contracting Parties , and in particular non-Contracting Parties whose activities are , without a shadow of a doubt , much more suspect than those of any Community fleet .
As is usual procedure when discussing the transposition of measures into Community law , I must once again express my disappointment over the Commission ' s delay in starting to work on adapting legislation .
If it is indeed true that the proposal covers NAFO ' s latest recommendations on sightings and transhipments from its annual meetings in 1998 and 1999 , it is also true to say that this represents nothing more than a reworking of the 1997 recommendation , which is only now being taken into account .
Besides this now traditional complaint , this proposal for a regulation represents an opportunity to debate the real problem of flags of convenience and discuss what the European Union is doing to deal with them .
Given the current state of marine resources , and at a time when there is growing awareness of the need for real protection of marine ecosystems , the fight against illegal fishing must become a priority and vessels flying flags of convenience should be first on the list .
The European Union is responsible for taking the lead in the fight against such harmful forms of fishing and must be capable of putting forward its own alternatives .
The first step must be to propose unified and clear measures in the fight against such activity to Member States . The aim of such common rules is to ban the flying of such flags and stop Member States allowing these fleets to dock in their ports .
Currently , not all Community ports are aware that , directly or indirectly , they are often providing cover for illegal activity .
We can only develop their awareness through an information campaign and by introducing rigorous measures to accompany it .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna on the amount of work he has put into this , indeed into all issues that come before the Committee on Fisheries .
The whole question of what we do to protect marine life outside our waters is not a very popular issue .
It does not exercise the public mind an awful lot in the European Union .
There is a growing understanding of the efforts that the European Union is making , and I would say that for the many years during which the Common Fisheries Policy has existed , the Union has failed , to a large extent , to convince the European public of the importance of the role it has been playing in trying to establish the facts of marine life , to provide the public with the scientific information and to take the necessary action .
Too often we do not get the sort of support from Member States and from national governments that is needed to convince the public that determined and substantial efforts have to be made to enforce all the laws and regulations .
In spite of these efforts , something like 80 % of all the major stocks are still over-exploited and continue to diminish .
The measures before us may be the best that we can manage , but they seem rather weak and hardly sufficient to achieve what we want .
We are the biggest market and the most lucrative market in the world for fish products .
We should be prepared to use our muscle and impose every necessary trade sanction on all the states and all the products that are associated with this illegal trade .
It is not just a matter of protecting our interests , because stocks outside our 200-mile limit can be affected by our activities .
Stocks within our limit can be affected by activities outside it .
There is also the whole question of our obligation to protect this resource that belongs to mankind .
I believe that for some people who have the money to buy large ships and equip them in today 's world there is no limit to the capacity that can be applied to extracting resources from the sea .
I do not think that individuals should have the right , just because they have the money and capacity and because they happen to live in a certain region , to go out and exploit those resources and become very rich as has happened in some instances .
We may be reaching the point where this resource is tendered and paid for and the public can get some compensation from those who get rich very quickly - they are already doing this in New Zealand .
The European Union in its review of the Common Fisheries Policy should take into account the fact that this is a public resource and that a small number of people think they have the right to go out and get rich from it .
There would be widespread public support for some sort of system that requires compensation .
In the old days people went out and took risks with their lives and bad equipment ; today they have the capacity to know where the fish are , to get them , and to exploit them and they should have to pay a fee for that .
I would like to express my sincere thanks for the interest you have shown in the proposal for the Council regulation in question .
As you know , the aim of the regulation is to implement at Community level a very important NAFO scheme intended to counteract non-contracting party activities which risk undermining the effectiveness of NAFO conservation measures .
In this context , I should stress that the Community , as a contracting party to NAFO , has every interest in measures that help to resolve problems caused by states which do not discharge their cooperation and conservation obligations under international law .
In respect of the proposed amendments , I should stress the following . Amendment No 1 does not seem to be necessary .
In fact , recital 3 of the version proposed by the Commission is correct because we are actually dealing with the practice of using non-contracting party vessels .
What is more , this wording is drawn from the language used in other legal texts , for instance the Council decision concerning the approval by the Community of the FAO compliance agreement and the Council regulation laying down certain control measures in respect of vessels flying the flag of non-contracting parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources .
Amendment No 2 is relevant and will be taken on board .
Amendment No 3 is not acceptable to the Commission .
There is no need to impose an obligation on individual vessels .
If it merely involves spelling out a faculty for individual vessels , there is no need to regulate .
Furthermore , the terms " proceed to a formal sighting " can be construed as an obligation for the Community inspection vessel to direct itself towards non-contracting party vessels in order to make a sighting formal .
Such an obligation would divert the inspection vessel from the performance of its existing tasks , which is certainly not acceptable .
I hope that what I have had to say has contributed to a better understanding and thank you again for the time and effort you have put into this proposal .
The debate is closed .
I have been up in my room just now , and it is little surprising that Fridays are so devalued .
The television technicians have gone home , so the television pictures are of the Assembly and no longer of the original speakers .
The staff are apparently running for the exits from 9 a.m. on Friday mornings , so it is hardly surprising that Fridays are being devalued .
I would ask you to check that the whole service of Parliament is available so long as the House is sitting .
I will pass on your comments to the Bureau but as regards the TV system we have considered this question before .
During the last Parliament , when Mr Gutierrez traditionally took the chair on Fridays , he asked for full television coverage of the sitting .
We tried this for a period of six months and no television network ever took any of the broadcasts and so the practice was discontinued as it was extremely expensive .
I do not wish to embark on a discussion of this issue now but you can rest assured I will pass on your remarks to the Bureau .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution ) EXPLANATION OF VOTE
I would like to congratulate Mr Varela on his report on vessels flying non-Community flags that are non-contracting parties to NAFO , which was adopted unanimously .
As Ms McKenna rightly said , the use of flags of convenience makes it possible to flout all the regulations .
My father had a bar in Genoa next to the Panama consulate - and I am not criticising the Panama consulate or any other consulate , for that matter - and I am therefore very aware that laws are violated .
For example , people who did not know how to swim or row were allowed to set sail , for only a passport was required , not a seaman ' s book .
We will be staffing ships with sailors who do not know how to swim , next .
Protection of juveniles of marine organisms
The next item is the report ( A5-0103 / 2000 ) by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries on the proposal for a Council regulation amending for the fifth time Regulation ( EC ) No 850 / 98 of 30 March 1998 for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures for the protection of juveniles of marine organisms ( COM ( 1999 ) 570 - C5-0041 / 2000 - 1999 / 023 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , Commissioner , before I begin my speech , I should like to highlight the unanimity in this House over the previous report so that the Commission reflects upon the reasons underlying the amendments we have tabled .
I hope that such unanimity leads them to reconsider their position on these two amendments that you said you would not adopt .
In any event , regarding the report we are currently debating , I should like to point out that the specific aim of these technical measures is to protect juveniles of marine organisms in order to reduce the threat to future yields .
As a result , alongside the Commission , we are aiming and endeavouring to protect fishery resources .
As you know , such measures include rules on the size of fishing gear , - and of meshes in particular - minimum allowable landing sizes , specific closed areas , protection of endangered species and so on .
The governing Regulation No 850 / 98 entered into force on 1 January of this year , but it must obviously continue to be periodically adapted to incorporate any new data and scientific innovations which may emerge .
In the case we are currently dealing with , we are discussing the fifth amendment which will enable the Commission to include various new measures that , in our opinion , are fully justified .
We are talking about nets for shrimp fishing , closed areas for fishing for sand eels and a review of the minimum size for certain bivalve molluscs and crustacea .
The Commission ' s proposed revisions and additions to Annex XII appear to be reasonable .
However , in the newly added case of deepwater rose shrimp , the carapace length of 24 millimetres seems excessive and could cause problems for fishermen . As a result , your rapporteur has introduced an amendment , which has already been adopted by the Committee on Fisheries , suggesting a compromise of setting this restriction at 22 millimetres .
This compromise , of course , has already been agreed with the Member States as being more appropriate .
We also feel that reducing the size of carpetshells from 40 to 38 millimetres , which has been widely called for by the sector , is a very positive step .
Therefore , it is now a question of adapting certain measures that will have a positive impact on economic and social spheres whilst strictly respecting scientific reports .
To sum up , it is essential that this regulation is kept up to date and that it is based on the best available scientific recommendations .
This will not be the last amendment made given that there will be a continuing need to adapt to specific conditions and to scientific reports that emerge in the future .
For this reason , with this amendment - which I think should be taken into consideration - we accept the overall proposal from the Commission and I hope that the Commission will in turn accept our amendment .
Mr President , Commissioner , as you can see , we are dealing thoroughly with the conservation of the fish population .
A short while ago , we were still dealing with measures within the sphere of NAFO . We will now depart from the subject of offshore fishing in the ocean and go into detail on fishing in EU waters .
It is not always just whales and seals which the public wants protected , and which attract , without doubt , greater attention from them .
No , we must also direct our attention now and then to less popular species which do not look as cute .
Who as a child has ever taken a carpetshell ( venerupis polastra ) in his arms as he would a soft toy ?
We certainly have a heart for children , but nothing concerns us quite so much as whether the juvenile fish are thriving .
We are therefore always prepared to take the necessary measures to protect them .
We must protect the periphyton of marine organisms now in order to preserve all species .
The regulation which we are dealing with is not a new one .
In fact , it is being amended again today for the fifth time .
In view of the developing populations , however , it must be amended time and time again in accordance with the requirements at a particular moment in time .
The mechanisms are improved , and new minimum sizes and fishing methods to protect species are established , as is deemed necessary by the fisherman on the spot .
In the end it is the theoretical expert who must give way to practice .
We do not have any objections to the amendments which the Commission is proposing , right down to the last detail .
They represent the latest technical and scientific developments .
I think the Commission likes to hear this , and it is also therefore appropriate to emphasise the work done by the experts dealing with this in the Commission .
Ultimately , Parliament has no interest in branding the Commission as its general scapegoat .
On the contrary , I would like to use this report to show that things can also be done differently .
The Committee on Fisheries is particularly benefiting from positive cooperation with the Commission and its services .
This cooperation is imperative for the preservation of sea populations .
Who , apart from the Commission , should monitor them and protect this natural resource ?
It is not always possible to fall back on artificially bred substitutes , which furthermore have been genetically manipulated wherever possible .
Does it sound healthy to you , for instance , when I say that it is possible to breed super salmon which grow eight times faster than before ?
Quantity instead of quality ?
The awareness that we need to do something to preserve a healthy variety of food and the willingness to take appropriate action are the needs of the moment .
We cannot go onto a fishing ground like the Huns , destroy it , and then simply move with the caravan onto the next one without taking responsibility for what is left behind .
If the matter is worth something to us , economically as well as ecologically , we must also take appropriate action on our own doorstep and not just in the North-West Atlantic .
These measures are a step in the right direction .
I do not think that tourists , on boat trips in the future , will be able to watch sand eels as well as seals being reared , but maybe , in a few years ' time , we will once again be able to say , with a clear conscience , that we can fish for this species because its preservation is guaranteed .
Mr President , we are now discussing the fifth amendment in two years to the regulation on technical measures for the conservation of juveniles of marine organisms .
This is a report of a technical nature which is of no interest whatsoever to the majority of MEPs .
However , perhaps their attitude would change a little if we were to explain exactly what it is about and how a report of this type can impact on the lives of the peoples of Europe .
For this reason , Commissioner , I shall refer specifically to the carpetshell , which is mentioned in paragraph 4 .
I shall refer to carpetshells as I am delighted that the Commission has reduced the minimum size for selling carpetshells from 40 to 38 millimetres .
Ladies and gentleman , this is a matter of 2 millimetres of carpetshell .
These millimetres are important because when the landing size was increased to the current 40 millimetres , this caused serious problems for women who harvest shellfish in my region , Galicia , as it did for the whole marketing sector and for consumers themselves .
In Galicia , shellfish gathering on foot - and this is how carpetshells are collected - is only done by women .
It would take a long and complicated explanation to say why .
The fact is that men gather shellfish at sea and using technology , albeit basic , and women gather shellfish on foot using a hoe .
Approximately 10 000 women in Galicia extract carpetshells , as shellfish are not fished but rather extracted .
These women work in a self-sacrificing way , working long days digging up hectares and hectares of beach in very difficult conditions for very low incomes . These women then see their income dwindle away as more than half their annual income is consumed by social security contributions .
Evidence seems to contradict any research the Commission used to increase the minimum landing size of these molluscs as , from 30-32 millimetres upwards , the carpetshell is mature and can reproduce .
Environmental conditions in densely populated areas where the carpetshell breeds and reproduces , such as in the estuaries of Galicia , do not allow them to reach the 40 millimetres required by the regulation which we are going to change today .
The truth is that 80 % of naturally produced carpetshells fall short of the current size requirement .
If shellfish gatherers were to wait for carpetshells to reach this size , mortality would be considerable and such loss would be due to environmental conditions and not to the women ' s actions .
In places where molluscs are most abundant - and I am thinking of the Ferrol and Arosa estuaries - the size of carpetshells does not exceed 36 or 38 millimetres .
Carpetshells measuring 40 millimetres are neither produced , sold nor consumed , simply because there are none .
If we wish to avoid encouraging non-compliance , one of the tasks of this or any other Parliament is to ensure that the rules reflect real conditions . In the case of harvesting shellfish on foot , such non-compliance leads to illegal fishing and to a black market subject to no health checks .
This House must realise that , by drawing up these technical measures , we are trying to protect juveniles , by allowing them to reach a certain size and breeding age , whilst at the same time trying to reduce unnecessary yields .
But for a regulation to fulfil its purpose , it must be adapted to real conditions .
As a result , not only will we benefit hard-working Galician shellfish gatherers but we will also benefit consumers as they will have access to a product that has passed all health checks . We will also encourage traders who will cease to feel persecuted by legislation that , if it were fully complied with , would lead to a shortage on the markets .
For this reason , the Group of the Party of European Socialists - which I represent - supports the proposed amendment to this regulation , in the same way as it supports the amendment from the Committee on Fisheries on the size of deepwater rose shrimp .
The only thing we hope , Commissioner , is that we do not have to review the regulation again within a year , because this would mean that both we and the European Commission had once again made a mistake in our calculations .
But , if need be , we will be here to amend it once again .
Mr President , I should like to express our support for Mr Varela ' s report and , at the same time , thank the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries for being so cooperative in the Committee .
Technical measures in order , especially , to protect juvenile fish- and thus secure the quantities which can be fished in the future - may be necessary .
Up until now , measures have consisted of reductions in quotas , minimum mesh sizes for nets and fishing bans in certain periods .
It stands to reason that such measures and arrangements should be modified in the light of new needs and knowledge .
What is new is that the fisheries in which sand eel are caught off the north-east coast of England and the east coast of Scotland are to become protected areas .
The reason for this is the low breeding rate of the kittiwake in recent years .
Denmark is the Member State which will be most affected by this limitation , which will reduce many fishermen ' s potential catches and , in that way , affect their livelihood .
As a matter of form , I would point out that Denmark has agreed to this technical measure for a limited period .
I should like to ask the Commission if the fishermen have been compensated for their losses or been directed to other likely fishing grounds .
Because bird colonies are affected by many factors in addition to fishing , I wish to propose that the Committee on Fisheries be included in future discussions about closures or limitations on quotas against the background of what is happening on land .
What I want is for us to have the opportunity to look in depth at the different factors of relevance to bird colonies and , in that connection , to discuss the bird colonies ' influence on catch sizes in relation to the principle set out under the common fisheries policy whereby the fishing industry is to be safeguarded through the optimum exploitation of marine resources .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work on today 's fisheries reports , both of which I am sure will receive the overwhelming acceptance of this House and both of which are extremely important in terms of protection and conservation of fishery resources .
I welcome the Commission 's updating of the regulation on the protection of juveniles .
We all know that sustainable development is a learning process and we must be able to update and adapt existing legislation to protect our fish stocks .
I have paid particular attention to scientific advice which indicates the requirement for the closure of fisheries for sand eels off the north-east coast of England and the east coast of Scotland .
This does not just concern the maintenance of sand eel stocks themselves , but the preservation of the entire ecosystem in these localities .
The low breeding rate of the kittiwake that Mr Busk referred to is of particular concern .
I am also happy to note , as Mr Busk confirmed , that Denmark as a Member State principally concerned with sand eel fishery has accepted these measures .
However , while these measures will hopefully contribute to improving the state of fishery resources , I am concerned that the Commission has not got it right in certain other areas : for example , in the recent report on the implementation of MAGPs and the drastic cuts that it calls for in some fleets which is of grave concern to Scots and other fishermen .
I would like to ask the Commission if they have really looked at whether cutting fleet sizes actually improves the conservation of fisheries .
I quote from the Commission 's own document which says : " The Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries found no evidence that stocks had , in general , deteriorated or improved since the adoption of MAGP4 . "
Surely we must question the effectiveness of MAGPs as a conservation measure .
The Commission also failed to take into account how fleet sizes are reduced .
I call for a more thorough investigation by the Commission into this .
In those states which have , on paper at least , been complying with MAGPs such as Spain and Portugal , what has happened to the vessels which are removed from the register ?
How many would be decommissioned ?
How many were scrapped ?
How many were sunk and so on ?
How many were simply transferred to another flag ?
How many vessels continue to fish either here in the Community or elsewhere under what is , in many cases , a flag of convenience ?
The Commission must get conservation measures right , but I am not convinced that MAGPs are the way to do that .
They can be circumvented easily and they do not fully take into account national measures such as days at sea .
How can the Commission reconcile this with the fact that its own report says , and I quote again : " It could be argued that a reduction in activity would have a more direct impact on the exploitation rates than a reduction in capacity . "
I hope that the Commission will review its position and not impose swingeing cuts on our fleets .
In Scotland , the proposed cuts would cost hundreds of jobs in particularly fragile rural areas .
The new proposals to cut fleets will , ironically , fall mainly on the Scottish pelagic fleet where MAGP targets have actually been met through control measures .
I welcome today 's reports on this agenda , but I hope the Commission will think again when it comes to the interrelation between fleet sizes and other conservation measures .
We have got to get this right so that in the long run fish stocks in Europe are conserved , thereby ensuring the continuing viability of our fisheries communities .
Mr President , I should like to express my gratitude for the fact that my suggestions were taken into account when this report was drawn up and , in particular , the recommendation that the size of deepwater rose shrimps be set at 22 millimetres rather than at the 24 millimetres proposed by the Commission .
Although I think that the Commission ' s proposal is not unreasonable , we have to bear in mind that the size limit is being set for the first time and that this species is an important part of the catches of certain fleets in southern Spain and Portugal where , until now , they have been fishing for shrimps without any size restrictions .
In a species that does not grow very large , 2 millimetres is a great deal when trying to determine whether the profitability of some very small-scale fisheries will be increased or decreased . As I said , such fisheries are not used to fishing with minimum size restrictions .
What is more , Portugal , the other Member State involved , wanted this minimum size to be even smaller . As a result , I feel that the compromise reached is acceptable and to be commended .
I should like to thank the Commission for being so prepared to listen and to accept both suggestions from this House as well as from the Council , which were along the same lines .
I am also especially interested in the Commission ' s proposal on the temporary halt on sand eel fishing in Scottish and English waters .
I must also welcome the fact that Denmark , the country most dependent on fisheries , has not raised any major objections to this measure . Their attitude should enable us to progress towards a more realistic management system of fishery resources used for industrial purposes .
I have often expressed my doubts about the idea that we should maintain large fleets in depleted ecosystems , such as those of the Community , which means that fish stocks are being destroyed in order to produce fish meal or oil .
In the European Parliament Resolution of June 1998 on this type of fishing , which was based on a report drawn up by Mr Kindermann , it was highlighted that 60 % of Community yields in the North Sea , Skagerrat and Kattegat are intended for this type of industrial use .
Reports from the FAO and environmental organisations estimate that 70 % of fisheries production is used to this end and say this is contributing to the destruction of stocks on a worldwide scale .
Evidently , these figures also highlight the high socio-economic dependency of some Community regions on such activity .
For this reason , while I have no desire whatsoever to eliminate this activity completely , it may be an opportune moment to debate the possibility of achieving a greater balance , taking account of the various fleets ' objectives in the use of resources . Eventually , this new balance should be borne in mind when distributing Community funds for structural measures as well as administrative and market policy measures .
Mr President , firstly , can I congratulate the rapporteur and the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries on his report on the revision of the regulations on the conservation of fishery resources and technical measures for the protection of juvenile marine organisms .
This report , whose name probably causes more confusion than clarity amongst those people who have not been following , the subject is in fact a number of separate amendments updating the original regulation .
Firstly , with regard to separator trawls or nets with sorting grids used in shrimp fisheries ; secondly , the revision of minimum sizes for a number of bivalve molluscs and crustaceans ; and thirdly , with respect to the establishment of a closed area for fishing for sand eels off the north-east coast of England and the east coast of Scotland .
It is on the last proposal that I primarily wish to speak .
This is a very good example of the eco-system approach to fisheries : taking action for environmental reasons beyond those applying strictly for fish stock levels .
In 1998 , a report by the Working Group on Eco-System Effects of Fishing Activities of the International Council for Exploration of the Seas identified for the first time that sea birds , specifically the kittiwake , which has been experiencing low breeding success over recent years , were in fact in competition with the industrial fleet , primarily Danish operators fishing for sand eels off the East coast of Scotland and England .
The United Kingdom requested the Commission to submit an appropriate proposal in the light of that report and the United Kingdom made initial approaches to the Danish government to encourage their support for the initiative .
It was suggested that a closed season for sand eel fishing should be introduced between April and August when the breeding birds were most dependent on sand eels for food .
The ICES subsequently looked at the science again and suggested a closed area stretching from mid-Northumberland northwards to include the Grampian coast .
This closed area is the one proposed by the Commission in December as part of the annual TAC Regulation and adopted by the Council .
These measures have , I understand , already been accepted in principle by the key parties involved .
I therefore hope the Council will be able , after this debate , to reach a speedy agreement .
It is important for the conservation of sea birds .
It is important for us to demonstrate our concern in this area .
Mr President , this is an important subject .
It is highly technical and not easily understood by the public .
A gradual improvement in the regulations will contribute in the long term to the future health of the marine environment for the generations that will come after us .
We can improve our resources .
We are not self-sufficient in fish in the Union , only 50 % self-sufficient .
With good conservation and better practices , we could give a better living to more people involved in fishing .
We could increase by something like EUR 4 000 million the value of the fish landed in the European Union if we could apply a little bit more care over a period of time to our fishing activities .
This is highly technical .
It is important that we do the research , keep up the revision and gradually convince people that the European Commission is not a hostile organisation sent from afar to persecute fishermen and prevent them from making a living .
We should not use occasions like this to make inflammatory statements about the necessity of reducing the size of fleets that are involved , because of the reduction in stocks , because of the high price of fish arising out of its scarcity in the European Union and the attraction of this type of food for health reasons .
There is a great urge to go out and catch more and more of it .
People complain about the Multi-Annual Guidance Programme and say it is not working .
Surely , a transport manager will not want to keep ten buses on the road if one bus will transport the passengers available .
The same applies to trains or trucks .
So why do we get this pressure from the fishing communities to maintain large expensive fleets if , in fact , the fish are not there and we are bound by quotas ?
If the quotas are being observed , surely it is in the interest of the fishing communities of the regions and the individuals involved to go out and catch these fish with the smallest possible number of fishing vessels .
Surely it contributes more to regional and national economic planning to do that .
Do not swallow this foolish talk that we want to keep boats and that somehow or other this will keep people in jobs if the fish are not there .
There were banner headlines just because the Commission published , a few days ago , a report which indicated that some fleets would have to be reduced .
Those reports spread over from Scotland to Ireland and the papers were full of massive reductions in the number of people employed .
There is no need for it .
Let us sit down , come to the Fisheries Committee , listen to the officials , listen to the researchers and work out a sensible solution to the problems instead of trying to create an atmosphere of hostility .
We have one programme broadcast in Ireland that deals with the sea .
It is called " Seascapes " .
The night before we had the Maastricht Referendum , they upped their tone and the temperature of their anti-European broadcasting , which goes on continuously , in an effort to ingratiate themselves with fishing communities who have the impression that somehow or another the European Commission is there to damage their interests .
Let us , as responsible public representatives , try to present the truth to our people instead of trying to mislead them and excite them and frighten them .
Mr McCartin appeared with his last remarks to be accusing honourable Members of this House of misleading the public .
I hope that was not true .
In case it was , then I suggest that he ought to be supplied with a map of the Scottish fishing areas to see just why it is so important to a lot of places where people can take boats out from .
Mr McCartin is far too polite to make any such accusation .
May I thank Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna for this excellent report , he is an acknowledged expert on this subject - and also thank the honourable Members who have spoken on this debate and expressed their thanks for the work of the Commission .
I am very happy to inform honourable Members that the Commission can agree to the amendments that have been put forward .
It appears to me to be an excellent example of the cooperation between our two institutions on this important issue of conservation .
Apart from this , the report fully supports the Commission proposal ; and therefore I feel that I need not take up any more of your valuable time .
That concludes the debate .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution ) EXPLANATION OF VOTE
Mr President , as representative of the Pensioners ' Party I voted for the Varela report .
It is not the first time that I have intervened on behalf of young fish , but I do so because I would like them to have the chance to grow old and , if possible , become pensioners .
I have already received satisfied feedback , not only from fish , but also from human pensioners , for it is right to protect the young , even if they are only fish , as is the case here .
It is true that this could cause problems for a few fishermen who can no longer catch such large numbers of fish , but I am sure that the Commission will find a way to compensate the fishermen whose income will fall as a result of their observance of this directive .
I would like to thank the House for its patience in listening to my explanations of votes .
Mr President , I should just like to say that I hope the Conference of Presidents will take serious note of the numbers - or rather lack of numbers - of Members in the Chamber voting on that very important report .
Mr President , I would like to draw to the attention of Parliament ' s administration the fact that the Members ' coffee bar has been occupied .
There are fifteen people there in military uniform who have taken over one end of the coffee bar and are holding some kind of meeting there .
I should like Parliament ' s administration to take immediate steps to put an end to this occupation , so that Members can have the use of both ends of their coffee bar .
You are right , the Members Bar is only for the use of Members .
We will ensure that is enforced .
This matter has already been drawn to the attention of the Quaestors .
Insurance
The next item is the report ( A5-0104 / 2000 ) by Mr Langen on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the operation of Commission Regulation No 3932 / 92 concerning the application of Article 81 ( ex-Article 85 ) , Paragraph 3 , of the Treaty to certain categories of agreements , decisions and concerted practices in the field of insurance ( COM ( 1999 ) 192 - C5.0254 / 1999 - 1999 / 2183 ( COS ) )


Mr President , this time the subject at the close of the sitting is not fisheries , but competition policy .
We have discussed this subject in great depth . It has not been too controversial , so it is also possible to discuss it at the end of such a sitting .
Since I am often here on Fridays anyway , I personally do not find this at all difficult .
The subject is exemption regulations , which are in force for the European insurance industry .
You all know that competition law has been one of the most important objectives of the European Union - and therefore of the European Commission - since the founding Treaties came into existence .
The general aim of competition law is to ensure that there is competition in the European Internal Market .
This serves consumers , promotes technical progress , and prevents monopolies and agreements .
Therefore , the rules on this are strict .
The Commission can and must take action in accordance with the rules , which have three different spheres of application : agreements or cartel agreements which are generally prohibited , abuse of a dominant market position , and public subsidies .
Over the past few years , the Commission , on all these issues , has repeatedly shown that it takes the provisions of the Treaties very seriously .
We will deal with the first of these areas today .
The general prohibition of cartel agreements is lifted under certain conditions ; these are the exemption regulations .
Price fixing , restrictions on , or control of , production , dividing up markets , application of different prerequisites for the same services and the extra provisions of the Treaties , which often vary tremendously in Europe and exclude different services , are incompatible with the laws , even in the areas where exemption regulations apply .
Under Article 81 ( 3 ) , exemption regulations only apply - please listen carefully - when consumers receive an appropriate share of the benefit generated and no unnecessary restrictions ruling out competition are imposed .
A regulation of this kind has existed in the field of insurance since 1992 , and expires in 2003 .
The Commission is required to submit a situation report every six years . The present report is available .
The Block Exemption Regulation for the insurance industry lays down and permits common rules governing agreement on the calculation of premiums , the stipulation of policy conditions , joint coverage of certain types of risk , and safety precautions .
To date , agreements on claims settlement and registers of aggravated risks have not been included .
I hope that when the Rothley report on the harmonisation of civil liability insurance in respect of the use of motor vehicles is adopted after the third reading on Monday , the Commission can , and will , also incorporate - on account of the harmonised legal basis - the settlement of claims into this future exemption regulation .
It will then be much easier for European Union citizens , in future , to be able to settle claims abroad , including in EU Member States , with their own insurers , safe in the knowledge that these agreements are also then guaranteed by the Commission within the framework of the exemption regulation .
Parliament has made unanimous demands on the Commission in its proposal . These should be taken into consideration by the Commission when examining the proposal .
This concerns , firstly , the definition of market share in a globalised market , followed by detailed questions about the lead insurer , for whom this might not apply .
When there is one large and 20 small insurers , then the large one may not have more than 10 per cent of the market share for the exemption agreement to be accepted .
Whether this is correct or not is doubtful .
This concerns matters which are connected with the possibility of termination .
We want the notice period for an insurance company to be 6 months and not 12 , and we want to bring about a harmonised basis for European standards in the settlement of claims .
All in all , I can say that Parliament is satisfied with this interim report and that it expects the Commission to make continuous progress on this matter and achieve an end result for the insurance industry within the framework of the exemption regulations in force , all of which expire in 2002 and 2003 , including for other areas .
With this in mind , I would urge you to give your assent . Thank you very much .
Affairs and the Internal Market .
I would particularly like to express my own gratitude to Mr Langen for his report and for the great clarity with which , in writing and in his presentation today , he has brought to our attention what this is all about .
I am glad to say that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is in substantial agreement with Mr Langen and finds no legal obstacles to this bloc exemption regulation .
As Members of the House will know , the bloc exemption creates exemptions from normal competition law , of the kind Mr Langen mentioned , in relation to the calculation of premiums where net premiums may be jointly calculated by insurers .
Secondly , in the establishment of standard policy conditions for direct insurance and common models illustrating profits from insurance policies involving an element of capitalisation .
It also creates an exemption to make possible co-insurance , common coverage of certain risks and , finally , the coordination of technical specifications for safety equipment and procedures .
The Commission says in its report that it is disappointed that the insurance industry has not taken up as much of that as it might have done .
These are all areas where it seems clear that there is a genuine public interest in not insisting on the strictest rigours of competition law .
What that draws to our attention , in a philosophical way , is that even in a competitive market , insurance is inherently a collective activity in which people share risks among themselves .
If I might make a remark about a currently controversial topic in my own country , I think it is a pity to see such vigorous efforts being made to de-mutualise excellent old mutual assurance companies which fully express the collective aspect of insurance , and I am sad to think of a raid being made on the Standard Life in this way .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Langen , and all those who have contributed to this draft resolution on the Commission 's report on the operation of the insurance block exemption regulation .
The Commission welcomes the draft resolution , not only for its overall support concerning the Commission 's application of the regulation , but also for the specific comments which it contains on how the regulation can be improved .
A brief word of background about the regulation in question is perhaps in order .
Before 1992 , the competition directorate-general of the Commission was submerged by literally hundreds of notifications of agreements in the insurance field , many of which raised similar issues and were eligible for an exemption under Article 81 ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
Rather than adopting hundreds of individual exemption decisions , the Commission adopted in 1992 a block exemption regulation granting exemption , with conditions , to agreements between insurance undertakings in four categories : agreements concerning the joint calculation of risk premiums , those concerning standard policy conditions , co-insurance and reinsurance , pooling arrangements and agreements adopting standards for safety equipment .
The Council Regulation of 1991 enabling the Commission to adopt an insurance block exemption regulation also authorised the inclusion of two further areas which the Commission , however , decided not to include in its regulation for lack of experience in those areas , namely agreements on claims settlement and agreements on registers of aggravated risk .
Following the adoption of the Block Exemption Regulation in 1992 , most of the notifications on the Commission 's table were withdrawn , but some were not , as the notifying parties considered that the regulation did not provide total clarity as to whether their agreements were eligible for exemption .
Most of these notifications concerned insurance pools .
The current regulation expires on 31 March 2003 and a new regulation will be necessary .
The future regulation should build on these strengths and remedy any weaknesses in the existing one .
The report produced by the Commission on 12 May 1999 , which it was pursuant to Article 8 of the Council enabling regulation , was the first step in the process leading to the adoption of a new regulation .
It summarises in detail the experience of the Commission in applying the regulation and the various problems it has identified .
It does not , however , contain precise proposals for the future regulation .
These will only be decided upon after the end of the consultation process .
Considerable account will be taken of Parliament 's resolution in this process .
Other interested parties , including professional insurance bodies and consumer organisations , will also be consulted .
The next step in the consultation will be a hearing organised by the Commission on 28 June of this year for an exchange of views between all those who have submitted comments on the report on the regulation .
This hearing responds in part to the call in the draft resolution for an informative debate on the regulation .
It is clear that the area in which most improvement to the regulation is needed is that of pools .
Significant change will be necessary here , but key questions exist in all the other areas .
The comments and suggestions contained in the draft resolution , for which I thank Parliament , are all relevant and interesting in this context , although each of them will have to be analysed individually and on its merits .
May I just respond at this stage to two issues of a similar nature raised by both Mr Langen and Mr Meijer , and that is the question whether the Commission accepts the draft opinion 's recommendation that agreements on claims settlement should be included in the future block exemption regulation .
The Commission has an open mind at this stage as to whether agreements on claim settlement and agreements on registers of aggravated risks should be covered by the future regulation .
It takes good note of the fact that the draft opinion recommends the inclusion of agreements and on claims settlement .
The conclusion of the draft resolution that the regulation has been successful overall , but that a moderate enhancement is needed , is one that the Commission entirely shares .
The draft resolution is a most helpful contribution to this end and the Commission will keep Parliament fully informed and consulted on the process of revising the regulation .
Mr President , I have , of course , voted for Mr Langen ' s excellent report , and I congratulate him on his work and also on his report .
Both the public and ourselves are obviously pleased with the simplifications he has explained so clearly .
I would like for this to be the case in other areas as well .
You know that I am a great advocate of Parliament ' s seat in Strasbourg and I have also regretted all the fuss again made this morning by those who wanted to prevent us from voting today , because they simply want to ruin the Friday sittings in Strasbourg and for everything to be concentrated in Brussels . And these centralists are also , of course , setting their sights on Luxembourg - as a by-product so to speak - for Parliament ' s Secretariat .
Certainly , I must also say that this does not always make things easy for France to defend Strasbourg as a parliamentary seat .
One of my groups of visitors found this out again on their way here this morning .
Their bus was stopped by the French police under the pretext that the driver would not have a French driving licence .
This particular company has transported thousands of my visitors here in the past ten years .
What is going on here then ?
I must say that these visitors wonder , naturally , whether this is what Europe is all about .
Moreover , the French police do not seem to have heard of credit cards yet .
The visitors had to pool their French francs together to pay the horrendous FRF 5 000 fine .
This cannot be right , Mr President !
I will , of course , check ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I am afraid I must cut you off , Mrs Lulling .
Explanations of vote must refer to the subject of the debate .
I gave you some leeway as you are such a distinguished Member of the House but I must cut you off there .
Mr President , last Sunday in Bergamo , my native town , I held a meeting on insurance and compensation for damages , which Mr Langen discussed in his report .
A young 20-year old , who had , sadly , suffered a serious road accident , rose to his feet and said : " I have suffered this serious road accident but I am , so to speak , content because I have received EUR 500 000 from the insurance company " .
Another person present at the meeting , who was about 40 years of age , said : " I suffered exactly the same road accident , but I only received EUR 200 000 .
" An older man who was about 60 added : " I only received EUR 20 000 " .
Another man who was about 70 years old said : " I suffered the same accident with the same results , and I was given EUR 1 000 " .
An elderly 80-year old pensioner , who could not even get out of his chair because he was so disabled , said : " I did not receive anything at all from the insurance " . There you have it .
Insurance companies consider that the elderly are worthless .
But I say that the elderly are worth more .
I therefore call for measures to be included in the regulation that will put a stop to this injustice .
Mr President , I just wanted to ask one question .
I did not notice Mrs Buitenweg this morning and I would like to apologise to her for that .
I just wanted to ask whether Mrs van der Laan is here or have I missed her as well ?
I will take that as an interesting intervention .
Adjournment of the session
I declare adjourned the session of the European Parliament .
( The sitting closed at 11.30 a.m. )
Before we start with the order of business , there are still a number of points of order .
Mr President , with regret I have to inform the House of the arrest yesterday in Moscow of Vladimir Alexandrovich Gusinsky , chief executive of the Most-Media group of television , radio and newspaper outlets .
Mr Gusinsky is a leading Russian community leader , being chairman of the Russian Jewish Congress and deputy chairman of the World Jewish Congress .
This morning he is in what is known as a general purpose cell in Butyrsky prison where conditions are such that they must be left to your imagination .
Mr Gusinsky 's media activities were the only ones permitted to criticise Mr Putin and his government .
His independent television is the only one that questions the behaviour of Russian troops in Chechnya .
His programme Dolls , based on Britain 's Spitting Image , satirises the President , something which supposedly causes him great irritation .
His radio station Moscow Echo was selected by President Clinton a few days ago for the only substantive interview that he gave to a Russian outlet .
On 11 May Mr Gusinsky 's places of work were raided by so-called tax police - men in ski masks and camouflage outfits carrying Kalashnikov rifles .
There are few Russians who do not see a connection between Gusinsky 's criticisms and the heavy-handed treatment now being meted out to him .
Now we have this arrest and Mr Putin says he knows nothing about it .
This latest event leaves Russia teetering on the brink .
Either Mr Putin backs down and releases Mr Gusinsky , or we shall have to conclude that Russia 's brave attempt to establish a free press has turned out a failure and their democracy an illusion .
The consequences of this will be devastating .
It will mean goodbye Council of Europe , goodbye Partnership for Peace , farewell Tacis and a warm welcome to a new arms race .
The European Parliament must do what it can to avert this catastrophe .
I ask you , Mr President , to confer with your colleagues so that the whole range of EU-Russia relations can be investigated , debated and our influence brought to bear not least on the turbulent Mr Putin , who is putting us all in danger .
Thank you .
As you can hear from the applause , the House has taken note of your comment .
- ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to bring up another point .
Not only yesterday , but also a few months ago , every month really , permits are granted to the presidency or other nationalities to organise receptions .
These then degenerate into all-out bingeing sessions , at which point the cameras start to roll .
I think , Mr President , that that is unworthy of Parliament .
What I would like to ask through you is that these kinds of festivity be regulated properly .
I think that we can no longer afford this kind of behaviour .
I am surprised that permission is granted for this kind of thing , because my request to set up an exhibition for the handicapped , organised by myself , was turned down last week by the same College of Quaestors .
My request was looked upon critically , whereas these kinds of party , where we are portrayed as vultures , are simply tolerated .
I would ask you to raise this matter with the College of Quaestors in order to put a stop to this , as this is beneath us all .
Madam , please be so kind as to file your concern in writing with the Quaestors , who will then take the necessary steps .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I have been studying yesterday ' s Minutes and I have noted that Elmar Brok , MEP , has not mentioned that there might be grounds for his disqualification when voting on the report on digital television , although he has indicated in the register containing information on Members ' secondary occupations that he is senior vice-president in a company called ' Media Developments Bertelsmann ' .
In my opinion , this matter should be discussed in Parliament .
I have not quite understood the honourable member .
Are you saying that he did or did not vote ?
According to the translation , he did not vote and if he did not vote on a matter which is pertinent , then he behaved correctly .
Mr President , I have been reading the Minutes and it does not say here that he would not have voted .
We shall clarify the matter .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , I have taken the floor simply to tell you that I have been in contact with Mr Murphy , the rapporteur of this report , and we have agreed that it would be better to proceed to the vote without debating the report .
What you have suggested is most unusual , because normally this is decided when the order of business is adopted .
If reports have been entered on the order of business with a debate then , having consulted the Rules of Procedure , I see no way of removing them from the order of business .
I suggest that we keep to the chosen procedure with debate .
I now have another statement to make .
Yesterday Mr Lannoye moved to ...
( Interruption by Mr Brok )
Mr Brok , we have moved on to another point .
If it is about what the honourable member said earlier , I shall gladly give you the floor afterwards so that you can make a personal statement .
Now if you would be so kind as to take your seat , that would ease the tension somewhat .
Yesterday Mr Lannoye moved to table the motion by 185 members to set up a temporary committee of inquiry into ECHELON in accordance with Rule 151 of the Rules of Procedure , which was rejected by a majority at the Conference of Presidents ' meeting on 13 April , for a resolution by Parliament .
The President has informed me that the Conference of Presidents is due to discuss the question of setting up a temporary committee again tomorrow .
I am sure the honourable member agrees that it makes sense to wait for the results of this discussion before tabling the matter before plenary .
It makes no material difference , a vote will he held anyway , the question is merely whether it will be during this plenary session or the next .
Mr President , I do not know if the problem lies in the wording , but this does not appear to answer the question I was asking .
In fact , on tomorrow ' s agenda , the Conference of Presidents has tabled its proposal for the establishment of a temporary committee , not a committee of inquiry .
This , however , is not the issue : what I am asking for is a vote on the decision by the Conference of Presidents , with the motion that there should not be a committee of inquiry .
There is another motion , but that is not it .
You have therefore not answered my question .
I believe I have because , as far as the procedure is concerned , we have two options .
First , we can vote separately on the question of setting up a temporary committee and the question of setting up a committee of inquiry .
We can do that separately and at different times .
But the Rules of Procedure do not require us to proceed in this way .
The motion , therefore , is to vote on both questions jointly as a package and that is our second option .
I cannot see that it will prejudice the idea of a committee of inquiry , which is what you want , if we merge the votes and the whole issue takes another three weeks .
It makes no material difference ; at some point the House will have to state its view .
I repeat : it would be possible , but the President suggests that we proceed differently and I suggest likewise to you now .
Mr President , I think that it is quite reasonable to propose two votes at the same time , but I insist that there should be two votes : firstly , a vote on the principle of establishing a committee of inquiry , which was rejected by the Conference of Presidents , and there may have to be a second vote if agreement is reached on establishing a temporary committee , which , I must point out , serves a quite different purpose .
These are two different problems and a close look at the Rules of Procedure will show that Rule 151 does not provide for a temporary committee : it only mentions a committee of inquiry .
I feel that the plenary is within its rights to state its opinion on the position adopted by the Conference of Presidents .
Mr Lannoye , that goes without saying !
The Rules of Procedure are crystal clear : if the requisite number of signatures is collected , then a vote must be held in plenary following the decision of the Conference of Presidents , otherwise it would mean that the Conference of Presidents decides whether or not to set up a committee of inquiry rather than plenary .
And , of course , that is not how it works .
There may be one or two people in the Conference of Presidents who believe that it is , but they are labouring under a misapprehension !
( Heckling , interjection by Mr Poettering ) ) Mr Poettering says no-one believes that and so your problem is solved !
Mr President , I have taken the floor in order to support the request and I am satisfied with your response .
At last , tomorrow afternoon , the Conference will give a response to this request which has been signed by so many Members .
I have taken note of the honourable member ' s comment .
Decision on urgent procedure
The next item is the vote on the motion for urgent procedure with regard to the proposal for a Council Regulation [ COM ( 1999 ) 576 - C5-0280 / 1999 - 1999 / 0236 ( CNS ) ] amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1251 / 1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops to include flax and hemp grown for fibre and the proposal for a Council Regulation [ COM ( 1999 ) 576 - C5-0281 / 1999 - 1999 / 0237 ( CNS ) ] on the common organisation of the market in flax and hemp grown for fibre .
These proposals were addressed in Mrs Schierhuber ' s report , on which the final vote on 16 May was postponed in accordance with Rule 69 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The matter was referred back to committee .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has the floor for the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture , as the committee responsible .
.
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as Parliament and the Commission are concerned , this regulation raises three issues : first , how to prevent abuse of the aid scheme for flax and hemp , because there have been very significant irregularities under the regulation in the past ; secondly , how to ensure that flax and hemp , both of which are impressive , renewable raw materials with a strong ecological and social impact , can continue to be cultivated in the EU .

And thirdly , we need to protect , consolidate and promote the burgeoning processing industry in this area , an industry producing smart , ecologically valuable , biological degradable products .
So we agree on the objectives , but we do not agree on how to achieve them , which is why Parliament has postponed the final vote on this report and is currently negotiating with the Commission .
Considerable progress has been made towards consensus and a compromise has been reached on numerous points .
We met again yesterday but did not finish editing the compromises and proposed compromises .
This motion for urgency tabled by the Council or the presidency is therefore premature and we propose therefore that it be rejected for the time being .
We assume that we will have reached a compromise which can be tabled by July and plenary will then be able to vote on it in July .
I should like to reiterate my express thanks in this connection to the Commission and Commissioner Fischler , who has been most cooperative in this matter .
I hope that we shall also be able to take account in this proposal of the fact that the Commission is keen for us to table and complete this procedure this year .
Thank you .
The chairman of the Committee on Agriculture has tabled a procedural motion .
According to the Rules of Procedure , one member may speak for and one member may speak against the motion .
Mrs Schierhuber has asked to speak .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . I agree wholeheartedly with the motion tabled by the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture .
He has outlined the matter quite clearly .
I , for my part as rapporteur , should like expressly to thank the Commission for its willingness to negotiate .
As you know , we still have no co-decision in agriculture , hence the two informal meetings , both of which lasted over an hour .
We reached a consensus on a great many points and the Commission too was willing to compromise .
Unfortunately , we have no written documents on which we can really vote and pass resolutions , which is why I support the motion to reject urgency for the time being .
Mr President , allow me a brief personal comment .
My professional activities are entered in the presidents ' register in accordance with the rules of the European Parliament and I have conducted myself over the last eight years on that basis .
I have never taken any parliamentary action on matters which bear directly on my corporate interests and have refrained from voting on such matters , despite the fact that I am not obliged to do so .
For the rest , there has been no occasion on which my voting conduct might be interpreted as representing indirect interests or on which I have departed from the opinion of my group .
I therefore refute what Mr Seppänen has said .
President .
Mr Korakas on a point of order .
Mr President , we shall shortly be debating Mrs Lalumière ' s motion for a resolution on European security and defence .
It is an important proposal and we each have an opinion on it ; however , I think that , if we are to hold a proper debate on this important issue , we should have received the amendments in time .
We requested the amendments this morning between 8 and 8.30 and they were not available .
This means that , when the time comes to vote on these amendments , we shall be unable to debate them first .
Because this also happens with other debates , I should like to ask for measures to be taken so that we receive amendments in time , before reports are debated in plenary .
Our services tell me that the honourable member is right and that there was a delay in distributing the documents because the deadline was set so late .
But as we are not due to vote until Thursday , I think that there is some justification for holding the debate nonetheless .
But basically you are right and we shall make an effort to distribute the documents earlier in future .
European political parties
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
( B5-0488 / 00 ) by Mr Poettering on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mr Barón Crespo on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Mr Cox on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reform Party and Mr Lannoye on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to the Commission on European political parties ;
( B5-0494 / 00 ) by Mr Pasqua on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group to the Commission on political parties at European level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to submit seven considerations on this important issue .
First : in 1991 , the European heads of state and government expressly recognised the importance of European political parties in Article 138a of the Treaty of Amsterdam , guided by the idea that full-blown democracy in the European Union cannot be achieved without solidly-funded European political parties set on a reliable legal basis .
Secondly : next year will mark the tenth year without any material progress with the legal status of European political parties or life breathed into the Treaty .
The group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats deeply regrets this .
Thirdly : we would remind the House of the important preliminary work carried out in the Tsatsos report adopted in 1996 and the Kuhne report of 13 April 2000 .
Other reports by the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control , the most recent being the Ferber report , have also indicated the urgent need for a European party statute and for this matter to be regulated .
Fourthly : we therefore welcome the fact that the Commission is prepared to advocate an addendum to Article 191 of the EC Treaty on European political parties and thank President Prodi , Commissioner Barnier and the College as a whole for treating this concern with the importance which it deserves .
It is this which will enable a solution to be found .
We hope that the wording selected will allow the Commission to finalise a European party statute quickly , not set the majority requirements in the Council too high and respect full co-decision for the European Parliament .
Fifthly : we also welcome the fact that the European Commission obviously also confirms the possibility , if my information is correct , of proceeding on the basis of Article 308 .
The possibilities offered by Article 308 must be used if and insofar as the Treaty is not supplemented .
Nonetheless , we take the firm view that supplementing the Treaty is the best way forward .
Sixthly : the chairmen of the four largest groups in the European Parliament , i.e. the group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , the Group of the Party of European Socialists , the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reform Party and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance submitted a proposal for the core elements of a European party statute several months ago , in agreement with the chairmen of the party federations and the Commission , thereby demonstrating that this problem should and could be solved within a broad political consensus .
We are confident that other groups which do not yet have their own European party can be included in this consensus .
Seventh and lastly : we are also aware that , until such time as a European party statute enters into force , we need transitional rules regulating and limiting support for European political parties by groups in the European Parliament and we are prepared to take a broad initiative here which crosses the group divide .
We want to promote the emancipation of European political parties from the groups still further and open up future prospects for them and our main concern is to see European political parties become a major vehicle for European political work .
We want to give them this opportunity and we want , above all , to ensure that , in all aspects of support for European political parties , we have a transparent situation and clear legal conditions which can be presented as such to the public .
This will serve the credibility not only of the parties but also of the European Union and the European Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , I agree with the words of chairman Poettering on this joint initiative and , if you will allow me , I would like first of all to remind you that ten years ago we achieved jointly - on that occasion we were the Christian Democratic Party , the Liberals and the Socialists - the inclusion in the Treaty of Maastricht of the article recognising the personality of the political parties .
It fell to me at that time to negotiate its inclusion with President of the Council Lubbers and I would like to pay tribute to him because I believe that it was an important step .
We could have chosen to pose the question in reverse , that is to say , why , when the Commission had the monopoly on initiative for ten years , did it not take any step to regulate such an important issue ? However , we are taking a constructive view .
We want to resolve this problem which is not just a question of a legal vacuum but a constitutional problem for the European Union .
The current situation is becoming increasingly complicated .
It was traditionally believed in the media that it was necessary to go ' lobbying ' in Brussels , to behave like a pressure group .
We managed to have the political parties recognised . In our countries they are a fundamental pillar of democracy .
Nevertheless , in ten years , no progress has been made and we truly find ourselves in an increasingly difficult situation .
We could go so far as to say that at least 75 % of the Members of this House are affiliated to organisations which are not clandestine , certainly , but do not have legal status , and demands are continually being made of us , which we try to respect and comply with , by the Court of Auditors , a key institution within the European Union , but which must not be the institution which in reality establishes the legal framework .
We believe that it is absolutely essential , in order to ensure that it is the democracy of the people and not the power of money , which prevails in the Union , that the Commission should exercise its power of initiative responsibly at the moment .
We have made certain useful suggestions so that we may find our way out of a situation which is not only unsatisfactory but also negative for the development of democracy in Europe .
Mr President , the essentials have been covered , but I should like to reiterate the point that the right to propose legislation rests with the Commission .
We have taken an initiative across the various political groups , which we presented in February to President Prodi .
As a matter of law there has been a reference to political parties in the Treaty for more than seven years now .
It states that the parties are a factor for integration , they contribute to the formation of European awareness and are a vital element in the democratic life of the Union and the political debate of the Union .
However , like several of the rather aspirational articles in the Treaties , Article 191 , the article referred to , lacks a certain operational content .
The question is : can the Commission take an initiative which breathes life and operational content into the aspirations of Article 191 ?
That really is what the debate is about in this House today .
I share the concern of other speakers that the reports of the Court of Auditors - which , by the way , we fully anticipated in this House several years ago with the report of Professor Tsatsos , which pointed out the urgent necessity of validating parties in statutory terms - adds a new urgency .
The institutions must be able to deliver accountability and transparency .
This House does not have the right to draft legislation : that is the exclusive preserve of the Commission .
We are asking for your assistance to ensure that this vital element , as the Treaty states , in the democratic life and political debate of the Union is validated by statute .
Mr President , my Group has also been involved in submitting this motion to the Commission , simply on the basis that we are creating a Europe that is undergoing integration , but it is not at all clear that our citizens will be able to have a say in this merging Europe and keep pace with the advance of integration .
I do not want to say that the political parties are the only , or even necessarily , the most important channel whereby the public can have a say in matters that currently affect society , but they play a part , and the status of the European parties must be defined without delay .
Just as my colleagues have said , these parties must be brought out into the light of day .
They are , in any case , already active today .
They cannot replace the national parties , but cooperation among national parties is no longer necessarily enough .
It is important that we agree on fully open and transparent financing when the European parties are defined .
It is , for example , very important that accurate information is available concerning their sources of income , and the financing of elections is of particular importance in this respect , since money must not determine success in elections .
My Group does not merely intend that we should acquire in this way a funding channel for the European parties , but what is most important is that there will now be the opportunity to define those basic principles on which the European parties can function .
We must take the view that they must respect fundamental democratic rights , human rights and the principle of the rule of law when they function .
The time perhaps has come to specify that only European parties such as these may enjoy public support .
If the legal basis is vague , we agree with the request for the Commission to take an initiative to make it clearer , and the Intergovernmental Conference must also take responsibility for this .
Mr President , according to the Treaty , parties which contribute to informing the citizens about events which take place within the Union and the European Parliament are political parties , and therefore , by their political activities , they contribute to the development of a European awareness and European knowledge .
But what is European awareness ?
It may be that the Treaties are not sufficiently clear on this subject , seeing that they do not mention the rights of the disabled and they do not provide enough protection for children and babies , who are nowadays particularly affected by widespread paedophilia in Europe .
European consciousness is that which must contribute to the development of mutual respect , which must prevent one culture prevailing over another , and which must ensure that tolerance is not confused with laxity and an absence of rules and laws and that laws and rules are not made with the intention of protecting some and not others .
The European culture is born of respect for our national cultures and national traditions . New elements are integrated , but this must not lead to a situation where one category of individuals dominates to the detriment of another .
The citizens of the Union need greater protection of their rights , economic and otherwise , in the face of a world market which is becoming increasingly dominated by the interests of multinationals and of a world market created , one might say , to serve political as well as other purposes .
Therefore , European parties are not those parties which , to further party interest , have the same acronym in different countries , but those parties whose common ideals , values and programmes lead them to unite within groups and to work together to give the citizens a louder voice and greater representativity
So , à la Voltaire , if you want to talk to me , lay down the rules now .
We have to clarify whether the European parties are something that we want to develop now , something different which will overlap with the national parties , that is if we desire cultural and political globalisation to follow economic globalisation - which would bring total uniformity - or whether we want , effectively , to build a Europe in which parties with the same affinities and ideals can work together at European level .
European parties , let us not kid ourselves !
Before hearing the speakers for the groups , I would like to give the floor to Commissioner Barnier .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my Group chairman has tipped me the wink and I am able to say on behalf of our group , the PPE-DE , that we fully support and welcome the Commission ' s explanations in reply to the oral question , as regards both what was said and the timetable and legal evaluation .
Secondly : I am also delighted that we are again stepping up the political debate on the party statute , the pressure of time in the run up to the final stage of the intergovernmental conference notwithstanding .
This is not just a question of money .
This is also a question of political self-awareness , a question of political identity , a question of the role of national and European parties in the unification process .
We want a stronger European Parliament and that means reducing unanimity and increasing the co-decision powers of the European Parliament .
But a stronger European Parliament depends on strong groups in Parliament which have the authority to act .
We want a strong Commission which drives the European integration process forward .
One of the ways in which this is expressed is by lobbying for the President ' s function to be strengthened and through parliament ' s proposals to the intergovernmental conference .
We want a statute for European political parties because our democracy is a civil and party-political parliamentary democracy .
But we must not underestimate the psychological importance of this debate .
At present people and national parties are elected .
We want , as we have stated in the proposal to the intergovernmental conference , members on European lists to be elected because we want to raise the European political profile of members further still .
The proposal was touched on at the intergovernmental conference .
I readily admit that we want European lists and European members of parliament .
The proposals have been made ; it all depends on the European party statute .
The report by the Court of Auditors containing demands on the groups was also touched on .
We shall comply with these demands .
My group started taking steps in this direction even before the Court of Auditors ' report in order to clarify this transparency and this division .
But it cannot work against the European parties because that would represent a reduction in our European self-awareness .
That is also why the party statute is one of the conditions which needs to be put in place so that we can in fact quickly do what is demanded of us and what we demand of ourselves .
Mr President , I take good note of Commissioner Barnier ' s statement and the commitment which the Commission is making .
Please allow me to express , not a criticism , but surprise in relation to the unassailable legal basis .
The Union Treaty , at that time signed by the twelve Heads of State and Government and ratified by all the parliaments of the Member States with the approval of the European Parliament , which recognises citizenship , is not , it appears , a sufficient legal basis .
This surprises me because to be associated with a political party is a fundamental right for citizens and , while our citizenship is recognised , that right is not .
We did not manage to have this included in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The Commission is behaving gingerly and takes this approach : two stages , almost three stages , according to the Commissioner .
I understand that the proposal relating to the tripartite dialogue and stemming from Article 308 is a provisional proposed legislative provision and the best laws , at least in my country , are provisional laws , which are the ones which have lasted the longest .
This would allow us to end this current situation of a lack of legal status , and I take good note of this and I believe we should work in that direction .
The second step is the amendment of the Treaties .
I believe I can say that we all support it , but the important thing at the moment is , firstly , the existence of a public commitment by the Commission to exercise its right to initiative , a common will to consolidate a fundamental dimension for European citizenship and contribute immediately to the political parties beginning not only to exist in reality , but also to be legally recognised , because I believe that this is an important step towards the construction of European democracy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I naturally concur with Mrs Hautala ' s views on transparency .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for his proposal in which we will be given the opportunity to exchange ideas here with Parliament which is , after all , eminently suited to express its opinion on this matter .
But what we need is an initiative - albeit hopelessly overdue - from the Commission .
After all , for the past twenty years , we at the European Free Alliance have been bringing together political parties which want to help build Europe on the basis of a diversity of cultures , peoples and regions .
In this connection , we have always attempted to stand up for the small and the weak , who cannot represent themselves in this big Parliament but whose concerns we are trying to take into consideration .
Up to now , it has been impossible to do this fully transparently , because there has been no clarity with regard to the European parties ' expenditure and revenue , among other things .
But there are questions left unanswered concerning the future too .
It has not yet been mentioned here , Commissioner , but I would like to raise the question nevertheless .
Will the European democratic parties which in future appoint themselves as European parties only be supported if they stand for the values on which Europe is built ?
This seems a rhetorical question to me .
I hope that the Commission can give me a clear answer to it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are totally opposing views on European political parties within my group .
The main question raised is the extent to which they can actually represent a European public .
Direct links with people exist not at a pan-European , but at national or regional level .
That is where the parties are anchored , that is where their members and electorate are .
The situation is in fact quite paradoxical .
First , there are European parties .
Secondly , there is Article 191 , which states that European political parties are an important factor for integration . Thirdly , at the same time , we still have no idea what European political parties actually are .
On 12 December last year , the chairmen of the Party of European Socialists , the European People ' s Party , the Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and the European Free Alliance and the secretary-general of the European Federation of Green Parties themselves stated in a joint declaration that clarification was needed as to what a European party is .
Now I am convinced that , outside this House , no-one , to all intents and purposes , can comprehend or understand this .
Plus , the parties tend to take themselves very seriously .
It is not by chance that citizens - and not just in my country - are highly sceptical about things such as party memberships .
When they commit , it is mainly in civil initiatives , non-governmental organisations and various structures within the civil society .
I have nothing against European parties .
I think that they face the challenge of achieving cross-border coordination of their work during the course of integration .
But one thing is unacceptable and that is a situation in which European parties exist and receive funding but are still undefined .
The criticism of the Court of Auditors was justified .
I should like to close by saying that I too am in favour of finding a solution to this muddle .
But the solution must include treating political democratic forces in Europe equally , including those which define themselves otherwise and which , for example , are critical of the EU , and not excluding them from this problem-solving process .
Mr President , I would first of all , perhaps specifically for the benefit of the German delegates , insofar as they still care about respecting the rule of law , like to remind you of the judgement by the German Constitutional Court of Karlsruhe , in which the European Union is unambiguously defined as a confederacy , and hence the opposite of a federal state .
In fact , this vision of the European Union is also held by the large majority of citizens of our Member States for whom our Union is a close partnership of free peoples and states which very clearly respects the principle of subsidiarity .
In the light of this , the project of European political parties is the umpteenth fundamentally undemocratic project because it can only widen the enormous chasm which exists between the electorate on the one hand and European political decision-making on the other .
But this is apparently the price which some , hiding behind a mask of rhetoric , are willing to pay here in order to channel even more of the taxpayers ' money to already excessive party funds .
It is also a project of people who are hoping to create the European federal superstate .
Indeed , these people are trying to attain their goal , the undemocratic federal superstate , by guile , and seize upon a variety of issues , including monetary union , the unified statute for MEPs and the possible accession of countries which are not even geographically situated in Europe , such as Turkey , to help them reach that goal .
In a European Union which really respects the principle of subsidiarity , we do not need a European political party .
Anyone who has different ideas about Europe or who would like to increase the pompe afrique , the money pump from the taxpayer to the European political parties , should have the courage to stand up and speak out , but you are lacking this courage .
Mr President , I am a strong supporter of cooperation between peoples .
Many problems can only be solved jointly .
Global problems must be solved in the UN .
The court here in Strasbourg can support us in connection with human rights .
In Brussels , we have close economic cooperation between the EU and the EEA in connection with a common market .
Would we obtain better solutions , however , if decision-making were , in every conceivable case , to be centralised in Brussels ?
Would we obtain better democracy by downgrading the national parties and raising the profile of common supranational parties ?
Would more people join , become active members and take part in debates in connection with elections and decision-making ?
Supranational EU parties are an artificial product which will never be financed through voluntary subscriptions but only by siphoning off EU funds .
We are familiar with the pattern from many national parties which have distanced themselves from the electorate and instead allow themselves to be financed by the State , business and the unions .
It is quite right that the State should support parliamentary work and provide citizens with information .
It must not , however , be a propaganda machine for the view of the majority .
To quote Grundtvig , doyen of the public education movement in Denmark , there must be ' freedom for Loki as well as for Thor ' .
The supranational EU parties will never win the hearts and minds of ordinary people .
They will instead be populated by highly paid officials bound to no country in particular - bureaucrats without roots in local political associations .
Manifestos will be written by small groups of experts out of touch with the lives of real people .
An artificial product of that kind does not deserve financial support from the EU .
My group will vote against subsidies for supranational EU parties and against bending the Treaty by using flexible clauses for that purpose .
Mr President , this is a question of democracy .
Democracy is transparency , public accessibility , rule by the people , and participation .
The current European political parties do not represent transparency or public accessibility .
It is a rhetorical question , but who of us knows anything about the European political parties ?
The only certainty is that some groups in the European Parliament have given financial support to the Europarties , contrary to the regulations concerning parliamentary funds .
They have been discovered in the investigations conducted by the Court of Auditors .
I suspect these abuses are now being covered up .
The European political parties do not represent democracy .
They are parties of parties and that means that the public does not have the opportunity to participate directly in their activities .
For rule by the nation , you need a nation .
Europe is not a nation ; it is nations .
We have no concept of supranational democracy .
Now , supranational rules and regulations for Europarties controlled by the big countries are being drawn up , with the Commission ' s support , by the big parties in the big countries .
Parties of parties are not democracy .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Security and defence
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
( B5-0315 / 2000 ) by Mr Brok on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy to the Council on the European Common Security and Defence Policy in view of the European Council meeting in Feira ;
( B5-0475 / 00 ) by Mr Brok on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy to the Commission on the European Common Security and Defence Policy in view of the European Council meeting in Feira .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the fact that we are already able to discuss this issue here today and I should like to start by saying that I consider this , to all intents and purposes , to be the first reading of the Lalumière report , because Mrs Lalumière has invested a great deal of expertise and work in this project .
We must stress that , after Amsterdam , Cologne and Helsinki , a great deal of progress has been made in developing the foreign , security and defence policy and we would like to thank the Council and the Commission for making this progress possible in these areas .
It is the result of our understanding that a disaster such as we have witnessed in the Balkans must never happen again .
We must guarantee that Europe has the authority to act in the area of foreign , security and defence policy , the authority which allows us to safeguard our interests jointly ; however , at the same time , we must make it clear that this is not an alternative to the transatlantic alliance .
This development complements NATO , which will continue to remain responsible for collective security in Europe .
We as the European Parliament have already come to this conclusion by intensifying and institutionalising collaboration with the NATO parliamentary assembly .
We must realise that Amsterdam transferred the Petersberg tasks of the WEU to the European Union and that , as a result , practically all areas of the Western European Union now come under the responsibility of the European Union .
All that remains is Article 5 .
I think this Intergovernmental Conference should consider whether Article 5 can be adopted in the form of a protocol to the EU Treaty and whether we should leave it to each Member State to take a sovereign decision as to whether or not it subscribes to this protocol .
This is surely a way for non-allied , neutral countries to find their own way as members of the European Union while , at the same time , allowing collaboration in practically all circumstances .
In the long run , this must be credibly sustained by the European Union .
We are a Union with our own legislation , which has resulted in our own legal system , and with our own interests based on the internal market and monetary union , which is why areas with different standards of security within the European Union must be a thing of the past .
This will surely help to develop a coherent foreign , security and defence policy .
We can see , precisely in Community matters , that the European Union has a plethora of instruments which are important for foreign and security policy , especially for civil crisis management , and that we are therefore able to provide more foreign aid than the United States Congress , that trade policy is the responsibility of the Commission and therefore that the nucleus of our potential to act is a Community remit and that we should not assign the development of a foreign , security and defence policy to intergovernmental collaboration .
The European Parliament will advocate bringing the Community position , the Community part to the fore .
We are of course delighted that we have a highly qualified High Representative in the person of Mr Solana , but it has always been the aim of the European Parliament in the long run to have a European foreign secretary incorporated into the Community area as part of the Commission .
This is unattainable at present for certain reasons , but we should strive towards it .
It is still our aim .
We can see that the Commission has a large stake and that foreign and security policy is being formulated in the European Council .
Defence is still a matter for national governments when it comes to equipment and similar questions .
This must be merged , including practically , so that such absurdities never occur again .
If we just think that today the foreign secretary of Kazakhstan will be received by fifteen foreign secretaries , the Commissioner responsible for foreign affairs and the High Representative , then I think this makes for wonderful Council meetings , but it is not a sign of any particular authority to act on the part of the European Union .
I think that we must speak up with one voice more loudly here and the Troika of Council President , High Representative and Commissioner for Foreign Affairs introduced in the Treaty of Amsterdam should first establish the Union ' s authority to act ; we should not have any other definitions in this area .
We must also ensure that this Treaty improves our decision-making mechanisms and we should not forget the huge shortcomings brought to light in the organisational disaster in Kosovo , which are the reason for the lack of an arms export policy and which have so far forestalled unity in the EU Treaty .
We must recognise the fact that we are squandering money in national budgets .
We spend more on defence than America , but with far fewer results .
This also applies to transport , satellites and such like .
According to the Treaty , this European Parliament is responsible for parliamentary control , including and especially of the Petersberg tasks , which is why the control function of the European Parliament must also be strengthened .
We shall also endeavour to bring about cooperation as well as collaboration with the foreign and defence policy committees of national parliaments in order to close gaps and cooperate with the parliaments of candidate and other countries .
But this European Parliament is named in the Treaty as the parliamentary controller of foreign , security and defence policy to the exclusion of all others .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during Portugal ' s Presidency of the European Union the development of the Common European Security and Defence Policy has been regarded as a priority , as is evident from the document which we presented at the beginning .
The report to be submitted to the European Council in Santa Maria da Feira will detail the progress made on the various mandates received in Helsinki . In particular it will cover the development of the European military capability , the headline goal , the institutional development of the permanent political and military bodies , the relations between the European Union and third countries in this area , the relations between the European Union and NATO , an indication of whether or not the EU Treaty needs to be revised and the problem of non-military crisis management mechanisms .
In the area of foreign policy and the Common European Security and Defence Policy , the EU has decided to develop the military and non-military dimensions in parallel .
We clearly must coordinate these two dimensions and particularly the military and non-military crisis management actions which the EU may decide to undertake .
This coordination will be carried out by the new structures of the Common Foreign and Security Policy , in particular by the Political and Security Committee , the future Military Committee and the Committee for Civilian Crisis Management .
I must point out that the interim bodies started work in March 2000 and that the Committee for Civilian Crisis Management was formally created during the Portuguese Presidency .
As will be evident from the Presidency ' s report to the Feira European Council , an effort is being made to simultaneously develop the military and non-military crisis management capabilities . The Member States have already been working to develop the headline goal .
For example this was discussed yesterday at a meeting of the General Affairs Council attended by the Defence Ministers . The Feira European Council will also see the Member States make a commitment to develop their civil police capability by 2003 , with up to 5 000 officers , for crisis management operations .
This represents a major effort by the Member States to ensure sustained and uniform development of these two dimensions which are fundamental for security and stability .
On another issue raised in Mr Brok ' s question , I must say that strengthening the Common Foreign and Security Policy by developing a common European security and defence policy , thus allowing the EU to establish a military capability and also to reinforce the efficacy of its civilian crisis management mechanisms , does not necessarily require an increase in the defence budgets of the Member States .
Rather , the basic objective will be to improve the use and rationalisation of the military assets and capabilities of the Member States .
In this context it must be said that the European Union will use , in order to develop the headline goal , the NATO defence planning , the planning and review process for countries which are not members of NATO and the defence capabilities initiative which is ongoing within the Alliance .
Every effort is being made to ensure effective use of all the assets and capabilities and to avoid the duplication which could lead to additional defence costs .
No increase in the Community budget is planned as these efforts are to be implemented by the Member States in a context of voluntary cooperation .
A final answer on the budgetary impact of this policy may only be given , however , after the Commitment Capability Conference to be held in the autumn . This will analyse the national military contributions to this joint effort and the shortfalls which it may be considered necessary to meet .
As for the involvement of the European Parliament in this process , it should be recalled that the Common European Security and Defence Policy is a component of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
The EU intends to make its foreign dimension more effective and credible by developing military and civilian crisis management capabilities .
Under Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union , Parliament shall be consulted by the Presidency on the main aspects and the basic choices of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
The views of Parliament shall be taken into consideration by the Council .
The European Parliament shall also be kept regularly informed of the development of the Common Foreign and Security Policy and may ask the Council about aspects which it considers are important and may make recommendations which it deems appropriate .
The need to avoid unnecessary duplication and to make the best use of all the existing assets and capabilities also underlies the development of the Common European Security and Defence Policy .
It is therefore natural that the Member States have from the beginning advocated the transfer of WEU powers which could prove useful in the process now under way in the European Union .
Portugal , which holds the Presidency of the WEU , has tried to advance the process for transferring powers from the WEU to the European Union .
The Portuguese Presidency has therefore prepared a set of political and military concepts and procedures which , following the WEU Council of Ministers meeting in Oporto , will be transferred to the European Union . This constitutes a fundamental part of the acquis which must be preserved .
During our Presidency of the WEU , preparations for the process of transferring the Institute for Security Studies and the Satellite Centre of the WEU have also been started . This will occur during the next presidency .
The WEU has already taken the decision to allow the EU direct access to these structures .
Therefore , in accordance with the desire expressed by the Member States , the transfer of the Institute for Security Studies and the Satellite Centre will take place .
The transfer of powers from the WEU to the EU does not imply the end of the WEU ; at least this is not the current aim of the Member States .
The amended Treaty of Brussels will remain in force without any further changes . This is why the collective defence mechanism specified in Article 5 will also remain in operation for the States which have signed this Treaty , as will the Parliamentary Assembly , which will continue to operate fully .
However , the whole organisational structure will be slimmed down . This will then simply provide support to a permanent council which will meet when necessary and to other structures which will continue to operate , in particular the Western Europe Armaments Group .
The budget for this organisation will also be substantially reduced .
The Common European Security and Defence Policy requires a close , intense and transparent relationship between the European Union and NATO .
The Portuguese Presidency has paid particular attention to developing ways of establishing this relationship , which must be based on cooperation , dialogue and transparency . However , it must not threaten the autonomy of these two organisations .
The report to be presented to the Feira European Council includes a document establishing the principles and terms of this relationship during this interim period .
Four ad hoc working groups involving the EU and NATO will be created on the following issues : security , European military capability , development of processes for transferring NATO assets and capabilities to operations led by the European Union and , finally , definition of the permanent terms of the relationship between the European Union and NATO .
If necessary , other working groups on specific issues may be created .
In its effort to develop the European military capability , the EU must take into account the need to maintain a relationship of cooperation , dialogue and consultation with European allies who are not members of the European Union and with the applicant countries .
It must be stressed that the headline goal defined in Helsinki is open to participation by these countries which may therefore contribute to the European force .
According to the document agreed by the European Union which will form an integral part of the Feira European Council report , a single and inclusive structure will be created in which the fifteen Member States of the European Union and the fifteen third countries will participate .
This structure will be responsible for dialogue , cooperation and consultation between these countries .
In view of the fundamental role of the six European allies who are not members of the European Union and also bearing in mind that NATO may provide assets and capabilities for operations led by the EU , meetings will take place within this single structure between the Fifteen and these six countries to discuss issues involving the development of the European military capability .
In the pre-crisis phase or rather at the start of a crisis , dialogue , cooperation and consultation will clearly be reinforced and , if the EU were to consider using NATO assets and capabilities , particular attention would be given to the dialogue , cooperation and consultation with the six European allies who are not members of the EU .
It must be stressed that , under the terms agreed in Helsinki , EU operations will in principle be open to participation by these countries .
Russia , Ukraine and other European countries may also participate in operations led by the European Union .
The French Presidency will be responsible for presenting the Nice European Council with proposals on the terms for the consultation and participation of these countries .
At the Feira European Council , the European Union will record the interest expressed by Canada in participating in this joint European effort .
Finally , in Helsinki the Portuguese Presidency was given the task of presenting the Feira European Council with an indication of whether or not the Treaty of Amsterdam needs to be revised .
From the debate conducted and the opinions expressed , it has been possible to conclude that the implementation of the EU decisions on the Common European Security and Defence Policy does not require the Treaty to be revised as this policy falls legally within the provisions currently in force .
However , as this is a process that is open to developments , the Member States have agreed on the need to keep an eye on this issue .
Mr President , I welcome this timely and useful debate , which was introduced characteristically and forcefully by my honourable friend , Mr Brok , in a thoughtful and useful speech .
I welcome the report by Mrs Lalumière .
It is an exceptionally helpful document .
What it says about non-military crisis management provides us with a checklist , an action list of things we should be making sure are put in place over the next few years .
It is a very good report , and I would like to congratulate the honourable lady , without reservation , on what she has said .
The Commission has actively contributed to non-military crisis management since long before the Cologne and Helsinki Summits .
These summits have reminded us that there is an urgent need for our policies to become more ambitious , coherent and effective .
We need to improve our capacity for rapid and targeted action .
We need to step up our efforts of coordination .
We need to improve the availability of analysis and information exchange , and we need to radically enhance our capacities for pursuing preventive policies .
The creation of additional instruments , or the mobilisation of additional funding , does not , in my judgement , stand in the centre of current deliberations ; nor are far-reaching Treaty changes required .
Instead , our focus lies on using existing instruments and financial resources considerably more efficiently .
Parliament knows the priority which the Commission and I attach to discharging our existing competencies a great deal more energetically and a great deal more competently than we have in the past .
That gives us a considerable agenda for the next few years .
I hope that we will have the support of Parliament in working through it .
We should build on existing competencies .
We should bring them to bear more effectively on the twin goals of conflict prevention and crisis management .
Saying ' no ' to institutional revolution does not mean turning our backs on innovation .
The Commission recently tabled a proposal for the creation of a rapid reaction facility .
The limited funds we think are required for that facility will be found by redeployment within our existing budget .
I also believe that the idea to set up a European civil police corps merits careful examination through a feasibility study by the Council , as proposed in the relevant European Parliament resolution .
It is also plain that the Commission 's lack of human resources for both conflict prevention and crisis management greatly impinges upon our capacity to make more rapid progress in this field , though that is something we are attempting at present to address .
Let me be clear about the Commission 's role .
We are plainly not responsible for coordination of the military and civil components in crisis management .
What the Commission is trying to do is to ensure an effective and coherent Community input into the overall coordinated effort of the Union in this area .
I have spoken before about the impossibility of making a clear distinction , in preventing a crisis or in managing a crisis , between the military and the civil components .
The important thing is to recognise the relationship between the two .
Look at what the Commission is doing around the world : we are paying for the training of police in anti-terrorism tasks in Palestine .
We are helping to create border services in the Balkans .
We are spending money on de-mining in virtually every continent .
Those are the sorts of ways in which the Commission is contributing to preventative diplomacy and I hope that in future Europe will manage those tasks in a more coherent way .
This is not our first effort to create as it were a common foreign and security policy .
We had the Pleven plan .
We had de Gasperi .
We had Fouchet .
We had years of European political cooperation , during which there were lots of ringing declarations , perhaps slightly too many of them , some weeks after they could actually have any effect on events .
The decision taken at Maastricht , the decision taken at Amsterdam , the decision taken at Helsinki - they all mark a signal move forward , a recognition that we have not done enough in the past to ensure that Europe 's voice is heard adequately around the world and that Europe 's capacities to prevent and manage crises are brought to bear with sufficient competence and vigour .
This time we have to make a difference .
This time we have to ensure that a common foreign and security policy ensures that Europe discharges its responsibilities at the level which events require , at the level which our citizens now in my judgement demand .
We in the Commission want to play our full part in ensuring that this time a common foreign and security policy is a resounding success .
Mr President , the decisions made at the Helsinki European Council on the development of a common security and defence policy are open to interpretation .
Many aligned countries believe that the formation of a common military force would mean the start of a common defence arrangement .
Their plans are clear .
Under the treaties , the aim of a common foreign and security policy for the Union is to safeguard its independence and integrity , as well as strengthen its security in all its forms .
The military force to be established is , in their view , a tool to realise these aims : a common army for a Union that is becoming a federation .
In the opinion of the non-aligned Member States , only the creation of a system for crisis management has been decided upon .
They stress that each country should decide separately on its involvement .
They believe that they have no obligation to become involved in enforcing peace .
Non-aligned Member States do not want the Union to become a military alliance or military superpower .
These differences of opinion and interpretation must be taken into account .
It is also wise in security policy to establish differentiated integration .
Combined troops of the European Union should only be used for crisis management .
Countries which are part of the federal core , as proposed by Messrs Delors , Giscard d ' Estaing , Schmidt and Fischer , could create a defence community , to form a strong European pillar within the context of NATO .
The understandable and commendable aim by the European NATO countries to develop a European defence identity should thus be realised within the context of NATO itself .
Decisions relating to security and defence policy are immensely important , and should therefore be made with the emphasis on openness and democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is useful to remind ourselves and to realise that we are in the first round of many of a debate on European security .
This means that we have imposed a few restrictions on ourselves .
We are very much focusing on the Summit , the European Council of Feira , which is fine , but that means that we will not be covering a number of other issues which are vital to European security .
One such issue which we are not discussing today is the criteria for the deployment of this rapid reaction force .
I am sure that we will be discussing this issue following a further report by Mrs Lalumière in due course , but in the meantime , we are subject to a few restrictions .
Despite these restrictions , we are able to pass a sound verdict now , in my opinion .
Let me start by making a positive comment .
A large part of the resolution is taken up by non-military crisis management , and this is very much how it should be , in my opinion .
The Commissioner spent quite a long time talking about this and I think he had every reason to .
According to my group , the EU has unique opportunities in this respect which , so far , have remained for the most part untapped .
Fortunately , there are also examples of how things can be done , for example , the Stability Pact , which is a mixture of economic reconstruction , promotion of human rights and the development of a civil society .
This is a good example of how , also in future , the Union will be able to use its nearly unlimited options in the field of non-military crisis management .
But military resources also form part of this package and , this may surprise some delegates , this is also largely backed by my group , albeit subject to a number of conditions .
I would like to specify two .
One is the EU ' s say .
In my opinion , it should be crystal clear , and this is not included in the present texts , that the EU has autonomous power of decision and that the EU countries must be able to decide for themselves on their level of commitment , without needing permission from NATO - or should that be the US ?
I would like to make one final point .
It cannot be the case that the new military resources which are required will be over and above the ones we have at the moment and that , as such , a new arms race would be created for military resources .
What is important is that the analysis and security policy are new .
This does not necessarily include more resources .
Mr President , there are matters which give rise to fundamental differences of opinion and this is obviously one of them .
You , Mrs Lalumière , have obtained the backing of a large majority in committee and you will no doubt maintain this majority in plenary .
This majority confirms the quality of your work and the care which has gone into it .
But it also confirms how weak the critical voices have become .
I do not see this is a cause for celebration .
Even official threat analyses confirm that there is no military threat to the countries of western Europe .
Instead , scenarios such as the war in Kosovo or imaginary crises in the future , Islamic fundamentalism or , as in the German defence guidelines , even possible ecological threats are wheeled out in order to justify huge military spending .
It marks the capitulation of politics and of the intellect , when such problems are met with a military response .
Let me pick up on just one issue , an issue which figured at the centre of all the positions taken here today : the war in Kosovo .
I think that the Council , the Commission and we ourselves are drawing the wrong conclusions in principle from a war which was wrong in principle .
First , the violation of international law , as practised by NATO , and which , for the rest , still forms part of the official NATO military strategy , should not shape future security policy .
Secondly , I am convinced that the war against Yugoslavia could and should have been avoided with a consistent , preventive , long-term policy , especially as events over the last few days have again shown dramatically that its alleged or actual aim of safeguarding human and minority rights failed disastrously .
War , if anything , is the most unsuitable and most counter-productive method in this respect .
Finally , when it is again argued that the war in Kosovo demonstrated that the EU needs major military independence from the USA then , to my mind , this begs the conclusion that militarising international relations and security policy will increase , not reduce dependency on the USA .
Military is what the USA does best .
My group takes an opposing view in principle to the present prevalent European security policy on at least three counts .
First : the security policy template is a military , not a political , civil or cooperative one and the section on preventive and civil security policy cannot hide that fact .
It is interesting that military resolutions have been coming thick and fast since the Helsinki Summit while , to all intents and purposes , nothing has been done about a civil , cause-orientated security policy .
Secondly : we reject a European military block formation .
The only viable approach , in our view , is to restore the central role of the UNO for international security , reinforce the OSCE , design cooperative security concepts and radically disarm .
Thirdly : we are deeply concerned at how automatically demands are rejected which , until just recently , formed part of a broad political consensus , at least between Mrs Lalumière and , for example , the positions represented in my group .
In all events , demands for an unequivocal declaration on the UN charter , defence of the ABM treaty , respect for the policy of neutrality of certain EU Member States or an increase in funds for peace education and peace studies failed to muster a majority in committee .
Germany has earmarked DM 17.5 million for civil conflict management projects this year .
I think it is a fairly typical figure .
It represents - and let me say this very slowly - 0.00029 % of military spending .
I fear that this policy first creates crises which it then endeavours to control .
Which is why there is nothing left for us but to say a firm No .
Mr President , we take a different approach to the important point raised by our colleague , Mr Brok ' s question to the Council .
This is an important issue , because , following the very serious crises that have struck the Balkans , the European Council , especially in its Cologne and Helsinki declarations of June and December 1999 and the Presidency , particularly in the two reports it has drawn up on the Union ' s military and civilian resources for dealing with crisis situations , have demonstrated their intention to see the Union become more closely involved in the management of crises that threaten European security , interests and values .
A number of European Union Member States , but also non-members , may perceive such threats as common threats .
The issue of concern to us , then , is how we envisage establishing an intergovernmental process which deals with each country individually and which would allow all the States that wish to commit themselves , to actually do so and combine forces , while not forcing any State that does not so desire to take part against their will in a course of action of which it may not approve .
The organisation of this kind of intervention capability must not , however , be designed in ideological terms , as a factor to make political integration binding .
Such an approach would lead to failure .
It must be seen in terms of specific crisis situations which are likely to occur , whilst respecting the freedom and the will of each of our States .
Treating each case individually will enable us to do this and to establish a type of reaction that is appropriate to the type of crisis and in line with the will of the people .
Furthermore , the question of the financial resources allocated to the establishment of civilian and military capabilities which are likely to be united is obviously a crucial one .
It requires significant budgetary input and therefore a radical reversal of the trend that has been seen in most Member States , unlike the United States , since the end of the cold war .
It would be useful to know whether the Council feels that the upturn in growth in Europe is such as to favour this essential turnaround and how the Council intends to promote it .
Mr President , I am very grateful to the person who submitted the oral questions for creating the opportunity , before the Feira Summit , to debate the CFSP , which is shrouded in mystery .
Its lack of transparency is characterised by a multitude of initiatives and ever changing coalitions .
I would nonetheless like to try to make a few observations .
First of all , I wonder whether the creation of a European identity is backed by sound motives .
I would like to stress that we should not be guided by power motives .
If we only focus on a strong role for Europe on the world stage , then we have got it all wrong .
It is not about power , but about taking responsibility .
This cannot be done without joining forces with NATO as the latter has all the necessary resources available .
I should also like to warn against all too unrealistic expectations as far as cooperation between the Member States in this respect is concerned .
A realistic view of the current developments in Europe shows that paper declarations from St. Malo , Cologne and Helsinki have so far not been accompanied by real security guarantees .
The required " firm political commitment on the part of all Member States " of Paragraph 19 of the resolution is lacking .
These brief comments do not detract from the fact that it is important to include this subject on the IGC agenda .
We need plain agreements on competencies in this field .
And as far as we are concerned , these are still mainly within the national state .
Mr President , we must recognise that the progress that has been made in recent months in the field of security and defence policy originated from the informal Council of Defence Ministers in Sintra , which should be included on the list of successes of the Portuguese Presidency .
One of the many and complex problems involved in the development of this policy , which necessarily requires greater involvement by Finance Ministers and Defence Ministers , is the role and influence of the institutions .
At this initial stage , Mr President , Parliament should be more involved in the development of this policy .
We should be thinking about a parliamentary dimension for the common security and defence policy which includes the establishment of mechanisms necessary for Parliament to participate , with its corresponding institutional role , in the definition and the objectives of that policy .
Furthermore , the appropriate measures should be taken for the Parliament to exercise control over the security and defence policy and so that it is constantly and adequately informed of its tasks and of the provisional bodies which currently work in the service of the Council of Ministers of the European Union .
What I have just said with regard to Parliament , Mr President , is equally valid for the Commission .
The balance between the institutions should not be altered in the case of such an important question .
We should clarify the competencies of the Commission and the Council , since there is an unresolved tension between intergovernmental and Community powers .
The ambiguity with regard to the limits of the Commission ' s role is particularly evident in the field of security and should be clarified once and for all , since we must not forget that the harmonious partnership between Parliament and the Commission has given rise to the successes of the European integration project , and we should work and fight for its restoration .
Furthermore , Mr President , this European Union project is not just a matter of a political , economic and military union .
Our project is based , or should be based , fundamentally on a community of values .
We in the European Union do not simply define ourselves as consumers in a big market place , but as citizens of the Union .
The citizens of the Union , represented by Parliament , increasingly want to be involved in this area which concerns them and affects them directly , namely the common security and defence policy .
Mr President , last month we celebrated Europe Day .
Central to this was Robert Schuman ' s speech of 9 May 1950 .
A lot has changed since then , but Robert Schuman ' s and Jean Monnet ' s basic axiom to the effect that a lasting peace is created by weaving peoples and nations together in mutually enriching dependence is still valid .
Security is created through cooperation pure and simple , as well as through integration and enlargement .
Schuman began his speech with these words : ' World peace cannot be preserved without constructive efforts to combat impending dangers ' .
This far-sighted approach permeates the Socialist Group ' s vision of Europe ' s foreign and security policy and is also a persistent theme in Mrs Lalumière ' s report on the eve of Feira , a report which our Group supports wholeheartedly .
For Social Democrats like ourselves , there are two complementary dimensions to the challenge of security policy in the twenty-first century .
The first is the global dimension , and the second is the purely European dimension .
Seen in a global perspective , security is clearly indivisible .
We share the same planet and the same fate .
In today ' s globalised world following the end of the cold war , poverty and exclusion stand out as the main enemies of peace and democracy .
No military arsenals and no new nuclear arms race can provide security against the resentment of the poor .
Generous , fair and far-sighted aid , together with a trade policy which attacks the causes of poverty and insecurity must therefore be an integral part of our foreign and security policy .
In the same way , we must look at conflict prevention and crisis management in the context of our new European security policy .
We are , of course , loyal to the decisions taken in Helsinki .
We should constructively develop the military capacity which the war in Kosovo , in particular , has necessarily brought about .
The headline goals which have been established are important and must be implemented in full , without delay and without exception .
At the same time , we must , however , oppose those who wish to exaggerate our military capacity and role .
We should accept increased responsibility for security on our own continent , but we should not take the place of NATO or create an embryonic form of permanent and independent European defence .
Such ambitions are pure fantasy and mere tilting at windmills .
A policy on conflict prevention is missing from our arsenal .
We must therefore actively support the proposals tabled by Commissioner Patten and also by the Council , together with the proposals in Mrs Lalumière ' s report .
Mr President , slowly and all too belatedly , a common European security policy is in the process of taking shape , one which , though it leaves a bad taste in the mouth to say so , is , at it were , being built on the ruins of Kosovo .
The EU did not manage to stop the catastrophe in the Balkans in time , and we shall forever be accountable to our children for this failure .
As Liberals , we consider it absolutely crucial for the EU to be able in future to intervene with personnel and resources in countries in its immediate vicinity , to be able to engage in civil crisis management , humanitarian efforts and peace-keeping exercises based on European values and human rights .
The EU must adopt a credible and independent policy in this area , but it is important to retain the commitment of the United States and the transatlantic link .
NATO is at present the most important organisation for peace and security in Europe .
The EU ' s Member States must nonetheless soon come to some definite decisions about the common security policy .
There are three main questions which must be answered at Feira and which I want to submit to the Council .
What is the distribution of labour between the EU and NATO to look like ?
We must develop complementary , and not duplicate , structures .
How will it be possible to guarantee the influence of the non-aligned States upon expanding security policy ?
Thirdly , a question in connection with which there are many good proposals in Mrs Lalumière ' s excellent report : how will it be possible for the European Parliament and the national parliaments to be guaranteed influence upon , and participation in , the decisions so that the latter are made openly and democratically in the interests of our European citizens ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , contrary to the priorities for Feira , the European Union must strengthen the civil conflict prevention dimension of its policy .
That means , as far as weighting instruments is concerned , that the financial and material focus must be on an effective conflict prevention policy .
The main lines of conflict today are to be found in domestic conflicts and this proves that the rich countries lack the will to do enough to foster sustainable and socially-balanced development in the crisis regions .
The opportunity was missed in Helsinki to give concrete expression to an active prevention policy and efficient and prompt crisis management and we urgently need to make up lost ground here .
I congratulate Mr Patten on his activities in this direction , which I should like to support and help develop further .
In building up conflict prevention and after-care instruments , the focus needs to be on combining a reduction in the production and sale of arms and stricter controls .
One more point : the importance of Parliament .
There is a risk in the numerous informal circles of totally inadequate democratic control of a European security policy , which is why the European Parliament needs to take the lead .
Its position must be strengthened and this point needs to be entered on the agenda for Feira .
Mr President , Europe is in the unique position of not having any enemies who threaten it militarily .
This might therefore be the time for extensive military disarmament in Europe but , in reality , rearmament is taking place .
Nor is this new military force of 50 000 to 60 000 men to be used within the EU ' s own territories .
There is , in fact , no common defence commitment . Rather , it is a question of operating outside the EU ' s borders .
It is about intervention .
Some might even go so far as to say that attacks may actually be mounted one of these days .
I am concerned about statements to the effect that the EU should be able to intervene anywhere in the world where there are threats to the Union ' s security , interests and values .
To me , it sounds as if , in this area too , the EU has the United States ' superpower policy as a model for its development .
Mr President , I too would like to express my great appreciation for the work of Mrs Lalumière , who has produced an extraordinarily sound document which is also carefully thought out . It has been discussed at length in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and has put us on the right track .
Mr President , a European Union which cannot play a clearly defined role in terms of security and defence creates uncertainty on the world stage .
In tandem with the Commission and Council , Parliament would like to contribute to a transparent and convincing policy .
After all , the European Union cannot escape its responsibility which is commensurate with its economic and cultural stature .
The Christian Democrats hope that the transfer of tasks and competencies from the Western European Union to the European Union can contribute to this clarity .
As the President-in-Office of the Council pointed out , this naturally means that the budget of what may be left of the WEU will be drastically reduced but , to our great amazement , he is at the same time quite negative about the idea that the European Union ' s budget should increase accordingly in this respect .
This seems extremely illogical to me and leads me to believe that this development is not taken altogether seriously .
Mr President , we have emphasised the civil and military aspects of this policy in our resolutions .
Both play a major role and the military component should explicitly be embedded in the wider context of the civil component .
These are not just pious words , they also have an immediate implication for the way in which this policy is supervised .
This is why it is essential that this European Parliament , in which we discuss all kinds of civil affairs with each other all the time , be the place where the military components form part of a wider context in parliamentary supervision too .
We know that the civil components will always take priority and the military components will in the first instance be used as a big stick and a last resort .
It would therefore be dangerous if this policy were not entirely supervised by us .
I also have to say that the nature of the tasks which we have in mind , the Petersberg tasks , is such that here is the ideal place where they can be dealt with .
As champions of a Community policy , we are particularly keen for the European Commission ' s input , as Mr Patten described it a moment ago , to be at its best .
This means therefore that the Council must make this possible and that the personnel and budget required for this should be adequate .
Mr President , we do not want to disconnect these tasks from cooperation with North America .
Obviously not .
In fact , we are very keen for our security to be undivided .
This is why it was with some hesitation that , in another resolution , we in the meantime urged that a position be adopted on America ' s inclination to determine its own security unilaterally via the ABM system .
We do not want this .
We want to cooperate with North America in these matters too , but also - and particularly - with sound backing from the Council .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner Patten , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to the excellent work of our rapporteur , Catherine Lalumière , we are now able to present Parliament ' s position in the run-up to the European Council in Feira .
She has succeeded in describing a really accurate and balanced position with which a large majority of the political forces here in Parliament can identify .
Thank you , Catherine Lalumière .
The war in and about Kosovo has made Europeans realise three important things .
First , that we need to give ourselves conflict prevention capabilities .
So far , we have had neither the political mechanisms nor the instruments to prevent or settle conflicts .
If we want to avoid war , we need to give ourselves this capability .
I am delighted that you , Commissioner Patten , take this same view and look forward to hearing your proposals , the Commission ' s proposals .
Secondly , we have learned that we are unable to intervene independently on our own continent and in our own neighbourhood , even in the case of very limited military action .
Thirdly : we have learned that we need to be independent from our American friends if we want to control the means to be deployed in a military conflict .
In other words : if we are dependent on others when it comes to reconnaissance , transport , attacking capacity and other such aspects , then we are fighting their war , not ours .
These realisations have resulted in the European Union ' s at long last tackling and stepping up its efforts to define , organise and restructure a common security and defence policy .
Today ' s debate is the European Parliament ' s contribution to these efforts on the part of the European Union as a whole .
As the European security and defence policy develops further , the Commission and European Parliament are increasingly being sidelined .
The European Parliament should also gain greater influence on military action through the budget and proper accountability through the Council .
If the Union only deals with civil and police matters whilst the governments ' exclusive remit is military aspects , then the unity of European action is in danger of becoming the first casualty in crisis situations .
There can be no artificial divide between humanitarian aid and military action .
The idea of a joint European and national Assembly has not been sufficiently developed by a long chalk .
Will it need to be more than an informal conversation club ?
Will it be given competencies at the expense of national parliaments ?
It should in any event not cause this Parliament to be sidelined even further during the development of the European security and defence policy .
Mr President , I hope that Mrs Lalumière ' s sterling report will this time not only meet with widespread agreement in Parliament but will also be heard in the Council .
But all too often the Council puts to one side what has been decided within the European Parliament , by consensus or not , as the case may be .
European unification is born from a desire for sustainable peace .
This is a leading concept which recurs in many interventions .
The Common Foreign and Security Policy should therefore forge a unity between political decision-making , conflict prevention , crisis management , possibly military action - only if need be , and ideally not - plus a plan to return to peace afterwards and to keep this peace .
I am not only thinking of Kosovo , which has been so important to us as an eye-opener .
The failure throughout the former Yugoslavia has shown that European helplessness and fragmentation between the different governments do not lead to a prospect of joint peace .
This peace is communal and it should also be maintained communally .
Mr President , the resolution proposed by Mrs Lalumière seeks parliamentary backing in the form of proposals for the necessary means and structures so that the European Union can assume international policing duties alongside ÍÁÔÏ , especially when and where ÍÁÔÏ fails to act immediately , as specified at Helsinki .
Unfortunately , this philosophy , as can be seen from the debate , prevails not only in the Council and the Commission , but also in the European Parliament which , instead of expressing the feelings and interests of the citizens , is about to ratify an extremely dangerous policy for Europe and mankind as a whole .
Not only are we ignoring the blatant crimes committed and being committed in Yugoslavia , we are also being called upon to support the need to repeat them with more efficient means and procedures .
The following questions must inevitably be asked : who gives us the right , on any pretext , to bomb , kill and trample the fundamental principles of international law underfoot ?
How should we describe someone who stirs up tension and conflict between peoples inside countries and then uses that tension and conflict to control and plunder the countries in question ?
But , even if international alliances are still prepared to commit such crimes today , the people will soon form their own peaceful front against these criminal policies .
I do not congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Lalumiere ; I am disgusted by her proposal .
Mr President , the challenge confronting us is how Europe can do more for crisis prevention and management , and the proposals which we are debating are the only way we can achieve that more effectively .
I congratulate the Commissioner on the lead he is setting for greater efficiency not only in aid , but also in this area .
I thank him particularly for his undertaking to examine my proposal for a European public security force , because there are several organisations across Europe which could offer experience , not least the Royal Ulster Constabulary in Northern Ireland .
I want to address a word to people in London .
It is reported in the newspapers that certain people in London are saying they would end the EU 's involvement in the defence process .
To London I say : you cannot do that ; be realistic !
You could possibly end the UK 's involvement , but you cannot stop what the European Union is doing .
Please face reality .
This is a valuable new development in which we are involved and which we are debating .
We must try to shape it positively .
I look forward to further debate on these questions , being Parliament 's rapporteur on the Rapid Reaction Facility that we will be dealing with later in the year .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating our rapporteur , Mrs Lalumière , on the report which she produced for our Parliament and in which she managed to strike a fine balance .
Cologne and Helsinki have added substance to the common European security and defence policy .
With unusual drive , the European Council has taken a number of important decisions , of which we have taken note and for which we have given due credit .
The aim is to develop our own capacity in order to be able to implement the so-called Petersberg tasks .
A decision has been made on the extent of the troops required in this respect .
A draft of the necessary decision-making mechanisms is in place .
A small-scale NATO is emerging .
In this context , I would like to emphasise two incisive questions , which are a small selection from a long series of matters which are being discussed here today .
The European Union must be able to act autonomously .
This may sound obvious , but this statement also touches upon an enormous problem .
What does autonomous mean in relation to NATO ?
There is some confusion surrounding this on both sides of the Atlantic and this should be resolved soon .
Autonomy should certainly not culminate in a political exchange between the common European security and defence policy and the national missile defence , as was suggested recently by an American senator during the NATO Assembly in Budapest .
In summary , the question which I would like to put to the Council is : what is autonomy in this context ?
Is action within a NATO context always the first option , as the Americans claim ?
Should NATO be given first refusal before the European Union can act autonomously or will the European Union allow itself more room for manoeuvre ?
I have the impression that this question is being avoided on both sides of the Atlantic , which will compromise future cooperation .
The second point is about democratic control .
In the Netherlands , there has been a lot of discussion recently about who was involved in what decisions in Bosnia and Kosovo .
This mainly relates to the government .
But if some kind of policy of faits accomplis is already mentioned sometimes at this level , then what about parliamentary control ?
Will the common European security and defence policy turn into a cosy intergovernmental get-together or will national parliaments and the European Parliament be truly involved ?
Here too , the pertinent question arises as to whether the Council pays any attention to this at all ?
Operating at an informal level has its advantages but not if issues of war or peace are involved .
The support base required for using the EU military instrument needs to be more extensive than that required for creating it .
Mrs Lalumière ' s resolution contains a relevant proposal for tackling the threat of a democratic deficit in this connection .
The government conference can benefit from this .
The least the European Parliament could ask for is to be considered a fully-fledged partner in this very important debate .
It is disturbing to note the major rush towards the militarisation of the European Union .
The last speaker said that a small-scale NATO is emerging .
Many Members , especially citizens in neutral countries , have no say on whether this is what they want .
In my own country the vast majority of people are against the militarisation of Europe , especially a Europe that will have nuclear weapons at its disposal , a Europe where the arms industries are exporting arms to places around the world where there are mass and gross abuses of human rights .
If we look at the track record of the European Union on its involvement in many conflict areas around the world , we see that the arms industries have been part of that problem .
We need to address that .
With respect to the neutral countries , some of the wording in this resolution is extremely ambiguous in relation to collective defence .
We in the neutral countries are being told that collective defence is not going to be part of it , but of course when we get in so far then there will be no going out .
Finally , I was quite amazed to hear Mr Newton Dunn cite the RUC as a good example of policing .
If you look at the human rights organisations around the world that have amassed damning reports on that organisation , it is incredible to put it up as an example .
I am sure there are good examples , but the RUC is not one of them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , several speakers have referred to the importance of the European security and defence policy .
I should like to confine myself to the question of democratic and parliamentary control of this policy .
Peace and security are not suitable subjects for Council meetings in camera .
They must be subject to parliamentary control .
It is important for decisions on military intervention to remain the responsibility of national parliaments .
It is also important for budgetary questions and national defence budgets to continue to be decided in national parliaments .
But everything over and above that , all questions of civil policy , come under the jurisdiction of the European Parliament .
This European security and defence policy must be subject to parliamentary monitoring in this House .
The President-in-Office has said that transparency and clarity are needed .
It was clever to pretend that the aim is to integrate the Western European Union in the European Union , which is why the debates currently being held within the Western European Union are so absurd , trying as they are to invent a new identity for the parliamentary assembly of the Western European Union .
Every iota of strength is being used at the moment to define new remits , even going so far as a European assembly for security and defence , yet another committee to add to the confusion , rather than to increase transparency .
I am reminded of the policy of the Christmas goose trying to postpone Christmas .
It would be good if more transparency were to reign here and if we were to come to accept that the European Parliament is the right forum .
We attended the NATO assembly a few days ago , where the president of the North Atlantic assembly stated that the Western European Union was merging into the European Union , that the EU had a parliament , that NATO had a parliament and that the WEU assembly therefore had no further raison d ' être .

I think that is also our position and account should be taken of it at this Summit .
Mr President , I also wish to congratulate Mrs Lalumière on producing a report which is a fine balance of the arguments and interests involved .
It is a remarkable achievement .
I also wish to congratulate the Council on being able to establish at the last summit the principle of the headline goals .
It is important to realise the significance of these headline goals because for once , instead of spending years discussing institutions , the European Union has put results before means .
That , as we are already seeing , will drive forward the agenda very rapidly .
If we are to succeed in our ambitions at a price we can afford , we have to ensure that we get better value for money out of defence and , in particular , defence industries .
We need a strong , competitive European defence industry .
Notwithstanding the takeovers and mergers in the private sector , there is still far too much fragmentation in this area .
We still rely heavily on intergovernmental activity .
The Western European Union Armaments Group , for example , moves very slowly on the basis of consensus .
Even the six EU Member States which two years ago signed a letter of intent on cooperation have still not agreed a framework agreement to implement that letter of intent .
We clearly need more urgency in this area and we need a single , coherent framework within which the defence industry can cooperate .
That is why I am disappointed to hear what the presidency said about the intention to continue with the work of the Western European Armaments Group .
I believe the pillar structure of the EU provides us with the best opportunity for a framework within which industry can operate .
Pillar II can provide the common positions on things like arms exports , and we could be working towards a European armaments agency which brings together OCCAR and the Western European Armaments Organisation .
The Commission has a crucial role in this .
The last Commission drove forward the agenda on restructuring the defence industries : there were two communications .
This Commission has been completely silent on this issue .
It is as if it is running scared from confronting the implications of its role as the guardian of the Treaties .
We have to ensure that the single market applies to defence industries as far as possible , and that Article 296 only applies in those areas specified in the Treaty .
I would urge Commissioner Patten to follow in the footsteps of Commissioners Bangemann and van den Broek to drive forward the Commission 's responsibility in delivering an effective and competitive European armaments industry in order to back up the measures we are taking in the political field .
Mr President , considerable progress has been made towards the establishment of a common European security and defence policy .
The Cologne , Helsinki and Lisbon Councils have all made significant contributions in that regard .
However , in all truth it must be said that decisions taken at these summits and any that may be taken at Feira will remain little more than aspirational until the Union has the necessary resources to implement such a policy .
I agree with the recent comments of Commissioner Patten when he criticised EU governments for making ringing declarations which they are reluctant to underwrite with money and staff .
If Member States are indeed serious about establishing a real security and defence policy then they must put their money where their mouth is .
In the meantime we have to be realistic about what we can achieve and at the moment we cannot talk about operational autonomy for any European force .
This will always be relative to our dependence and reliance on NATO which still owns the essential military hardware and which enabled EU governments to deploy their troops in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo .
Unless and until we have a sufficient intelligence capability matching that of the US and the transport capabilities to put EU military personnel into world trouble spots quickly , we will continue to need a close working relationship with NATO underpinned by a structured EU-NATO dialogue which is not simply a replication of the WEU / NATO acquis .
These realities must temper our discussions at Feira and elsewhere as must also the need to keep in mind the status and role of the United Nations .
Let me conclude by saying I welcome the speculation that the Feira Council will endorse the concept of a rapid reaction police force which would swing into action after completion of military tasks .
The experience of Kosovo has underlined the need for such an initiative and I welcome the fact that it may happen at Feira .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , a common foreign , security and defence policy has recently developed in the European Union which would probably have been unthinkable a few years ago .
It has come about because two main groups of members in the European Union have shifted their position : those who believed that NATO alone was responsible for security and defence , and those who believed that security and defence were not a Community affair and should be dealt with by individual states either neutrally or within a pact .
I think that what is happening today is a positive sign of community and solidarity .
I also think that , in the final analysis , Article 5 , which has been quoted several times today , should represent the common basis for all members of the European Union , even if this can only be achieved gradually .
Kosovo has been mentioned several times today .
I think that too one-sided a view is sometimes taken of the lessons to come out of Kosovo and the Balkans .
In fact , four issues are at stake .
First , prevention , of which there was practically none whatsoever in the case of Kosovo .
Secondly , deterrence , of which there was certainly too little in the case of Kosovo , because no common will was visible .
Thirdly , the facility for rapid , targeted intervention .
This functioned perhaps to a certain extent , although the fight about what constitutes the optimum form of intervention blocked a great deal .
And fourthly , the restoration and stabilisation of peace , including after military intervention .
Developments over the past few days show that it is not as easy as you might think .
I am particularly thankful that the question of the police and security forces in Kosovo has been raised several times today , because it is essential to establish security by strengthening the presence of police troops .
There is also the question of developing a system of regional responsibility in Europe which does not fly in the face of the United Nations system , as has been maintained time and again , but which , on the contrary , can be incorporated into the United Nations system and into the ideas of the United Nations .
Finally , Commissioner Patten has said that we do not necessarily need institutional revolution , perhaps just reforms .
But we should try for institutional revolution .
As far as the institutions to be set up in the near future referred to today are concerned , I am afraid that we will paint ourselves into a corner .
We should not allow too many institutions to exist and the integration of the WEU and the EU forms part of this philosophy .
Mr President , we are regularly reassured that the measures being put in place under the common European security and defence policy are intended to strengthen NATO .
This is somewhat disingenuous .
If this was the intention there would be no need to set up the separate structures which largely exclude the Americans and Canadians and marginalise reliable European allies such as Turkey .
Over the past five years NATO has already restructured for the specific purpose of facilitating European action should the alliance as a whole not wish to be engaged .
But this apparently is not enough .
The real desire is to create something separate from NATO .
Of course we want to see the Europeans reforming and enhancing their military capabilities but I fail to see how the continued reductions that we are seeing in European defence budgets , most notably by Germany , demonstrate resolve to make a greater contribution to Western defence efforts .
The amendments we have put forward to the Lalumière resolution are intended to stress the importance of the continued commitment of our North American allies to the security of Europe as a foremost priority , to make it clear that the European Union should only opt to act militarily in agreement with the alliance and when NATO as a whole has chosen not to be engaged , to insist that any rapid reaction force should also be assigned to NATO and in any case should not impact adversely on the capacity of NATO allies to meet their alliance obligations .
We want EU decisions relating to the use of military assets , including decisions taken on the basis of a common strategy or when implementing a joint action , to be taken unanimously .
There should not be attempts to create a European armed police force behind the cloak of the common European security and defence policy .
The Royal Ulster Constabulary is a fine force with a proud record in fighting terrorism but this is not at all relevant to this particular debate .
Our overall concern is that the common European security and defence policy is indeed a further step towards European political integration and that is our fundamental objection .
Mr President , honourable members , for reasons of security in Europe and in order to safeguard the security of others outside the Union who may need our support , Europe requires an independent military presence which differs from the presence which it has by reason of its membership of NATO .
Events in Kosovo and the whole tragic break up of the former Yugoslavia are proof most painful of Europe ' s failings within NATO .
One might even say that Europe has entrusted the task of a military presence to the NATO leadership and , at the same time , relaxed its efforts over the years , to the point at which it is now more or less incapable of properly honouring its obligations within NATO .
There is a psychological explanation for this .
If someone , be it a person , a country or a group of countries , considers that it has no initiative to act , it loses interest , neglects its duties or goes through the motions of performing its duties , but there is no substance to them and they are performed perfunctorily .
Perhaps the most important outcome of the resolutions of the Cologne , Helsinki and Lisbon summits is precisely the fact that they have restored Europe ' s sense of initiative , giving it the motivation needed in order to accept responsibility , make an effort and honour its obligations .
From this point of view , the draft which we are debating does not constitute a threat to the cohesion of ÍÁÔÏ .
On the contrary , a Europe with its own military initiative will take its NATO obligations more seriously .
It is the only way in which it can take its NATO obligations seriously and reassure the political forces in the United States which object to American armed forces and American resources being tied up in the defence of Europe .
Consequently , Mr President , we must ensure that our immediate decisions are geared towards European unity and the defence of a common border and , sooner or later , that is the point we must reach .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the proposed resolution on a common European security and defence policy is an important signal from the European Parliament in the run-up to the Feira Summit , a signal which points in two directions .
First , a declaration of an independent role for the European Union in both civil and military security policy within a clearly defined remit , as in the Petersberg tasks for maintaining peace and peace-making .
Secondly , a signal to take account of and strengthen the role of the European Parliament in fashioning a common European security and defence policy .
The European Union needs to make up lost ground when it comes to a common security and defence policy if you think that its defence spending does not even equal 60 % of comparable spending in the USA and only achieves 10 % of the operational efficiency of the USA .
The specific undertaking to create a European strike force no more than 60 000 strong in order to complete the Petersberg tasks calls for solidarity between all the Member States of the European Union .
The lack of any real common foreign and security policy has been exacerbated by the Balkan crisis , which highlighted the weakness of the European Union in this area .
We cannot double the functions of NATO in the area of global security .
We cannot build up an expensive parallel structure .
But completion of the Petersberg tasks must be guaranteed and the principle that security is indivisible must be applied , which is why mutual support , as anchored in Article 5 of the WEU Treaty , must be open to all sides in a revised EU Treaty .
The idea of attaching Article 5 in an additional protocol to a revised Treaty , to which the individual Member States may accede if necessary , therefore represents a reasonable attempt to find a solution .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , honourable members , it is quite right to make crisis management the main objective of European foreign and defence policy .
After all , crises all over the planet are the predominant issue at the dawn of the twenty-first century .
Of course , the current state of the world and the intricacies of the international system also raise other issues and questions which , in my view , form an integral part of the issues and problems which need to inform a specific proposal on European foreign policy .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Lalumière because she has taken a huge step forward in her report .
Not only has she made specific proposals , she has also highlighted the need to find a modus operandi and a modus vivendi for all the means proposed in order to implement European foreign policy .
The problem with a European foreign policy is not quantitative .
There is no problem with the figures .
It is qualitative .
The problem lies in the content .
Having said this , may I suggest , Minister , that we act with the greatest caution when it comes to questions such as the integration of the Western European Union or relations with ÍÁÔÏ .
I , fellow members , shall insist above all on the need to find a system , a modus operandi for all the proposals tabled in the House .
Because foreign policy nowadays cannot and must not merely be the product of simple intergovernmental cooperation .
On the contrary , it must be derived by operating a multi-dimensional structure and system within which the parliamentary aspect plays an important part .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a year has gone by since the war in Kosovo , and intensive reconstruction work has begun .
An enormous amount of valuable property has been destroyed .
To avoid similar disasters in the future , we are now taking new steps to establish a common European defence and security policy .
We are doing this in order to join together in creating tools to safeguard the lynchpin of security , namely freedom and peace in Europe .
I am extremely pleased that this process is going on .
Within the framework of the EU ' s mandate , this joint commitment is now being carried out and intensified .
I think it is important that the EU should concentrate on what it is good at , namely engaging in trade , developing contacts and taking measures to prevent conflicts . It is also important , however , to create credibility through ' more muscle ' and increased ability to intervene in time .
If ( as it wishes , and is endeavouring , to be ) the EU is to be taken seriously in the world , it must also demonstrably be able to take more responsibility in its own area .
It is therefore important that we should create structures which cooperate with NATO , for it is there that the competence , capacity , leadership ability and credibility are to be found .
The EU has a complementary role , and that is why Mrs Lalumière ' s report is so commendable .
This concept is based upon individual Member States ' fulfilling the commitments they have made .
Our main role in the European Parliament is therefore to exercise supervision .
I have previously discussed the shrinking defence budgets of the Member States .
These defence budgets are shrinking at the same time as we require investment in restructuring and new hardware .
Since we last discussed this subject , Germany ' s supreme commander has resigned in protest , which is as good a sign as any .
If our heads of State and government are to have any credibility in the year 2003 , they should not only talk in Feira , but must also then return home and review the responsibilities of each country and the commitments they have undertaken to fulfil .
Mr President , Secretary of State , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in order for the European construction process to maintain its vitality , which is a prerequisite for its survival , each point of arrival must also form a point of departure .
Having achieved economic and monetary union , other plans are now being drawn up . We cannot take 50 years to implement these , however .
This is the case with the establishment of an effective common European security and defence policy .
The Member States must address this issue from a European perspective which can be fully reconciled with NATO commitments .
Although this was clearly not our desire , the fall of the Berlin wall has obviously not helped with security and defence in Europe .
We are therefore now faced with the complex situation in the Balkans , which throws up new problems on a daily basis . The lessons of Kosovo show us how not to act and the challenges in the Mediterranean basin are keeping us alert .
After decades of a bipolar world , the situation of unipolarity must be transitory and in this the European Union ' s contribution will be decisive .
Peace must continue to be the grand plan of European construction but this will not happen by itself .
We must therefore have effective mechanisms for managing crises using non-military means , for developing and ensuring the compatibility of the military capabilities of the Member States , for mobilising adequate financial resources in the national and Community budgets and for establishing effective decision-making structures .
The choices seem clear , the objective is challenging and its achievement will be decisive .
Reforms must be implemented , major financial resources and means must be identified , made compatible and mobilised .
The commitment of the Member States is essential .
The current challenges cannot be deferred or hesitated over .
The Feira European Council must be more than an occasion to reaffirm our desires . It must be a turning point characterised by the identification of the necessary financial resources and by the inclusion on the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference of the institutional aspects of the Common European Security and Defence Policy .
I congratulate Mrs Lalumière on her work .
- ( PT ) Mr President , I must very quickly highlight the usefulness of this debate and the importance of all the interventions in terms of better preparing the Council on this issue .
Mrs Lalumière ' s report is excellent , particularly in its balance and the relevance of many of its observations . The report to be presented by the Portuguese Presidency to the Feira European Council next week will dispel many of the doubts and clarify many of the aspects which we have addressed here .
This report is the result of our commitment to carry out in full the mandate established in Helsinki .
Regardless of certain differences which are evident here in terms of security and defence cultures , and more so in the defence culture than in the security culture , we believe that we all agree on the need for the European Union to rapidly acquire a crisis management capability at either military or non-military level .
We must determine the extent of these mechanisms and the appropriateness of these various dimensions in terms which express the different sensitivities indicated here .
I must mention one specific point which was raised with regard to amending the Treaty on European Union and other possible amendments to this Treaty at this stage in order possibly to enshrine in law the EU ' s current military mechanisms . The Portuguese Presidency ' s and the Council ' s reading of this issue is that there is no need for an immediate amendment of the Treaty and that the provisions of Article 17 are sufficient to cover the current mechanisms .
In any case , the way is clear for future discussion of this issue bearing in mind future developments and what will be enshrined in terms of the definitive structures .
As for the EU-NATO link , all the concerns expressed about how the creation of a common European security and defence policy may reflect negatively on the relationship with NATO are unfounded .
On the contrary , we believe that this mechanism will allow us to independently reinforce a particular dimension without creating any type of barrier in our relationship with NATO .
Moreover , the mechanisms which we are implementing to link Member States who are in NATO with those who are not and , at the same time , the formulas which we are using to link the European Union in terms of security and defence with NATO partners outside the EU seem to have found the right balance . We hope that the Feira European Council will enshrine these as the definitive model in this area .
On the issue of parliamentary representation , we obviously appreciate the sensitivity of this House with regard to its greater involvement in these matters .
However , we believe that this issue of representation precedes that of security and defence and in fact lies at the level of the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the well-known claims made by Parliament with regard to its involvement in this wider policy .
This point has been and is being discussed in the Intergovernmental Conference and we will see to what extent these claims are accepted .
In any case , it is essential , particularly with regard to the national parliaments , to guarantee their association with any future development in this area .
We too share these concerns .
Civilian crisis management has been one of the aspects highlighted by the Portuguese Presidency , particularly bearing in mind the concerns felt within the Council and also expressed in this House about this dimension . The day after tomorrow the first meeting of the Committee for Civilian Crisis Management will take place .
This Committee was specifically created during the Portuguese Presidency .
Finally , on the last issue of the Armaments Group , this group is continuing its work and will remain active within the WEU .
Mr President , it has been an interesting debate .
We have heard plenty of good sense in the course of it , as one would anticipate .
I shall be mercifully brief .
I do not want to come between Parliament and its preprandial democratic duty .
However , there are a couple of points I should like to make .
Firstly , there was some discussion about the sort of institutional arrangements that we need to make , not least in the Commission , to cope with the responsibilities of adequately implementing a common foreign and security policy and , in particular , to ensure that we can play our own role in the non-military aspects of conflict prevention and crisis management .
We need our own crisis units in the Commission , but we should keep that small .
I want to make it absolutely clear that I have no intention of duplicating within the Commission the sort of structures which are necessarily going to be created in the Council .
Secondly , Mrs Lalumière spoke very pointedly about the importance of taking decisions much more quickly .
I am bound to say that is one of my obsessions .
It is one of my obsessions in relation to , for instance , MEDA regulation and in relation to the Balkans .
We brought forward a new regulation for speeding up our delivery of assistance to the Balkans .
We have made proposals about asymmetric trade measures for the Balkans , which are now being considered by the Council and , in due course , will be considered by Parliament .
We have made proposals for cleaning up the Danube .
Those are all areas where we have brought forward proposals .
I hope we can get quick decisions .
Unless we can take decisions more quickly , before crises happen , then the question of how quickly we take decisions when crises have actually broken will come up a great deal more frequently .
So in my judgement the importance of taking decisions more quickly is one which is relevant at every stage of our activities .
The sooner we face up to that the better , not least for the credibility of a common foreign and security policy .
Once again I thank the honourable Member for her superb report .
I can only imagine the amount of work that went into it .
All of us know the amount of wisdom that went into it as well .
President .
I have received two motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Welcome
Colleagues , it is a great pleasure to welcome a delegation from the Australian House of Representatives and the Senate , who have just taken their seats in the official gallery .
I extend a warm welcome to the Australian delegation , which is here to attend the 24th European Parliament / Australia Interparliamentary meeting , taking place here in Strasbourg on 14 and 15 June .
The honourable Bruce Baird heads the Australian delegation , which is composed of three Members of the House of Representatives and two Members of the Senate .
The European Parliament and the Australian Parliament initiated their direct political dialogue in 1981 and over the years this dialogue has encompassed a broad range of issues .
We now look forward to the strengthening of our cooperation with Australia .
I wish you all a successful and an enjoyable stay here in Strasbourg .
Vote
Mr Perry has the floor on a point of order .
Madam President , outside the door of this Chamber there is somebody dressed as a cigarette packet .
I have no objections to people dressing as cigarette packets but I have objections to what I take to be political manifestations outside the very door to the Hemicycle .
Is this allowed under our Rules ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I shall just say that the amendments which Mr Dell ' Alba has just been speaking about have indeed been deemed to be inadmissible , because Parliament is only entitled to give its opinion on the dates of the part-session as they are presented in the proposal formulated by the Conference of Presidents .
There is therefore some confusion as to what we are voting on .
That is why we did not feel that we could deem these amendments to be acceptable .
On the other hand , all the other amendments have been deemed to be acceptable , and indeed has always been the case .
( Parliament adopted the calendar of part-sessions as amended )
Simplified procedure - without report


Initiative of the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg with a view to the adoption of a Council decision establishing a procedure for amending Articles 40 ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) , 41 ( 7 ) and 65 ( 2 ) of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 on the gradual abolition of checks at common borders ( 7217 / 00 - C5-0216 / 2000 - 2000 / 0803 ( CNS ) ) ( Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs )
( Parliament approved the initiative )
Proposal for a Council decision modifying Decision 1999 / 311 / EC of 29 April 1999 adopting the third phase of the trans-European cooperation scheme for higher education ( TEMPUS III ) ( 2000-2006 ) ( COM ( 2000 ) 0184 - C5-0231 / 2000 - 2000 / 0074 ( CNS ) ) ( Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Recommendation for 2nd reading ( A5-0153 / 2000 ) by Mr Beysen on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the European Parliament legislative resolution on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3330 / 91 on the statistics relating to the trading of goods between Member States , with specific reference to a simplified application of the nomenclature of products ( 14100 / 1 / 1999 C5 ­ 0134 / 2000 - 1997 / 0162 ( COD ) )
( The President approved the common position )
Report ( A5-0156 / 2000 ) by Mr Maaten , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture , presentation and sale of tobacco products ( COM ( 1999 ) 594 - C5 ­ 0016 / 2000 - 1999 / 0244 ( COD ) )
Madam President , on behalf of my Group , I would like to request that the vote on Maaten report be postponed until July .
Mr Fiori , to make things quite clear , you are therefore asking for the vote to be postponed , pursuant to Rule 146 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Is there a speaker in favour of this request and one against ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is surely an extremely important report on what is without doubt a serious issue .
My own opinion of the legal basis notwithstanding , I really have the greatest respect for the proposals submitted and , above all , for the work carried out by Mr Maaten , who had to process an unbelievably large number of proposals , both in committee and here in Parliament for plenary , in an unbelievably short space of time .
I think that we shall not do justice to the significance and importance of this issue if we complete this procedure in such a short space of time .
There are so many proposals - 120 in all - that I fear that majorities will be reached and results will emerge which are not compatible with each other .
We really do need more careful voting and coordination both in and between the groups so that we achieve a result which is worthy of its name .
With the best will in the world and with the greatest respect for this issue , we must not forget that we really are not under any pressure and we should use the time available to us for careful reflection and review .
Madam President , I must state my opposition to this request to postpone the vote . I do not think that there is any shortage of arguments against taking such action .
I know that the tobacco industry lobby is most anxious to prevent this directive and I think that this request is yet another ploy to prevent a vote , which is clearly a matter of urgency , from taking place .
I would remind you that the Council postponed its review of this dossier until it had heard Parliament ' s views .
If we postpone our vote , the tobacco industry will gain even more time , since the Council will then not be able to state its position until the end of June .
Furthermore , I think that Mr Maaten and the Commission on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy have produced a good piece of work .
It is true that many amendments have been tabled and also that in future we will have to make efforts to improve our work so that fewer amendments are tabled in plenary .
As it happens , however , I do not think that this would in any way justify postponing the vote .
Everything is in place for a vote to be held .
( Parliament rejected the request to postpone the vote )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
President .
I congratulate Mr Maaten and I shall take this opportunity , ladies and gentlemen , to tell you that I have received several letters from Members who would like us to respect the non-smoking areas because they suffer from asthma .
( Applause )
Report ( A5-0142 / 2000 ) by Mr Berenguer Fuster , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directives 85 / 611 / EEC , 92 / 49 / EEC , 92 / 96 / EEC and 93 / 22 / EEC as regards exchange of information with third countries ( COM ( 1999 ) 748 - C5 ­ 0011 / 2000 - 2000 / 0014 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0144 / 2000 ) by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ,
I. on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directives 69 / 169 / EEC and 92 / 12 / EEC as regards temporary quantitative restrictions on beer imports into Finland ( COM ( 2000 ) 76 - C5-0137 / 2000 - 2000 / 0038 ( CNS ) )
II. on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 918 / 83 as regards a temporary derogation for duty-free imports of beer into Finland ( COM ( 2000 ) 76 - C5-0138 / 2000 - 2000 / 0039 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted both legislative resolutions in successive votes )
Report ( A5-0159 / 2000 ) by Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the European Parliament resolution on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on historical liabilities resulting from nuclear activities carried out at the JRC under the Euratom Treaty - Decommissioning of obsolete nuclear installations and the management of the resulting waste ( COM ( 1999 ) 114 - C5-0214 / 1999 - 1999 / 2169 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I should just like to point out that I believe that the House has passed an illegal resolution in the vote on the calendar because a four-day week in Strasbourg would only be permitted if there were no additional plenary part-session in Brussels or , conversely , I believe that only if the full plenary week has been exhausted is it legal to hold additional plenary part-sessions in Brussels .
Please have the legal implications checked as a matter of urgency .
We have clearly passed a resolution which violates the spirit and probably even the letter of the Treaty .
Because this could result in our holding one-day sessions here and five-day sessions elsewhere .
That cannot be the purpose of the compromise .
Apart from that , it is a huge waste of money to cut a day here and then hold additional plenary part-sessions .
Mr Posselt , firstly , I am doubtful as to whether this is a point of order and , secondly , bearing in mind that , of course , the Bureau is willing to study everything that is asked of it , if that interpretation were indisputable , the amendment that you are criticising would not have been put to the vote in plenary session .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Parliament ' s calendar of part-sessions - 2001
Mr President , I rise to register my opposition to the amendments of my own Group with whom I am out of step , and to similar amendments , which seek to eliminate the Friday sittings in Strasbourg or to break up one of the weeks of the part-session into two distinct part-sessions in order to artificially increase the number of part-sessions in Strasbourg and even to the amendments by Mr Pannella and company , seeking to remove Mondays and Fridays from the Strasbourg part-session or to extend the additional part-sessions by two to three or even five days .
All of these amendments are designed to render the Protocol on setting the venues of institutions , which is annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam , meaningless . They are designed to attempt to eliminate Strasbourg and to concentrate Parliament ' s activities in Brussels .
By the same token , and out of respect for the rule of law , I voted against the amendments which seek to cancel the additional part-sessions in Brussels .
It is legitimate to attempt to change the terms of the Treaties regarding our working venues , although it is not an intention that I share .
To whittle away , however , at the provisions of the Treaty and the annexed acts is a method that is not worthy of the parliamentary institution .
Mr President , I voted not to work on Fridays in Strasbourg although I am totally in favour of our meeting here .
I decided to vote not to work on Fridays because Friday was inconvenient for almost all the Members .
I would like to make the following point : we put in a lot of time but we work inefficiently and we produce relatively little compared with , for example , the Italian Parliament , which meets less often - it never votes on a Monday and does not meet on Fridays at all - yet produces at least 500 laws every year .
We are constantly wasting time in fruitless discussion and , in particular , with all these votes , resolutions , motions , urgent debates and so on and so forth which , when all is said and done , do not produce any tangible results and undermine the genuine legislative activity which should be the principle activity of a Parliament which is not an advisory body but an organ which adopts resolutions .
Mr President , I am ashamed to say so but I could not stop myself dozing off a couple of times during the votes which have just taken place and only managed to wake up and cast my vote at the last minute .
This is because Parliament ' s work is not being organised properly .
I voted for the calendar but I would like to make it clear - as Mr Speroni has just said - that we waste a great deal of time in fruitless activities .
Voting on the amendments to the recitals of all the legislation , even those which merely lay down guidelines , when all is said done , makes it impossible for us to carry out our mandate .
Directives and regulations should be produced and voted upon in Parliament , but Parliament must not waste time in other sorts of debates which could be dealt with by the committees .
Mr President , I agree wholeheartedly with what Mr Posselt and Mrs Flesch have said about this unfortunate vote on cancelling Friday sittings here in Strasbourg .
I take the view that this violates the Treaty and violates the agreement on where Parliament sits .
I am really pleased that the ministers in the Council of Ministers and not Parliament continue to decide where Parliament sits and I hope that the Intergovernmental Conference will not change that .
It is hard to understand why we are passing a resolution on a four-day working week when the Treaty refers to session weeks .
Every employee in the Community , hundreds of millions of people , work a five-day week .
Once we have a four-day week for everyone else , because the self-employed already work whenever they want , then we can also say that a session week is only four days long .
I think it is a disgrace , it is a waste of money and as for the ridiculous ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I too should like to endorse the statement made by my fellow Member from the Liberal Group , Mrs Flesch .
I would like to add something further .
It is a fact that very few Members of the House are present here in Strasbourg on Friday mornings .
Nevertheless , I think it is scandalous that some Members want to prevent others from working on Friday mornings . What I find even more scandalous is that these Members think - and I have here an e-mail to this effect from Mrs van Hulten to other Members - that when the Friday sitting is removed , it would still be possible , in spite of everything , to register on Fridays , in order to receive one ' s salary , even without having worked .
I urge the Bureau to be consistent and to also remove the possibility of MEPs ' receiving money for Fridays on which they have not worked !
. The current practice of moving Parliament between Brussels and Strasbourg implies high costs for the European taxpayer , and reduces the effectiveness of parliamentary work .
It undermines Parliament 's credibility and political impact .
The solution to this problem would be to concentrate Parliament 's work at only one place .
We call upon the Member States to consider a change of the Treaty , allowing the European Parliament to decide upon its own seat .
In order to make this point we have voted for all amendments that aim to reduce the amount of time spent in Strasbourg and increase that in Brussels .
. I have not missed one day in any of the Parliamentary sessions since the election and , I believe , only two in the previous Parliament .
It is therefore with some hesitation that I voted for the deletion of Fridays from the Strasbourg sessions .
I have come to the opinion that agendas for the Friday sessions have been engineered to fill up the session and are becoming increasingly meaningless .
It does this institution no favours when , on a Friday , there are fewer than a hundred Members debating a resolution which is of no importance .
This Parliament must restructure its mode of operation to reflect the changed working conditions .
Mr President , I voted for the motion and I would just like to point something out : in Italy , the Schengen Agreement is not always correctly applied .
I refer , in particular , to the systematic border checks carried out by border and financial police on all those who travel from Italy to a Schengen Treaty country by aeroplane , particularly in general aviation aircraft , or what are commonly referred to as private aircraft .
According to the Schengen Agreement , there should not be any systematic checks and there should not be any obligation to present oneself to the Customs authorities or notify them that one is leaving national territory .
I therefore call upon the Commission to take action to ensure that the Schengen Agreement is respected and that the bureaucratic interference of the Italian authorities ceases .
Beysen recommendation ( A5-0153 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for the Beyson report , but this is a classic example of what I was referring to in the vote on abolishing Friday sittings .
In this document , the European Parliament defines the categories of goods to be taken into consideration in the drawing up of statistics on products which cross the borders between one State and another , although it is not clear what purpose this will serve .
Is it so that we know how many sweets have passed from Italy into France or how many tractors have passed from Germany into Sweden , for example ?
This seems to me to be excessive bureaucracy as well as an unnecessary amount of work for Parliament .
Since we are recording the amount of goods which cross the borders , why do we not also record how many people cross from one country to another within the European Union ?
But to what end ?
We must make life simpler for our citizens and simplify our legislation as well !
Maaten Report ( A5-0156 / 2000 )
Mr President , I am totally in favour of this report safeguarding citizens ' health , the health of both active and passive smokers .
But when , in the past , have we ever succeeded in reducing tobacco consumption or cigarette smoking ?
Only once , Mr President .
' And when was that ? ' you may ask .
In 1848 , during the fight against the rule of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in Milan . In order to damage the Empire ' s finances , the Milanese managed to reduce consumption of cigarettes .
There we are : we should have written , ' Smoking kills and governments are grateful for their saving in pension expenditure ' .
Mr President , I voted against Amendment No 54 which would have allowed a derogation from our yield limits on cigarettes exported to third countries .
All cigarettes are harmful .
None do any good .
Smoking is an addiction , indeed a slow suicide , as we have voted , and manufacturers have admitted and known for some time that it causes cancer and other diseases .
I agree that third countries should set their own health rules but we should not approve of double standards .
If we choose tight protection for our citizens we should not allow the exporting of more dangerous products which profit from the addiction of others .
No man is an island .
All human beings are involved with each other .
I cannot condone profiting from the ill-health of third world citizens .
Mr President , I wanted to give an explanation of vote stating that I had abstained on much of the Maaten report .
Not because I do not share its health policy objectives , but because I really cannot understand why the Commission and this House wish to pass such detailed regulations at European level , since all they do is destroy our credibility .
When we start regulating the size , colour and position of notices and pictures on cigarette packets , then we are no longer the Europe in which I believe .
I disagree with Newton Dunn ; it is not a question of double standards .
But we are responsible for the health of our citizens and we must decide on rules here .
Other regions must decide on their own regulations .
We cannot have rules which damage exports , with the result that others will then export to these regions .
I hope that we can reach agreements with the Council and the Commission here which contain clear , unequivocal health regulations , but not the sort of details which , in all conscience , we cannot decide in this House .
Mr President , this is just a brief statement to declare that I do not totally agree with the Maaten report either .
Although I am well aware that we have a duty to give consumers all the relevant information regarding the risks presented by the products they use , I do not feel that it is our duty to adopt prohibitionist laws , particularly where third countries are concerned .
The report contains excessive statements which are reminiscent of a certain type of terrorist propaganda which I do not feel would advance our awareness-raising operation , also because whenever we go to extremes in these sectors and these fields we obtain the opposite effects to those desired .
I would stress another point : I come from Italy , which is a Mediterranean country , and I would like to emphasise that the attempt to reduce subsidies for tobacco plantations is a very delicate issue . I would ask the Commission to think again for thousands of jobs are directly or indirectly jeopardised .
There are a whole range of activities connected to the tobacco industry , which we must protect at all costs .
Mr President , I share this explanation of vote with Mrs Cauquil and Mrs Bordes .
In voting in favour of this report , despite its shortcomings and particularly despite the hypocrisy of Member States in their actions to limit smoking , we feel that we are making a stand , within the options available to us , against the right of tobacco cartels to poison the population for the sake of private profit .
The measures that are adopted should furthermore impose the same restrictions , at least on European tobacco companies , when they manufacture their products under licence , or sell their poison , in the countries of Eastern Europe , in Africa or elsewhere .
The behaviour of tobacco companies , which runs completely counter to the interests of society as a whole , mirrors the behaviour of all the large oil , asbestos , arms and agrifood companies , which are prepared to run the risk of harming the population or the environment in order to make a little more profit .
We rejected all of the amendments which sought to reduce the already very limited range of measures that have been proposed or to restrict information on the lethal effects of smoking , because they all serve the interests of the tobacco companies ' lobby .
On the other hand , we support the employees in this sector , as well as small tobacco producers , whose income , as well as conversion to useful production , should be financed by levies on the enormous profits of the tobacco companies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ban on any form of television advertising for cigarettes and other tobacco products in Directive 89 / 552 and the more stringent labelling requirements for tobacco products introduced in this directive illustrate the ambivalent attitude of the European Union towards tobacco .
On the one hand , tobacco crops are subsidised to the tune of over EUR 1 billion a year ; on the other hand , we are trying to reduce the consumption of tobacco in the Union as much as possible .
This dilemma must be resolved in the interests of the credibility of Community policy .
The European Union must set itself the task of pursuing policies which our citizens can understand .
There is an irresolvable contradiction between the promotion of tobacco cultivation , on the one hand , and the advertising ban , on the other .
If this contradiction cannot be resolved at Community level , then the Union must fight to help attain a high level of health protection by supporting a reduction in tobacco cultivation at international level .
Mr President , I have voted decidedly in favour of the amended proposal and of the legislative resolution with regard to the new tobacco directive .
It is certainly the case that the texts need to be cleaned up because we have adopted quite a few texts which , according to the rules of lawmaking , do not belong in this directive at all .
Despite this , these texts too are of value because they send out a message .
They show that Parliament puts public health first .
Protecting public health is effectively our responsibility .
Even if we harmonise legislation , public health should not be compromised in any way .
Public health is not just any old interest , it is of general interest .
Today , we have proved that we stand for this , and that is how it should be .
- It was important that the tobacco industry was not able to prevent the vote taking place in Parliament today .
More than half a million people died as a result of tobacco addiction in the EU in 1990 .
Despite huge lobbying by the tobacco industry , including an attempt to say the process is illegal , the European Parliament will stand firm on public health .
I welcome the commitment to increase information in cigarette labelling .
Health warnings will take up 40 % of the front of the packet and 50 % of the back .
The industry must be made to give details of the ingredients of the cigarettes , including the tobacco , and just as importantly the filters and additives used to make them .
Each individual brand should list all additives , not just the prohibited ingredients .
This must be made public knowledge and not hidden behind a shroud of ' trade secrecy ' .
People have a right to accurate information on the health risks of tobacco .
The Greens want to ban many of the more than 600 additives in cigarettes .
We need to know what these substances are and make sure that they are properly tested .
Smokers have a right to know exactly what a cigarette contains .
. ( EL ) No one denies the harmful effects of smoking and no one can object to measures being taken to reduce smoking .
From this point of view , the Commission ' s proposal for a directive contains positive provisions .
However , although there is serious doubt as to whether the Commission ' s proposals will reduce consumption , they will undoubtedly have a decidedly adverse impact both on Community tobacco producers and on tobacco industries and merchants .
The amendments relating to a reduction in the consumption of tobacco products are no more than a pretext , the sole purpose of which is to reduce budgetary spending ( approximately 1 billion euros a year , compared with total tax revenues in the 15 Member States of the EU from the tobacco sector of 60 billion euros a year ) and , if adopted , will cause huge and irreparable social , political and financial damage to regional economies , especially in Greece .
Similarly , the abolition of the three-year derogation for the application of the directive proposed by the Commission and the application of the directive both to tobacco products consumed in the EU and to products for export to countries in which the strict provisions of the directive do not apply will cause Greece tremendous problems .
- I welcome the adoption of this report on the basis that it ensures the right to a higher level of public health protection and could potentially pave the way for the eventual eradication of tobacco addiction within the EU in the long term .
If we take the example of the Community 's approach to food safety legislation , whereby legislation is based on the principle that consumers have the right to know what they are consuming , then the same principle must apply to tobacco products : smokers should have the right to know exactly what they are smoking and what the effects are .
We as legislators share the responsibility with the manufacturers of ensuring that the public is fully informed about the dangers of cigarette addiction .
The recommendations regarding warnings on the front of packages are to be welcomed because they shatter the myth that those products are less damaging to a person 's health .
- ( PT ) The debate and vote on this report revealed a clear divide between Members .
We supported those proposals which , in order to protect the health of consumers , did not endanger jobs by preventing European farmers from continuing to produce tobacco and the European industry from continuing to manufacture it . As imports are not being prohibited , the American multinationals would be the only ones to gain from a reduction in the production and manufacture of tobacco in Europe .
We therefore voted in favour of maintaining direct aid to income in the tobacco production sector within the European Union , thereby guaranteeing greater compliance with Community preference , in order to reduce the share of American multinationals in the tobacco consumption market and to protect the interests of Portuguese farmers , without public health being endangered .
We also tabled a proposal intended to protect the Portuguese brand ' Português Suave ' as we consider that there is no reason to threaten this .
- I voted in favour of lifting the ban on sales of oral tobacco , so called snuff , in the EU .
I totally understand that all tobacco products are dangerous to human health and cause different types of cancer and cardiovascular diseases .
However , I think that all tobacco products , which may have different levels of harmfulness , should be treated in a way that is compatible with the level of danger they represent to human health .
I also want the different restrictions to be based on scientific facts .
That is why I tabled an amendment with my colleagues to do the monitoring of health effects by the year 2002 instead of 2005 which was the initial proposal from the Commission .
This proposal to change the timetable is also very important from the public health point of view .
Unfortunately my proposal was not adopted .
I still think that even if the scientific data come as late as the year 2004 , this information will be very important for us Members of the European Parliament , when we create future legislation in the field of tobacco products .
- ( DE ) I was the rapporteur in this House for the common organisation of the raw tobacco market over 30 years ago .
In the enthusiasm of youth , I hoped then to convince my 141 fellow members not to introduce a market organisation for raw tobacco which would give us mountains of unmarketable raw tobacco to deal with .
Had I been listened to then , we would not now be crying over the billions spent on raw tobacco subsidies .
However , I am not trying here to come to terms with the past .
Things are as they are and we shall have to live with them , because tobacco farmers cannot reasonably be expected to be left standing out in the rain after 30 years ' common organisation of the raw tobacco market .
We have got them used to subsidies and that has , to all intents and purposes , destroyed our chances of restructuring the cultivation of raw tobacco .
Now the health missionaries in the House want to stamp out the cultivation of raw tobacco in the European Union altogether ; this will naturally benefit imported tobacco - which they cannot and do not want to stop - without , of course , making chain smokers give up smoking .
There is no question that a lot of people in the EU and everywhere else in the world die from lung cancer , which hits far more smokers than non-smokers .
But the sort of bans imposing unreasonable demands on the European tobacco industry which the Committee on the Environment has cobbled together with no regard for job losses , especially for women , will not make the citizens of the European Union give up smoking , as the current drastic measures in relation to advertising and labelling have already proven .
The suggestion that EU manufacturers should be required to comply with the same regulations as regards tar , nicotine and carbon monoxide yields for cigarettes intended for export to third countries is perverse in the extreme .
Wanting to accept a sense of responsibility for the health of smokers in third countries is obviously well meant , but when this sense of missionary purpose results in the tobacco industry relocating production intended for export to third countries outside the EU , then all we will have managed to achieve are job losses .
Measures such as this would result in the relocation of 12 % of cigarette production in the tiny principality of Luxembourg alone .
What is being produced here now is out of proportion and unfair to tobacco farmers and discriminates against the European tobacco industry .
One cannot shake off the impression that certain people in the health lobby would prefer to exile smokers altogether .
I am in favour of warnings on packets , but not in favour of a skull which takes up 60 % of the surface area .
I am in favour of a targeted information campaign , especially for young people , in order to make them aware of the dangers of smoking to their health .
But I am against all the exaggerations contained in this report and am therefore unable to vote in favour of the report as it stands .
- ( SV ) To impose a total ban on snuff in the EU , at the same time as cigarettes and other tobacco products are permitted throughout the Union , is illogical .
The ban on snuff , which applies in all EU countries except for Sweden , ought therefore to be lifted .
The advantage of snuff is that using it does not affect the environment .
While smoking causes suffering and illnesses even among people who do not smoke , especially among people with allergies , it is only the snuff taker himself who is exposed to possible ill effects .
Snuff is addictive .
The tobacco industry should not , therefore , be allowed to market snuff as something healthy .
The Marketing Directive , which will shortly be banning tobacco advertising within the EU , must be safeguarded and apply to all tobacco products .
. EPLP Members fully support the main direction of the Maaten Report in highlighting health risks associated with tobacco .
However , we believe that there are a number of technical areas which will need to be clarified following first reading in negotiation with the Commission and Council .
The question of tobacco growing subsidy has not been addressed in this report .
Although many Members feel it is part of the whole debate on tobacco and health and should have been included here , we believe that it would be more correctly brought up in reform of the CAP .
. ( FR ) Smoking kills : it causes 500 000 deaths every year in the European Union , which is 1400 a day or almost one a minute .
One smoker in two will die , sooner or later , from a smoking-related disease .
These figures speak for themselves and are terrifying .
Surely we need no further reason to support the proposed directive in its current form , quite rightly amended by our rapporteur , Mr Maaten , whom I must congratulate on his remarkable work , the broad outlines of which I have supported .
Tobacco is not just like any other product .
It requires specific regulation and it is most apt , in light of recent studies , that the Commission has proposed a revision of the legislative texts in this field .
Although it may seem naïve to try to eradicate smoking , I think that we can certainly reduce it considerably by providing the consumer with better information .
We have just declared ourselves in favour , much to my satisfaction , of warnings that will cover 35 % of the front and 45 % of the back of the cigarette packet .
Personally , I am sorry that most of my colleagues could not be convinced of the impact that photographs on these surfaces would have had .
I supported Amendment No 75 on banning the sale of tobacco products to anyone under the age of 16 .
To the anti-prohibitionists , who feel that this ban would , on the contrary , make cigarettes more attractive to young people , I would answer with an ethical argument .
Our society has the duty , in certain areas , to set strict moral limits .
It is the whole issue of human behaviour that is at stake here .
This also raises the whole issue of education and of health education in particular .
Such education must be started at the earliest possible age , and I think that adolescence is an appropriate stage to instil in young people the limits that they must not transgress .
On the basis of ethical considerations , too , I feel it is reasonable to ban exports of products that we consider to be harmful to our own citizens to countries outside the Union .
I voted in the strongest possible terms against Amendment No 54 .
Europe has other assets and other creative ways of finding export markets .
During yesterday ' s debate , some Members raised the point that smoking kills more people than tuberculosis , Aids or other infectious diseases .
This factor alone is sufficient reason for us to grasp this problem with both hands .
Mr Maaten ' s report is a step in the right direction , but is only one step , because the fight for life , for health , is an ongoing struggle that should engage us all .
- ( SV ) The Swedish Christian Democrats have today voted in favour of significantly stricter rules for the tobacco industry , including the proposal that as much as 40 per cent of the space on packets of tobacco products should be taken up with health warnings , compared with the 25 per cent proposed by the Commission .
We are also in favour of no longer permitting any references to ' light ' or ' milder ' tobacco , as well as of phasing out subsidies for tobacco cultivation within the EU as soon as possible , for this form of subsidy is directly at variance with the EU ' s efforts and initiatives to improve public health .
Moreover , we wish to abolish the peculiar tobacco derogation granted to Greece .
When it comes to the continued ban on sales of snuff to other EU countries , we Swedish Christian Democrats consider that account should be taken of the unwillingness of these countries to introduce a new product they consider to be habit-forming and destructive from a public health point of view .
Sweden ought not , in the name of free trade and the internal market , to force snuff products upon other countries and peoples if they do not want them .
In the same way , the Commission ought to have shown similar respect for Swedish alcohol policy by having extended and made permanent Sweden ' s 1994 derogation concerning private imports of alcohol .
. As Member for a tobacco-producing region , I would like to express my reservations about the proposal for a ' tobacco ' directive .
Nobody questions the validity of its aims : smoking kills 500 000 people per year in the European Union alone .
We must therefore fight vigorously against smoking , just as we must fight unremittingly against drug addiction , alcoholism and all dangerous addictions , whether they are of natural or chemical origin .
In this respect , we can only share this report ' s proposals , which seek more effectively to warn , make aware and inform consumers of the risks to which they are exposing themselves through excessive tobacco consumption .
Let us even go beyond labelling or limiting toxic substances by making better use than we currently do of the special fund established under the common organisation of the market for tobacco and to which producers pay contributions in order to fund the research and development of less harmful varieties .
On the other hand , however , let us be careful not to destabilise too suddenly , without allowing time to convert , a farming sector that involves 135 000 producers and employs 400 000 seasonal workers , in often very vulnerable agricultural regions .
In this case , there are a few basic principles which I feel must guide our action : we must act fairly against all factors likely to cause addiction , such as advertising and excessive consumption of dangerous pharmacological substances - funded , moreover , from the social security system -and we must ensure that restrictions on tobacco production within the Union are accompanied by the monitoring and restriction of imports so that their effects on consumption are not cancelled out .
We must give tobacco growers an adequate timescale in which to adapt their production to the new standards for tar content and we must reject any restriction on subsidies for tobacco production unless we replace them with aid as an incentive for conversion .
In other words , we must ensure that it is not only European Union producers - who supply only 25 % of the raw tobacco consumed in Europe - who , without compensation or an adequate timescale , bear the costs of a regulation which is undeniably praiseworthy , but which is too sketchy in the form that has been proposed to us .
. I wholeheartedly support amendments to the Commission 's revised proposal on tobacco that will strengthen health warnings on cigarette packets in the EU .
The new cigarette health warnings will cover half the surface of cigarette packs , with warnings 40 % of the packet size on the front and 50 % on the back .
Smoking kills and there is no nice way to put that .
Half of all long-term smokers will eventually be killed by tobacco and of these , half will die during middle age losing 20 to 25 years of life .
As many as half a million people in Europe are killed by tobacco , and 85 % of lung cancers are caused by smoking .
Madam President , I would have welcomed the radical proposal to use pictures to illustrate the damage which smoking does to health , like they do in Canada .
If shocking pictures of smoke-filled lungs or rotting teeth show the harmful effects of smoking , go ahead and print them on packs .
I am disappointed it was not accepted .
It is preposterous that tobacco companies are trying to destroy this legislation .
I am fed up with them trying to put a stop to these proposals .
They have misled people for far too long .
At present , warnings are cleverly hidden by displays or coloured packaging .
Smokers or those considering smoking must know the full risks of their choice .
The proposal will ban the use of misleading terms such as ' ultra light ' and ' low tar ' .
People have been hooked on the idea that ' mild ' and ' low tar ' cigarettes are healthier .
This is simply not true .
Low tar cigarettes cause just as much damage as normal cigarettes .
This legislation will spell out the dangers of smoking and save thousands of lives .
- ( DE ) I voted against an export ban on stronger cigarettes for the following reasons :
The Commission has proposed banning exports of cigarettes with yields of over 10 milligrammes of tar , 1 milligramme of nicotine and 10 milligrammes of carbon dioxide to third countries .
This would result in a massive erosion of EU cigarette exports and the loss of several tens of thousands of jobs .
This sort of ban benefits no one , because the cigarettes will simply be manufactured outside the EU .
But the jobs will be lost here .
The EU has absolutely no powers to enforce such a ban .
It has nothing to do with the internal single market .
The anti-tobacco fanatics should not act as if exporting cigarettes was tantamount to handing out cyanide .
The EU is acting inconsistently , given that it also subsidises the cultivation and export of tobacco to the tune of EUR 1 billion .
The EU is using an export ban to act as the health missionary of the entire world .
That is presumptuous and offends the customs and practices of other countries .
The right move would be to promote the work on global uniform production standards for tobacco products already begun in the World Health Organisation .
Unilateral action by the EU will be pointless .
Berenguer Fuster report ( A5-0142 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for this report on the exchange on information regarding , specifically , financial activities .
But I would like to accompany this vote with two questions : firstly , who inspects the inspectors , and secondly , why does the European Parliament not extend its controls - as I would advocate - to cover all the uses to which the citizens ' money is put , including the money used to finance pension funds ?
The Members of the Pensioners ' Party are not yet aware of how the money from contributions which should boost their pensions is spent .
I feel that this directive should be extended to include this type of inspection .
Lulling report ( A5-0144 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for Mrs Lulling ' s report on beer imports into Finland , but I have to say that I do not agree with these excise duties .
For my part , I would like there to be a free market .
I remember when , at the age of about 21 , I worked as part of the crew of a ship which travelled between New York and the Bahamas : whenever I left the ship and ventured into New York City I was allowed to take two bottles of whisky with me , which , as I boarded the bus , would regularly be bought from me at three times the price , for whisky was much more expensive in New York .
Therefore , this trade between one State and another which was caused by different levels of duties was only natural .
If we want to avoid it , we must remove all the excise duties in the European Union .
The rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , strongly criticised the taxation of alcohol in Finland in her report , which she considers to be unreasonably high . She also criticised the aim to restrict the importation of beer through derogation provisions .
In my opinion , the Commission ' s proposal is a rather good compromise , however .
According to that proposal , Finland would reserve the right to abolish the more stringent restrictions on imports from EU countries in stages by the end of 2003 .
Imports of beer from non-member countries such as Russia and Estonia would be limited to six litres up to the year 2006 .
Nowhere else on the EU ' s external borders is such cheap alcohol available than in those regions that border onto Finland .
In my opinion , Finland is consequently justified in maintaining more stringent restrictions on imports than other EU countries .
Under the Treaty of Amsterdam , Internal Market policy also has to take into account considerations of public health and environmental protection .
Derogations with regard to Community legislation must be allowed if they are made on the basis of higher levels of health protection .
- ( SV ) Finland has been hit by serious problems in the form of a drastic increase in the amount of beer imported from third countries , mainly from Estonia and Russia .
It is therefore a very positive development that the Commission is now granting Finland a six-year derogation to enable it to introduce a new limit on beer imports from third countries .
Finland is in that way being granted the right to limit beer imports from third countries to six litres per traveller per day up until 1 January 2006 .
This issue shows that , in the case of Finland , the Commission realises that private individuals ' being more or less free to import alcohol across national borders is not only a trade and tax issue . More to the point , it has to do with public health and with a social policy on alcohol aimed at combating the horrors of abuse .
The Commission might have shown similar insight in its treatment of the Swedish derogations from 1994 concerning private imports of alcohol into Sweden .
While Finland is obtaining a new derogation , the Swedish one is being removed . In this way , the Commission , together with the Commissioner responsible , Mrs Bolkestein , are drastically undermining the tools of alcohol policy , democratically decided by the Swedish parliament and government and consisting of high taxes and a restriction on imports .
Vidal-Quadras Roca report ( A5-0159 / 2000 )
Mr President , I have to say that I was very surprised to find myself voting for this report , for it represents , perhaps , the surrender of the European Union to one of the original Communities out of which it grew , namely Euratom : the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes .
I remember how , when I was a child , one of the books which I found most interesting and which I will never forget bore the title : ' My friend the atom ' by Walt Disney . This book explained clearly how our future would be improved by the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes .
Sadly , today , we have to come to terms with the fact that someone has prevented this from coming about .
And who was that ?
We should send the multibillion pound bill for decommissioning the nuclear industry to the person responsible , although I still do not know who that is .
Maybe you can enlighten me , Mr President .
. ( FR ) The purpose of the programme that we have been debating today is to organise the dismantling of the Joint Research Centre ' s nuclear installations and the management of waste resulting from their nuclear activities .
I do not have any major disagreement with the basic proposal , but I do have questions about this programme ' s budget , and the rapporteur has not provided us with any practical proposals on this .
It is true that he rejected the proposal by the European Commission .
Let us remember that the Commission proposed that it would finance this operation by using , at the end of each year , unspent appropriations from heading 3 .
To this end , it would use a ' reception ' line under the current sub-section B4 , which covers energy , the monitoring of nuclear safety and the environment .
This solution may be satisfactory insofar as it places financing outside the framework programmes for research , a point stressed by the European Parliament , but it nevertheless falls short of what is required .
We cannot accept the long-term financing of the dismantling of nuclear activities through a ' miscellaneous ' line , of an order which is left to chance .
I must take this opportunity to say that I do not approve of the growing frequency with which we resort to this type of line !
I imagine that this is what led the rapporteur to " take note " of the Commission ' s proposal , without actually putting it into practice .
The report proposes that we establish a trialogue between the institutions in order to reach a solution but says nothing about the alternative means for financing that have been suggested .
The most mistaken course of action would therefore be to have the dismantling of these nuclear activities financed by Member States , by methods that still remain to be found .
That would inevitably cause a backlash in the countries that are not greatly affected by this problem .
On the other hand , the most suitable solution is the one that seeks to have this programme financed by a self-contained budget line .
I am quite aware that it is not the easiest solution , because it involves voting for additional appropriations in the review of the Financial Perspectives .
Nevertheless , we must provide ourselves with the means to achieve our ambitions , particularly when we are talking about nuclear activity .
In the long term , then , we will have to put pressure on the Council to accept the creation of this self-contained budget line .
In the shorter term , for pragmatic reasons , we should not obstruct the rapid implementation of this programme .
I therefore support the following compromise : in the very short term we set up the ' picking up the pieces ' line proposed by the Commission , and initiate the trialogue promptly in order , in the medium term , to achieve a vote for an self-contained budget line .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Special UN conference : Women 2000
The next item is the Council and the Commission statements on the outcome of the special UN session on ' Women 2000 : gender equality , development and peace ' .
Mr President , I am grateful for this opportunity to tell you about the work carried out at the special UN conference assessing the 1995 Beijing Conference and its Action Platform .
The Beijing Conference was extremely important in terms of recognising women ' s rights and approving an Action Platform endorsed by 189 countries . It established the content of these rights and approved instruments allowing these rights to be gradually consolidated .
As usually happens with this type of international instrument , it became necessary to assess this given that five years had passed since it was signed .
This assessment was carried out over many sessions with preparatory meetings initially being held within a PropCom .
These sessions made slow and sometimes difficult progress in terms of agreeing on certain aspects on which one group of countries , particularly those which are usually regarded as the most developed , considered that progress should be made . There were also some problems in terms of resistance to the language used , not in the political declaration which was approved earlier , but in the final document which was composed of four parts .
One of these parts concerned the measures and policies to be approved by governments in order to consolidate not only the Beijing Platform but also everything which has been achieved by the various countries in the meantime .
This process was relatively complex as alliances were established between certain countries , particularly from the European Union , and the South American countries with the result that the G77 broke up at a certain point . This prevented the work from being carried out at a quicker pace .
Anyway , to summarise as quickly as possible , important progress was made in recognising women ' s rights as human rights . Very positive political statements were made in terms of rejecting any violations of these human rights , eradicating all practices which violate human rights , referring to the Commission on the Status of Women and the optional protocol and combating racism and violence based on racial grounds .
On the issue of violence against women , the satisfactory progress made included the agreement achieved on combating trafficking through international cooperation , with support for actions which are being developed at other levels in the international arena , and also the acceptance by all countries of public campaigns against violence based on the campaign instigated by the European Union on zero tolerance .
Also discussed were the issues of poverty eradication policies , work as a factor in ensuring the economic participation of women , the essential need to adopt policies reconciling family and professional life and the need to develop access for women to education and training as a basic instrument in guaranteeing them independence .
There was also , for the first time , a more positive reference to issues of maternity and paternity , usually associated with the male role , and the need for job-sharing .
On health , the need was noted for a holistic approach in terms of sexual rights and not just in the area of reproductive health .
Special references were introduced , also on the EU ' s initiative , to handicapped migrant women , elderly women and native women .
The role of men was adequately emphasised , as also was the need to reinforce the participation of women in building increasingly peaceful societies .
Also addressed was the introduction of an issue which was one of the fundamental instruments in the Beijing Platform , namely mainstreaming from the gender perspective . This must be included in all mechanisms on human rights , in the UN Treaties and at the Millennium Summit and represents an extremely important achievement .
As for the methodologies for assessing the progress made by countries in applying their commitments , positive references were also made to measurable and well-established objectives resulting in the type of monitoring which allows a more objective balance to be produced , at any time , than that achieved to date .
Discussions were also held on reinforcing the role of non-governmental organisations in conducting all the policies and as privileged partners of the State in ensuring that the Platform is implemented .
The basic problems concerned what the European Union has already included in Article 13 of the EC Treaty and the difficulty which some countries had in accepting the issue of sexual rights and its inherent diversity and the issue of sexual orientation .
In this context , and continuing the strategy defined at EU level of considering that this special conference was not a new conference but an intermediate phase , it was considered that , on these more delicate aspects , the language of Beijing should be used again . The EU took the decision to make a final declaration in which it reaffirmed the progress achieved and its intention to continue fighting to ensure that what for us is already a commitment , given the very constitution of the European Union and specifically Article 13 , can be enshrined in future instruments .
Mr President , I am very pleased to be here today to give you the Commission 's view on the outcome of last week 's extremely important conference in New York .
I want to apologise for the fact that my colleague , Commissioner Diamantopoulou , is unable to be here this afternoon .
As some of you will know , she was unavoidably delayed by commitments which she had undertaken before the timing of this debate .
As honourable Members will also know , she is coming to the committee next week in order to have a full exchange with Members , many of whom will , of course , have shared in the success achieved last week .
Members will be able to follow up any further details in that exchange with Commissioner Diamantopoulou next week .
I wish to begin , on behalf of the Commission , by thanking the Portuguese presidency for coordinating the Member States ' positions so effectively and for handling the negotiations with other delegations so proficiently under what I understand were occasionally extremely difficult conditions .
We should also thank Parliament for its exceptionally cooperative approach to the special session .
Members of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities made an extremely valuable contribution as part of the delegation .
However , beyond that , they took the initiative in cooperating with parliamentarians from the Member States and from associated countries .
That was an exceptionally useful piece of political coordination .
We in the Commission also very much welcome Parliament 's motion for a resolution : it is a firm , constructive statement of Parliament 's commitment to gender equality .
The European Union can be proud that it was the most progressive regional group represented at New York .
Collectively we fought hard to move forward from Beijing .
If we succeeded , it is due in part to the unity of purpose demonstrated by the various institutions .
And succeed , I think we can say , we certainly did !
In a number of areas the outcome document goes far beyond what was achieved five years ago at Beijing - a conference which I remember observing from slightly closer than would have been the case today .
We managed that without having to concede any watering down of the Beijing Platform in other areas .
The document reaffirms women 's rights as human rights .
It urges all UN members to sign the CEDAW optional protocol and calls for a strong awareness of gender issues in the workings of the International Criminal Court .
It recognises that discrimination against women is often compounded by discrimination on other grounds .
While we did not obtain specific references to all the grounds listed in the EC Treaty , the presidency made the European Union position clear in a final statement before the General Assembly .
We have new , much clearer language on the state 's duty to end violence against women , including domestic violence , and to put an end to the appalling yet growing traffic in women .
The outcome document acknowledges the link between gender equality and greater prosperity .
If women are given a chance to participate fully in social and economic life they will be better able to pull themselves and their communities out of poverty .
It seems to me , with some responsibilities in this field , inconceivable to have a sustainable model of economic development which does not have gender issues at its heart .
The document reaffirms the prime importance of education as a means of empowering girls and women .
It also refers to the need for a fair distribution of work between men and women , including work in the home , and for measures to make it easier to reconcile work with family care commitments .
It also has something to say on methodology - how , in other words , to ensure that these fine intentions are put into practice .
At the European Union 's insistence the document recognises the importance of establishing benchmarks and progress indicators .
Lastly , we welcome the reference to men 's role in bringing about greater gender equality for they clearly have a considerable responsibility as well .
The Union is better equipped than ever to deliver on its Beijing commitments with its stronger stand on human rights , gender equality and discrimination .
The Amsterdam Treaty gives the Union increased scope to push ahead with implementation of the Beijing platform for action .
I hope nobody will doubt the Commission 's determination to do precisely that .
The effort is of course led by my colleague , Commissioner Diamantopoulou , but it is an endeavour in which all of us as Commissioners wish to be fully involved .
Mr President , I thank the Commission , the presidency and all my fellow delegates for the excellent cooperation which we have enjoyed and which has greatly impacted on the conference .
The conference has shown that , over the past couple of years , we have indeed made progress and we have done so in many areas .
For example , women are taking part in peace talks , improvement has been made in the field of women ' s health problems , employment for women has improved in a number of countries and violence towards women has been put on the agenda in a number of countries .
As such , we can trace the progress that has been made , although new problems have emerged in the meantime , of course .
I am thinking of the problem of AIDS in women .
In some African towns and cities , up to 40 % of pregnant women suffer from AIDS .
There is also the problem of trafficking in women , rape of women during armed conflicts , etc .
Consequently , Beijing + 5 could not afford to just focus on the progress that was made in respect of decisions taken at Beijing .
Beijing + 5 also had to incorporate a number of new issues into the text , which it did , after a hard fight .
In my opinion , we have three tasks within the European Union .
Firstly , as a European Union , we should remain the driving force behind the Member States .
We played this role very distinctly in the past and we must continue to do so in future .
It will be evident from the Fifth Action Programme and the financial resources used for this purpose whether the European Commission is serious about applying the Beijing Platform in years to come .
But it is not only vis-à-vis our own Member States that we have a role to play , we also have a responsibility towards the candidate countries , those which we as MEPs have brought together in New York .
We have proposed to continue the cooperation with them and asked the Commission , during the screening activities it carries out in the context of the acquis communautaire , to assess the achievements with regard to the Beijing Platform too .
We also have a role to play vis-à-vis third countries .
It is dreadful to have to listen to the problems which women face in third countries : genital mutilation , killing if they have been unfaithful or if they had sexual relations before marriage and all these kinds of problems .
It is the most atrocious form of violence perpetrated against women .
In my opinion , the aid which the European Union grants to third countries should definitely be conditional on what these third countries need to do in order to solve the problems faced by women .
Finally , I would like to make it clear that I am a Catholic , but an open-minded Catholic .
I was greatly shocked by the news that the Church which I belong to has associated itself with the most fundamentalist groups which exist in society .
It was shocking , mainly because my Church offers so few opportunities to women within its own structures .
Mr President , the European Union brought women ' s rights throughout the world to the fore in New York .
They were tough negotiations , which is why the Portuguese Presidency deserves special thanks for speaking not only on behalf of the 15 Member States , but also on behalf of the associated countries , with the exception of Poland , as do the Commission and the Commissioner and her negotiators , who worked together with the Parliament delegation in an exemplary manner .
That is most unusual , so here too special thanks .
And fruitful collaboration with non-governmental organisations also strengthened the position of the European Union .
Our unity allowed our opinion to prevail in the progressive countries and to make significant progress in the twelve crucial areas .
At no time did the European Union brook any watering down of the Beijing action platform , although it is , of course , a pity here that we did not have a resounding success on every count and that the clear language in Article 13 on non-discrimination and sexual rights is not reproduced in the outcome document from New York .
As already mentioned , we have the fundamentalist countries of Iran , Iraq , Libya , Sudan and even the Vatican to thank for that .
But this should not blind us to the fact that we really moved forward with women ' s rights in New York and made significant progress in the areas already mentioned .
We now have specific measures in place in many countries to combat the cruel practice of genital mutilation , the issue of HIV / AIDS was addressed and the role of women in the peace process , ignored hitherto , was recognised as an issue .
The fight against violence was put on every country ' s agenda .
Access to capital , the role of men - very important , we would like to see more men taking part in the process - still need to be promoted .
We tabled our document , our report , in New York as an official UN document , another major success .
I think the resolutions of Parliament and our progress in the European Union , Parliament ' s progress , are now accessible to every country .
We were very successful with the initiative to invite parliamentarians twice and have speeded up the implementation of the action platform .
We came to the clear conclusion with our partners from associated countries that we need to work together more closely in order to promote women ' s rights .
We want to have a parliamentarians ' conference in two years to review Beijing .
We insist on another world women ' s conference in five years to ensure that the process continues .
We must all make a joint effort to ensure that the subject of gender mainstreaming , equal opportunities for men and women , stars on the world political agenda .
It is in our interest to fight for this .
I think , and this is my personal opinion , that it is also in our interest to fight to ensure that this happens in Eastern Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to start by saying that I am pleased with the outcome of the Special UN Conference on ' Women 2000 : gender equality , development and peace ' .
In my opinion , all credit for this follow-on from Beijing + 5 , where the implementation of the action plans was discussed , should go to the NGOs , but also to the European Parliament , which was represented by five strong women , and naturally the European Commission , which , in the form of Mrs Diamontopoulou , was 100 % committed to this conference .
Progress has been made , that is for sure , as has already been mentioned by previous speakers .
The distribution in care , actions against trafficking in women and empowerment of women are important issues to me .
I am pleased that the participating countries still subscribe to the Beijing Declaration and the action plan .
It is nonetheless unfortunate that only eight countries in the world have managed to meet the essential obligations which follow on from these with regard to equality in education , paid work and a minimum representation of 30 % in national parliaments .
It naturally gives me pleasure to be able to say that the Netherlands is one of them , although I am not entirely satisfied with its emancipation policy , or rather , the lack of it , and that Germany , the Scandinavian countries and South Africa too belong to the eight .
But back to Europe .
In my opinion , it is downright alarming that it is precisely the candidate countries which have shown a decline in the number of female employees and the number of girls registered in education .
This development merits particular attention from us in the European Parliament .
Not only is education the best way to obtain gender equality , it is also the quickest way and the only way if we want to ensure that our children and grandchildren will not still be grappling with these issues .
We should point out to the acceding countries that they need to improve this situation .
The other point I wanted to raise is the opposition from the Islamic and Asian countries with regard to women ' s rights , in connection with which they refer to the sharia .
I find it downright disgraceful that we women cannot join forces across the world .
I would ask you to give attention to this .
It is not just the Islamic and Asian countries to which this applies , but also Poland , for example .
Finally , I would like to ask you , as I do not have any hard facts at my disposal regarding the acceding countries , whether it would be possible to analyse the status quo in the candidate countries , ideally as soon as possible so that we can assess whether the situation there has improved .
Finally , I would call for the NGOs , in particular , to be given a key role , because it is they who are promoting awareness , and this is something which needs to be done not only among women , but also among men .
They need to be involved in this process .
At the end of the day , we are relying on the political will of society as a whole to commit itself to a cause which is related to democracy and human rights and which transcends all cultures and religions .
Mr President , I am not now asking for an extra minute in the name of equality , however ; I shall try to keep to two minutes .
I will join that group of people who just said that real progress was made on many issues at the New York Conference .
Women ' s human rights , the trade in women , violence against women , women ' s economic rights , the status of civil society : we may be pleased about the progress that has been made in all these issues .
It is the very determined work of the European Union we have to thank for that .
We were there as observers , but it is to be hoped that we were also able to influence the way the talks went - at least in some respect .
It was especially gratifying for me that all the Member States and almost all the candidate countries were talking together under Portugal ' s leadership .
This is a promising sign that we will also be able to strengthen legislation on equality within the context of the European Union .
I myself do not remember seeing such single-mindedness , and for that thanks go to the chairman and , obviously , the Commission as well .
The only exception among the candidate countries was Poland , which was not at all interested in supporting the strengthening of women ' s rights in the same way as the Member States of the European Union and the other candidate countries .
I would appeal to Commissioner Patten that when enlargement negotiations are being conducted , serious attention be paid to Poland ' s compliance with EU legislation on equality and its recognition of women ' s rights .
I also think that greater attention must be paid to women ' s rights in connection with the cooperation that is going on with Mediterranean countries , as it is there that glaring violations of human rights , particularly in respect of women , take place .
I believe this conference has given hope to all those millions of women who are without fundamental human rights ; and we need a further follow-up conference in five years ' time .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Presidency .
I did not participate directly in the New York conference , but the reports I have heard , from participants and in other ways , have really praised the European Union as being very much a motor of progressive change .
I think that , happily enough , we can declare the Beijing platform for action a success .
If there is anything which really has had a very secure foundation , it is very much this platform that has been adopted .
We saw this from the assessment , showing a host of committed women around the world working not only on a small scale but also on an extremely large scale where , for example , violence against women is concerned .
I should also like to thank Mrs Smet .
I do not belong to any church and come from a country which has now also separated the Church from the State .
I want to thank all practising Catholics who are dissociating themselves from the Vatican State , which is behaving as it is .
If we cannot enter into dialogue with the Vatican State in the future , we shall probably have to question its basis for existence .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , the Assembly of the United Nations has once again offered an opportunity to demonstrate the progress made since the Beijing Conference , as well as the problems which remain and which need to be resolved .
Education is still the most effective instrument for ensuring that women can freely exercise their rights and for allowing greater access to positions of responsibility , both in the workplace and in public life .
Knowledge of new technologies has been considered to be of great importance in terms of allowing full participation in the society of the future .
The media is of enormous importance as it can allow women ' s voices to be heard , and can transmit an image , without stereotypes , which is committed to society and the quest for solutions to everyday problems .
Women ' s health is one of the priorities of the meeting ' s final document , with special mention of the spread of Aids , especially in certain areas of the planet , which affects women in a particular way and requires special measures for prevention and treatment .
One of the objectives is the eradication of domestic violence , which will be considered as a public issue and therefore subject to national legislation .
Violence against women and girls will be punishable by law , which means that there will have to be legislative reforms in the countries where it is not yet considered a crime .
Poverty particularly affecting women must be eradicated , and this is why the countries which have signed the agreement will send 0.7 % of their GDP to development programmes aimed at eliminating what has come to be called the feminisation of poverty .
Globalisation has generated new problems which particularly affect women , such as trafficking in human beings , prostitution and drug-trafficking , which should be combated so that women may live a dignified and free life in conditions of equality .
All these objectives must be achieved in the next few years and , in order to ensure they are complied with , we are requesting a new meeting within the next five years .
The fifth programme for equality promoted by the European Commission must serve to promote the position of women , to eliminate the remaining inequalities , integrating gender policies into all Community programmes .
This meeting has therefore been of enormous importance in terms of making progress in the situation of women in all parts of the world .
The European Union ' s position , given that it has a higher level of development and , therefore , better conditions for women , must not allow us to forget the situation of women in other areas , where daily hardships are combined with malnutrition , extreme poverty and a complete lack of respect for their fundamental rights .
Mr President , I want to thank the Council of Ministers and the Commission for their respective interventions .
The Women ' s Conference at the UN in New York came perilously close to failing .
A small group of Catholic and Islamic fundamentalist countries clearly intended to undermine the progress achieved by women from around the world in Beijing five years ago .
The issues which created the most problems were women ' s rights to sex education , free abortion and safe sex in order to protect themselves against HIV and AIDS .
These issues united certain Islamic and Catholic countries ranging all the way from the Sudan , Iran and Libya to the Vatican , Nicaragua and Poland , which were prime movers in the fight against these rights .
Some countries attempted to quash wordings about governments ' responsibility to protect women from various forms of violence .
In spite of the fact that , last week , we were in danger of turning the clock back , we eventually agreed upon a final document which looks ahead to progress on the basis of the Women ' s Conference in Beijing and , at the same time , marks out the route towards increased equality in the future .
I should like to point out that the Presidency of the EU , especially the minister Mrs De Belém Roseira , actively contributed to a successful final outcome , something we would thank her for .
The final document embodies progress in certain respects .
Forced marriages and murders committed for reasons of honour are mentioned for the first time in an agreed international document .
On the issues of rape within marriage , right of possession and right of inheritance , together with the right to asylum on the grounds of gender-based persecution , the wordings have been strengthened .
Women ' s right to equal participation in macro-economic decision-making , together with the allocation of quotas with a view to increasing women ' s participation in political parties and parliaments are other matters which are being taken up .
The resolution we are to vote on demands that the institutions of the EU , Member States and candidate States make active efforts to turn the final document from Beijing + 5 into a reality .
It is especially important that all candidate States , including Poland , undertake to abide by the EU ' s policy on women ' s rights .
What are now required are economic resources for putting the decisions into effect and inspection tools for supervising their implementation .
Mr President , the Beijing + 5 Conference has not actually made any significant progress in achieving the aims defined in the Beijing 1995 action programme .
The women ' s march for equal opportunities and the affirmation of differences still has a long way to go and is effectively full of dangerous paths .
This became clear in New York when Islamic fundamentalists attacked what , in recent years , has characterised women ' s demands : an end to domestic rape and violence , an end to the right for men to commit crimes passionnelles and an end to female circumcision .
However , it must , of course , be appreciated - as Commissioner Patten said , moreover - that the Conference as a whole confirmed and consolidated women ' s rights as human rights .
However , similar positions on sexual rights , sexual health and the self-determination of women have caused an unholy alliance - evident at Beijing - to be formed between Christian and Islamic fundamentalists , including the Vatican , Poland , Nicaragua and a number of Islamic countries .
Furthermore , I feel that mainstreaming and empowerment were consolidated in this Conference , and also the fight against poverty and trafficking in human beings , but that there was an absence of tangible , verifiable objectives such as the need for a greater representation of women in the institutions and also for projects to fight poverty .
I welcome the positive contribution made by Europe to forging closer relationships with other countries and the NGOs .
Mr President , the very positive assessment that we are making today of the meeting in New York , should not allow us to forget that there have been serious deficiencies and great hypocrisy , even within the European Union , which make me want to double my efforts from now on .
An example of this , and this is an appeal to the Council , is the issue of wage discrimination .
It has been demonstrated that , compared to men doing the same work , women receive 50 or up to 80 per cent less .
This is not in our legislation .
Nevertheless , it appears that the European Union approves of it .
I wonder if the Portuguese Presidency , before the end of its mandate , could make a recommendation in this respect .
It also seemed extremely important to me , Mr Patten , that in the meeting in New York , when the policy of microcredits was discussed - loans to certain women so that they may be given access to financial autonomy - the countries recognised that these programmes of microcredits had been a complete success .
Why does the Commission and the European Union , given such a positive assessment , not implement these programmes so that the European Union may also offer its women with no resources the possibility of these policies ?
Please answer me , Mr Patten .
Mr President , the European Parliament ' s delegation played a magnificent role with regard to the candidate countries .
Our work has been outstanding in this respect .
I do have reservations with regard to Poland , but precisely because Parliament ' s delegation played such a significant role .
Mr Varaut , you are very badly informed . You have made a fool of yourself .
You were not in New York , but I was .
Your information is not accurate . It is not even true .
Your intervention is very unfortunate because it is false .
I have to refute what you have said because none of it is true .
Mr President , I , too , would like to thank the Portuguese Presidency , in particular Minister Maria de Belém , and the Commission , represented by Commissioner Diamantopoulou , for their guidance and coordination work both at the preparatory stage and during the Conference , for this allowed the European Union to make a substantial contribution to the production of the final document .
It has already been said many times : the work carried out by the UN and in New York has demonstrated clearly that some progress has been made since Beijing .
Women are no longer regarded as merely vulnerable people who need to be protected but as the social protagonists of change and as an essential part of society ' s resources .
The need to continue the fight against all forms of discrimination on grounds of gender , race , ethnic origin , religion , age , disability and sexual orientation , which are still rife throughout the world , has become clear .
The need has become clear for governments to include a gender aspect in all government policies , from employment to development , from social policies to the fight against violence .
There is an evident need to continue to step up dialogue and cooperation with autonomous women ' s organisations in civil society , politics and the institutions .
A number of challenges remain at national and international levels and for the European Union , particularly in the context of its development cooperation policy .
In this regard , I would like to draw Commissioner Patten ' s attention to the Commission ' s frequently negligent attitude towards the adoption of drafts which provide for the involvement of women on development cooperation with Mediterranean countries .
Poverty affects women more than anybody else .
Therefore , we need to focus on clear policies which fight the social exclusion of women and consolidate their role as active protagonists of political change and economic development .
If globalisation is to provide new opportunities , it must include globalisation of the human rights of all people , globalisation of fairness and globalisation of equal opportunities .
Development must be regarded as a project to expand the freedoms which all human beings have the right to enjoy .
Therefore , the need for recognition of rights without any discrimination must be a priority both for us and for the international organisations .
Mr President , the World Conference on Women , which was held five years ago , meant a breakthrough at the time in the worldwide recognition of women ' s rights as an area of human rights autonomy and empowerment .
In contrast to this , I have mixed feelings about the UN Conference which was held in New York last week .
On the one hand , it was confirmed that it is up to governments to guarantee equal rights for women and to pursue sound emancipation policy , and , despite many people ' s fears , no retrograde steps were taken .
On the other hand , it was once again impossible to reach agreement on sensitive issues which had not been resolved at Beijing , such as the recognition of the right to self-determination for women in their personal life , including their free choice in pregnancy and sexual behaviour or sexual preference .
This is greatly disappointing .
Actual equality and freedom for women is only possible if all options are open to them and if the traditional family image is not held up to them as the only true one .
Resistance of the kind displayed by governments , diplomats and officials last week , is a form of rearguard action , however .
It is impossible to stop a revolution with clever word games and little schemes behind the scenes .
The fight goes on .
The true inspiration which I gained from last week ' s conference in New York lay in the power of the international women ' s movement which , contrary to popular belief , is as vigorous and alive as ever and is also bolstered by a new generation of young women who , strong and well-informed , stand up for all kinds of issues .
The European Union and Member State representatives showed great commitment during the Conference to the issue of sexual self-determination for women and the non-discrimination principle pursuant to Article 13 .
The fact that this did not end up in the final document should not be a reflection on them .
What can , however , be expected of the Council and Commission , is that they put their money where their mouths are in their respective Chambers .
In addition to what we obtained last week , namely reparative legislation on equality in work and professional life , they should produce new additional legislation to prevent sex discrimination across the entire range of social life .
Article 13 offers the opportunity to do so and the Beijing + 5 Conference issued an instruction to this effect .
Surely a European Union which , at international conferences , is full of rhetoric on banishing sex discrimination should set about developing effective policy instruments which can attain this goal at the level of the Union itself .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Many friends and women who are colleagues in this Parliament have just pointed out that my name appears as one of those who signed against women 's rights .
I want to put on record that I am not against women 's rights .
I have always supported women 's rights .
It must be an error .
Sometimes colleagues bring petitions from delegations and we sign them .
I am sorry about that .
That was not a point of order , Mr Khanbhai .
You mentioned a matter which has not been raised by anyone . There has been no reference during the debate either to your name or to a list of reprobates .
I really do not know what you are talking about .
President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure you will understand the pride I feel as a Portuguese national at the general acclaim for the Portuguese Presidency ' s excellent work in promoting equal rights for women during its term and particularly with regard to the special UN conference on Beijing + 5 .
The conferences on violence against women , trafficking of women and reconciling family and professional life , together with the UN conference on Beijing + 5 , are clear examples of the Portuguese Presidency ' s involvement in this area .
Anyone at the UN last week , like myself , would know that , in the end , we only managed to approve less than one-third of the final document .
The difficulties were immense . I feel that it was both the work of the Presidency and the Commission and the involvement of all the female Members of this House who were there , and who joined with the national MPs of the Fifteen plus those from the applicant countries with the exception of Poland , which ensured that progress was made in the final document and that this was a lot closer to our intentions than when we started the work .
Finally , I must say that the European Union has a decisive role to play in this issue .
We must lead the way in defending women ' s rights and we must continue the work in this respect .
The resolution approved by the European Parliament was greatly appreciated in the UN .
I must thank the President-in-Office for having come directly from Canada to Strasbourg so as not to miss this meeting which is so important to us . I know that , since Monday of last week , she has been constantly dealing with women ' s issues both in the USA and in Canada .
Mr President , I must thank the Members for all their compliments on the Presidency ' s work .
I must also say very sincerely and with immense gratitude that the conduct of this work in this way was only possible because we all - the Presidency , the Commission , the European Parliament and the non-governmental organisations - cooperated together . This was also possible because the bilateral contacts which we each maintain , by working hard at them and thereby multiplying their effectiveness , were vital in the end result .
I am extremely grateful to everyone for this .
When I spoke , it was clearly on behalf of all the Member States of the European Union and of all the applicant countries except for Poland .
In the contacts established with Poland , it has been made very clear that accession cannot be exchanged for non-recognition of women ' s rights .
The European Union could not take any other position on such an issue . Women will no longer accept their fundamental rights being regarded as a bargaining chip for political issues .
Europe must continue to be the driving force in developments in this area . These must be achieved through cooperation , particularly with all like-minded countries , some of which , like Canada , are totally committed to the Presidency ' s statement presented at the end of the special conference .
We must take advantage of all these opportunities .
These developments must also be achieved through benchmarking processes and by using the conclusions of the Lisbon Special Summit , which considered that in Europe there could be no economic development without social cohesion .
In this way the European Union itself can develop and export these instruments for assessing , measuring and exchanging good practices enabling gradual and effective progress to be made .
I referred to the Portuguese Presidency ' s work on the issue of discrimination in the European Union . Portugal is also very pleased that , in the last Social Affairs and Employment Council , a resolution was approved on reconciling family and professional life .
Women are constantly being penalised because the time that they devote to family life gives employers objective reasons to discriminate against them in wage terms .
Therefore , in my opinion , we have already achieved what was asked of us .
Finally , I must thank the President and the whole House for your kindness and the comments which you have made , and I also thank the Commission for its support .
The Portuguese Presidency is now coming to an end and sincerely hopes that the subsequent French and Swedish Presidencies will continue the work which we have together managed to achieve so that they represent the next stage in the consolidation of women ' s rights .
Thank you , President of the Council . We all share this hope .
The debate is closed .
I have received four motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , following the intervention by my colleague in seat No 662 , here , in Parliament , I have asked for the floor on a point of order because this fellow Member has obviously fallen victim to misinformation or to a misunderstanding .
In fact , the Members of the European Parliament who were in New York as part of the European Union delegation , which comprised 15 people with observer status , were not allowed to speak because , in accordance with the UN ' s procedure for extraordinary general assemblies , the Portuguese Presidency spoke on behalf of the European Union .
The Commissioner was entitled to give a speech in the plenary session .
Even in the working parties , we were not allowed to take the floor , which was always given to the Portuguese Presidency .
Do not , therefore , put words into the mouths of the Members of this Parliament who were in New York .
In no instance did we speak in an official capacity , still less on behalf of this Parliament , although we did have some useful discussions with the Commission and the Council , with Members of the Parliaments of Member States and associated States , who allowed us to convey our views .
What were banned from these meetings were the positions that Parliament adopted under the Smet / Gröner report , and nothing else .
Mr President , Poland ' s name has been bandied about a great deal , so I must say that we simply stated that Poland is accepting the acquis communautaire .
If Poland tells us that it is free ...
( The President cut the speaker off ) I do wish to point out that a fellow Member has accused us , Mr President , and I must be entitled to correct this , otherwise this is not a genuine Parliament .
You may hear my explanation of vote tomorrow , Mr President , if you are going to cut me off .
Mrs Lulling , we have already heard speeches on the matter from the President of the Council and from the Commissioner on the subject of Poland .
You were speaking about a point of order .

Mr Izquierdo Rojo had already replied to Mr Varaut and therefore , Mrs Lulling , you could not use your speech on a point of order to discuss the issue .
You have , of course , prompted Mr Varaut to ask to take the floor for personal reasons .
You are quite right , Mr President .
In short , I agree completely with the need for a full debate in this Chamber , even if we do not all agree .
Next , having heard what most of the speakers said on the issue of Poland , I am left in no doubt as to many of the things said in corridors and about the pressure of which I was informed , which was brought to bear on the representatives of Poland , a free State .
To conclude , I have heard many things said about the Vatican , but I can see that Jesuitical thinking , at least , has truly pervaded the European Parliament .
Mr Varaut , we cannot base our debates on corridor conversations . These are not reliable sources of information and are not available simultaneously to all Members in all languages .
The corridors are there specifically for private , informal conversations , not official debates .
Tunisia - Human rights - EU-Tunisia Agreement
Mr President , Commissioner Patten , Mr Da Costa , we are approaching this debate , as we approached the questions we put to the Council and the Commission , aware of the responsibility entailed in our partnership relationship with Tunisia , which we consider will be decisive for the success of the entire Euro-Mediterranean Partnership .
In fact , Tunisia is the first country with which the European Union signed an Association Agreement within the context of the 1995 Barcelona Process .
We attach great importance to preserving and consolidating this Agreement , and I would like to make it quite clear that , as far as we are concerned , there is no question about this .
On the other hand , it is true that we are following the development of the situation in Tunisia closely and with a sense of involvement , and we appreciate the positive factors such as economic and social progress , which we do not deny , particularly in relation to the region ' s situation and the role played by Tunisia in the Arab Maghreb .
We do not , therefore , intend to interfere in the internal affairs of a sovereign country at all , and it will be more useful if today ' s debate serves to bring about renewed commitment on both sides to the values and undertakings entailed in our partnership .
However , in all honesty , I must also say that we are extremely concerned about the human rights situation in this country , particularly because we are convinced that , given the socio-economic and cultural context involved , there is the possibility for substantial improvement in the degree of freedom of the press , of speech , of association and of movement , conditions in prisons and the autonomous exercising of justice , so that the country can move towards full expression of the rule of law .
And this is the moment to do so .
This is why we call upon the Commission and the Council to support this process by joining us in making representations to the Tunisian authorities .
We must not forget that the creation of a free trade area is not the sole objective of the partnership policy , nor , moreover , that the partnership does not just consist of an exclusive relationship between the governments but has to ensure support and due respect for civil society , for the autonomous associations which uphold human rights and freedoms and for the role of women , whose lives in this country are full of sacrifices and who are often at great risk and undergo indescribable suffering .
For our part , we must prove that the Euro-Mediterranean policy is a priority for the Union as a whole and that it is not based on the egotism of those of us who are motivated by the desire to conquer new markets for our goods or obtain cheap labour for our businesses .
It is also based on shared values , on respect for cultural , religious and linguistic differences , and on policies capable of producing prosperity and security for the entire Mediterranean area .
Today , may this debate serve to remind us and our partners of all these things .
Why is Europe silent about human rights in Tunisia ?
Is it on account of the stability and economic progress which this holiday destination enjoys ?
Is it because of the political links with France or the European socialists ?
Or because it has adopted a constructive stance in the peace process in the Middle East ?
Or do we see Tunisia mainly as a bulwark against the rise of Islamic fundamentalism ?
At any rate , President Ali only has the religious fanatics in mind .
He seems to be obsessed by them .
But this concern is more of an alibi than a justification for the human rights situation in his country .
Not only Muslim fundamentalists , but all political opponents are systematically silenced .
Tunisia calls itself a democracy , a democracy without opposition that is , without freedom of the press , without fair judicial processes and with torture and the elimination of political prisoners and their families .
Tunisia has concluded an association agreement with the European Union which contains a clear human rights clause .
There can , of course , be no question of President Ben Ali ' s claiming rights under the agreement but shirking his obligations under it .
If the violations continue , the Treaty will unfortunately need to be suspended .
Would Commissioner Patten agree with me there ?
Tunisia is the first Mediterranean Sea partner with which this association agreement has been concluded .
Given its economic development , it can act as a model for the entire region , but it should then , of course , meet the political criteria .
The European Union cannot allow one agreement partner that which it denies another .
The Association Council must , therefore , look into the human rights situation as a matter of great urgency and draft a democratisation programme .
If the European Union keeps quiet any longer , it will be partly responsible for the human rights violations in Tunisia .
Mr President , in March , the Delegation for Relations with the Maghreb countries and the Arab Maghreb Union , of which I am vice-chairman , made a visit to Tunisia , where we observed that , while there has been undeniable economic progress , there exists a democratic deficit in the field of freedoms , particularly in the area of the press and the audiovisual media .
We were also able to observe - and I think this should be stressed - that the Tunisian authorities are aware of this deficit , which they justified time and time again through the need to temper their political openness in accordance with their particular idiosyncrasies and culture as well as the danger to Tunisian society of the growth of Islamic fundamentalism .
They therefore asked for understanding and patience .
I must say that the Tunisian Government has made gestures which indicate goodwill . They made these gestures during our visit and this is reflected in the report which the delegation has presented to Parliament .
In the view of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats and European Democrats ) , we are therefore holding a debate which is necessary but which should not take the form of an exaggerated and alarmist condemnation , which is often what happens , but which should recognise certain facts which concern us because they affect the areas covered in the association agreement , such as the respect for human rights and democratic principles . This issue must be resolved by means of political and social dialogue , and an effort on the part of the Tunisian Government to implement legislation which will guarantee political pluralism in a real sense and not in a purely formal sense and , above all , provide the necessary freedom so that the citizens can express their opinions and the media can reflect them .
This is the message which this House must send to the Tunisian authorities , who must receive them in the positive light in which they are intended .
To this end , within the framework of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation , the Commission , the Council and Parliament must not go into reverse with regard to the aid programmes which must be implemented within the framework of MEDA II .
Education and training in democratic principles are a fundamental element of sustaining a plural and democratic society .
Young people , judges , the police and journalists need to have full knowledge of the rights they must exercise and defend .
This is the area in which the European Union can and must cooperate .
It also concerns me that Commissioner Patten , who is present , is not sufficiently sensitive to the serious problems currently faced on the southern side of the Mediterranean , where Tunisia plays a very important role .
Emigration , fundamentalism , poverty and political instability cannot be resolved by pronouncements and good intentions alone .
We need true political will and the economic and human resources to put it into practice .
In any event - and this could serve as a summary of the debate - we cannot restrict our cooperation with third countries to purely trade and economic issues .
To this end , we also ask Tunisia , together with economic reforms , also to make progress with political reforms aimed at guaranteeing freedoms , but with the aid and cooperation which , of course , they receive and will continue to receive from us , at least from my Group .
We also believe that we need a common strategy in the Mediterranean , as the resolution states , and that , together with political , social and security aspects , special attention is paid to the cultural and human dimension .
This is why we need to strengthen the interparliamentary dialogue and the dialogue with the representatives of civil society .
As we say in my country , By talking we come to understand people ' .
If one thing characterises the people of the Mediterranean , it is the wealth of their thought and their words , and that , ladies and gentlemen , costs very little .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we start to examine an issue like this we should remind ourselves of the European Union ' s general attitude to its external relations .
The EU has a set of values and principles which it naturally tries to promote in its relations and which it tries to use in all areas of its associations with third countries .
Contrary to what may be inferred from one honourable Member ' s intervention , the European Union does not act according to geographical position by being more demanding on countries which are closer and less demanding on countries which are further away .
We do not work in this way .
We usually use uniform criteria and , in particular , the idea that it is preferable to open areas for dialogue in order to encourage countries to make regular bilateral assessments of what is causing exclusion factors or misunderstandings .
In this respect , the work of the Council and Commission is totally coherent . In particular , and I do not really need to say this , Commissioner Patten has more credentials than most of us on the issue of respect for human rights .
On the specific issue of Tunisia , I must say that the Council is fully aware of the human rights situation in this country . It has noted all the concerns expressed on various occasions by this House .
Naturally , it has also noted the considerable concerns expressed here today .
The Council has on several occasions emphasised to the Tunisian authorities its concern about the occurrence of certain situations , particularly the lack of general freedom and press freedom in particular .
Human rights issues are frequently discussed , as the speakers have noted , within the political dialogue which the Council is conducting with Tunisia within the Association Council and through the Heads of Mission of the Member States in Tunis who have regular meetings with the relevant Tunisian government officials in this area .
At the moment this dialogue is centred specifically on the current reforms of the new press law , the operation and functions of the penalty enforcement judge and the amendments of electoral law .
The possibility of such a dialogue , which Tunisia did refuse for some time , represents significant progress .
During the two meetings of the Association Council which took place as part of our relations with Tunisia and which I attended , the Council reiterated the fundamental importance to relations between the European Union and Tunisia of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and , naturally , it used the opportunity to highlight certain specific cases , some of which have been mentioned here .
On a more national note , during the State visit by President Ben Ali to Portugal at the beginning of May , the Foreign Minister , Jaime Gama , had the opportunity to raise with his Tunisian counterpart the human rights situation in Tunisia and in particular the case of the journalist , Taouffik Ben Brick . He underlined the constant need to respect fundamental freedoms .
We realise that any kind of action in terms of political pressure can have advantages where carried out through the media .
We believe that there is room for several dimensions to be used in the international arena on this type of issue and we do not reject the efficacy of these actions .
However , the Council prefers to use the opportunities for influencing the Tunisian authorities more discreetly , and perhaps more effectively , by maintaining constructive pressure on them through political dialogue and various meetings at different levels .
We do not consider it appropriate to initiate the procedures needed to suspend the Association Agreement or to convene an extraordinary session of the Association Council which would probably be reported in the media but which would have no practical effect in specific terms .
Maintaining regular dialogue and continuing all the steps which have been made so far , when and if appropriate , is the right way to proceed in this context .
Despite these difficulties and the problems in moving this process forward which we all recognise , we must accept that there have been positive results .
We cannot ignore , and it would be politically incorrect to so do , the gestures of openness already made by Tunisia , particularly in freeing 600 political prisoners , returning passports to certain members of the opposition and being clearly willing to reduce tensions in the case of the journalist , Taouffik Ben Brick , and accepting his specific claims .
The Commission has also tried to finance actions in order to promote human rights and democracy in Tunisia through the MEDA programme for democracy and may provide further information in this respect .
Finally , in the Barcelona Declaration , Tunisia , like the other Mediterranean partner countries , signed up to certain principles involving respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Within the EU-Mediterranean framework and in reinforcing this framework as we are trying to do at the moment in close cooperation with the European Commission , we are also insisting on the importance of actively promoting the rule of law and the good management of public affairs which constitutes a key area in the dialogue between the two sides of the Mediterranean .
To conclude , I must assure you that the Council remains committed to promoting and reinforcing in Tunisia , as in other countries with which the EU maintains relations , respect for human rights , democratic principles and fundamental freedoms , and to establishing a true democracy with an open civil society based on a rule of law .
A measured policy is , in our opinion , the best way to achieve these objectives .
The Council will continue to pursue discreet but firm diplomacy and will continue its policy of encouraging all forms of progress towards democracy and the rule of law .
I am extremely grateful to the House for the opportunity to comment on these extremely important matters .
As a number of honourable Members have noted , Mr Taoufik Ben Brik 's hunger strike is over , but it has had a major impact both on the authorities in Tunisia and on civil society .
It sparked a public debate in Tunisia on the human rights situation in that country .
I want to make it clear that the Commission shares the view of the UN Special Rapporteur who states in his report to the Commission on Human Rights that : " Tunisia still has a long way to go to take full advantage of its favourable economic context and adopt measures designed to strengthen the protection of human rights and , in particular , the right to freedom of opinion and expression " .
But how can the Commission and the European Union in general influence Tunisia 's rate of progress in this area ?
This is best done by looking at the three main instruments provided by the association agreement linking the European Union to Tunisia .
The first , to which my colleague referred , is political dialogue .
This dialogue has already given us the opportunity to comment on Tunisia 's human rights situation twice at ministerial level at the two Association Councils that have taken place to date .
The Union has made a point of addressing the human rights issues in Tunisia in our many contacts with the Tunisian authorities .
The second instrument is the financing of positive measures in the form of grants from the Community budget for projects promoting the exercise of political and civil rights .
The MEDA programme for democracy , on which Parliament has strong and positive views , has financed training , information and awareness-raising projects for NGOs and for public opinion in this field .
A programme of support for the Tunisian media has already been included in the programming of future financial cooperation with Tunisia and should be the subject of necessary consultations with the Tunisian Government .
As Mr Dupuis reminded us , sustainable economic development and political stability depend , above all , from Russia to the Mediterranean , on strong institutions , not on strong men .
It sometimes requires strong men to ensure that the institutions themselves are strong and operate within the rule of law .
The third instrument is the European Union 's option of adopting restrictive measures , the most radical of which would obviously be the suspension of cooperation .
The Commission considers that , before having recourse to any restrictive measures , positive means offered by the partnership should be pursued to the limit .
There is still significant scope both at the level of political dialogue and the financing of support programmes .
I would like to explore this further with Tunisia .
Specifically , the Commission wishes to see to what extent the Tunisian Government will implement its promises regarding reform of the press code and facilitating freedom of association .
We also wish to see if our efforts to support the desired reforms by providing funding from the Community budget prove successful .
I will keep Parliament informed of developments in all these areas .
The issues that we have been discussing this afternoon are extremely important .
I know that Parliament is aware of the whole picture .
Mrs Napoletano , in her interesting address , pointed out the economic and social progress that has been made in Tunisia .
Others could have referred , for example , to the position of Tunisia on the sharia law .
Nevertheless , there are issues which give considerable cause for concern .
It is best at the moment to proceed by dialogue but , as the House will understand , I do not equate dialogue with being supine .
Parliament has legitimate concerns and a strongly felt point of view .
That can be expressed firmly but courteously , as Parliament is doing today .
I want to put the debate on Tunisia in context and to take up a point that was made by Mr Hernández Mollar and some other honourable Members as well .
Of course there will be events and developments that crowd in on us .
Today , inevitably , we have to give a good deal of attention to our efforts to rebuilding in the Balkans and , in particular , to prevent further social and political disintegration .
It is a policy in south-east Europe which , I should add , is not irrelevant to stability and prosperity in the Mediterranean .
But if I have to judge where we are going to face the main challenge in the medium and longer term , it would be , to be candid , our policy in and around the Mediterranean .
What is at the heart of the Union 's common foreign and security policy ?
It is the projection of stability .
That is the crucial element in our policy in the Mediterranean .
What are we trying to do there ?
It is true that we are trying to create , if you like , the Mediterranean equivalent of NAFTA .
But there is more than that , which I will come to in a moment .
I just want to make it clear to the honourable Member that my commitment to making this policy a success is total .
One of the things that most offends me at the moment is that our record in supporting it through development assistance is not nearly as good as it should have been .
For year after year we have only been able to spend 40 % or less of what we have committed in the Mediterranean , partly because of absorption problems in the region , partly because of our own failures , which I am keen to address .
I will make this bargain with the honourable Member : if , by the time I leave my job as a commissioner in 2005 , our record in closing the gap between commitments and payments is not a hell of a lot better than it has been in the last three years then he can have a contribution to his favourite charity .
That is what I would like to be taken as a mark of whether or not we are committed to making a success of our policy in the Mediterranean .
It is extremely important that we use our existing instruments much more competently , much more effectively .
That is what I would like to be judged on .
I want to repeat : this is not just about creating a free trade area , important as that may be .
Free trade is not the end ; free trade is a means to an end .
The end is the creation of an area of prosperity and political stability to the south of the sea that we have shared with North Africa and the Middle East for all these millennia ; it is about the sharing of values , as well as the sharing of trade .
It is not about creating hub economies which will make Europeans more prosperous : it is about working in partnership with Mediterranean countries in a partnership of values as well as trade , for the good of people to the south of the Mediterranean as well as those of us in Europe .
It is an enormously important part of Europe 's endeavours over the next few years ; as important , in some ways in projecting stability , as the whole process of enlargement .
I very much hope that in the next five years we will be able to carry that programme forward in Tunisia and the rest of the region .
Mr President , one of the best pieces of theatre criticism to be published in Europe in the 20th Century , in my humble opinion , went something like this : ' Yesterday was the opening of such and such a play , by such and such a writer ' .
I could not hope to emulate the crushing brevity of this , in my view , brilliant journalistic comment .
However , my question is practically the same .
Why are we arguing about the situation in Tunisia ?
Why is there a certain crisis in the relations between Europe and Tunisia at the moment which , in one way or another , no doubt affects the relations between the institutions of the European Union and the Tunisian authorities within the framework of cooperation and the association agreement ?
I believe that this is a useful question to ask , because only by understanding as accurately as possible what is happening in Tunisia and the challenges faced by that country , will we be able to find the tone of moderation and effectiveness which we must develop within the framework of cooperation .
There is a great paradox in Tunisia at the moment and my concern is that this paradox may be becoming increasingly dangerous .
Tunisia is the most peaceful and prosperous country of the Maghreb , but also has the most closed press and media in the Maghreb .
It is the country with the greatest growth and with the greatest advances in terms of social modernisation , particularly in terms of education and the status of women ; however it is the country in which the emergence of a civil society , which is born of this economic and social growth , does not have adequate means to express itself in complete freedom .
It is a country which is , and has been , in the forefront of the association agreements and the agro-Mediterranean policy , and which has signed all the international conventions on human rights but where , nevertheless , time and time again problems arise relating to human rights which are exaggerated by sections of the European media .
Believe me , I am sensitive to the question of human rights .
I have spent fifteen years of my life without a passport or driving licence .
I have had experiences , which I will not describe , in the police stations and prisons of the Franco dictatorship , but I believe that the fundamental problem in Tunisia at the moment is a different one : the future of Tunisia .
We will only be fulfilling our obligations if we in the European Union find the tone and the effectiveness to help the sectors in Tunisia who are in favour of the development needed to accompany and safeguard the future of economic growth and social modernisation .
I will end by saying that I share to a large extent the points which Commissioner Patten has expressed , but I would also like to hear from the Commissioner that he also feels a deep concern for Euro-Mediterranean policy , for the policy relating to the Maghreb .
Only by ensuring that we are not in a situation where the Council is giving less priority to the Mediterranean , the Commission is hindering the implementation of programmes and the European Parliament is simply giving lectures , will we be able to find the tone and effectiveness of a policy which will help the future of Tunisia , in friendship and solidarity , towards a situation which brings both socio-economic growth and full democratisation .
A lot is at stake , not only in Tunisia , but also in the whole of the region , when it comes to achieving the objectives of this task .
Mr President , the paradoxes of this Parliament never cease to amaze us .
We do not hesitate to set about installing a political regime in Kosovo which is antidemocratic and made up of only one ethnic group , from which the non-native populations , if I may call them that , will be excluded .
We do not hesitate to sign trade agreements with China , a totalitarian country if ever there was one , which ordered 1800 executions last year alone - that is the official total - and at the same time , we allow ourselves to pass judgement on the Tunisian government with what is , to my mind , uncalled for severity .
It is true that not all of the Union ' s Member States have , like France , had the privilege to have developed very long-standing links with Tunisia , which enable France to understand that the reality of the situation does not match up to the caricature that some fools in the media have managed to spread throughout Europe .
It is true that Tunisia does not match up to our idea of democracy , but how many countries in the world and even in Europe , live up to the idea of what democracy is according to a person who is already a democrat ?
Tunisia is actually the first country in the Maghreb to have signed an agreement with the European Union , and everyone recognises the progress that Tunisia has made in adapting its economy and its social fabric to the modernisation required by its links with the European Union and , unfortunately , by acceleration due to liberalisation through globalisation .
I would say that the results that Tunisia has achieved make a good case for the country and that is why the trial it is being subjected to seems somewhat disproportionate given the reality of the situation .
We must , in any event , remember that Tunisia was in the front line of combat when , a few years ago , Muslim fundamentalism threatened the whole of the Maghreb .
In my opinion , Parliament would be doing something it could be proud of if it took into account the whole geopolitical context of the region instead of behaving like some kind of activist cell . Such behaviour is not even worthy of a non-governmental organisation .
Mr President , the news reached me here in Strasbourg of a hunger strike involving more than one thousand political prisoners in Tunisia .
I would like to make two comments .
Based on Christian beliefs , we denounce this ultimate means of self-defence .
However , we are quick to add our condemnation of authorities which force their citizens into such extreme despair .
The present Tunisian regime does not tolerate any independent minds .
Hence the repression which has lasted for years and is even becoming increasingly harsh .
This is why I wholeheartedly concur with those who submitted oral questions today , particularly Mr Van den Bos .
He is quite right in asking the Council for real action because the EU ' s own credibility as a partner of the association agreement with Tunisia is in the balance .
" It is not a case of the population being denied its rights " , according to a Tunisian defender of civil liberties .
He goes on to say , " they might as well forget that these rights even exist . "
If Tunisians lead this fight , then the European Union should not and cannot trail behind .
Mr President , I too should also like to express my great concern at the deteriorating human rights situation in Tunisia , a concern that is actively shared by all friends of that country .
For several years now , those who have promoted human rights have suffered , together with their families , continual harassment by the Tunisian authorities and some of them have been given prison terms .



They are regularly followed by members of the state security services ; their passports , and those of their families , are confiscated ; their telephone lines are cut off or tapped ; they are subjected to defamation campaigns or to verbal and physical threats ; and finally , their relatives are regularly interrogated .
Given this kind of abuse , the European Parliament today reiterates its conviction that there should be no exception to the respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms . This rule cannot be flouted without damage being done , because Tunisia is the first European partner to have concluded , in 1995 , as a matter of fact , an association agreement with the European Union .
This agreement contains a clause which calls for human rights to be respected , with suspensive effect and provides for political dialogue .
I certainly prefer political dialogue to unilateral sanctions , but , for this very reason , it is our duty to tell our partners that we are extremely concerned about the situation in Tunisia .
It is our duty to ask the Tunisian authorities to undertake all possible initiatives to establish a genuine multiparty political scene , and to guarantee the freedom of the press and freedom of association .
But what form will this dialogue take , Mr Patten ?
What practical and specific steps can we take ?
How can we make the positions that we adopt here effective ?
We can start by asking how things are going to develop in Tunisia .
The Ben Brik affair alone has come to symbolise the exasperation of many Tunisians in the face of the depletion of their freedoms , with the press being only one of the many areas lying in ruins .
There has been a Ben Brik effect , which goes beyond his individual case and in three months , we have seen a whole civil society , which has demonstrated its determination to end the police state , suddenly gain a new dignity .
Over these three months , President Ben Ali has continued to wield the carrot and the stick at those who question his methods or who criticise the state of freedoms in his country .
Given this attitude , we are entitled to wonder if , tomorrow , Tunisia might not become a new hotbed of tension on Europe ' s southern border .
Tunisia ' s rulers have two solutions today .
The first is to continue to refuse to accept the reality of the situation in line with the principle - quite common in this type of regime - of insisting that everything is fine until the final moment , with civil society having to suffer a new wave of repression and to face up to it with courage and determination .
It would then be the international Community ' s task to isolate a power that would be an outlaw and to support the fight of the Tunisian people to regain their sovereignty .
The Tunisian government can also , however , choose the path of dialogue with civil society , in order to decrease tensions and to negotiate a way of pulling Tunisia out of this impasse and to lead it towards democracy .
I think that it is important , as Mr Abitbol said , that we choose our words carefully .
In any event , we must implement every measure that we can to ensure that that is the path they choose to follow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Tunisia must be seen in the wider context of the Mediterranean and the countries of North Africa with which the European Union is interested in maintaining dialogue regarding its peace and stability programmes .
Out of all those countries , Tunisia has certainly made the greatest progress in terms of its economy , stability and social services , and Tunisia is the country which is most aware of the importance of a Euro-Mediterranean dialogue on economic , political and cultural issues .
Nevertheless , we clearly cannot disregard the suppression of civil liberties taking place in that country , but I feel that it would not be sufficient or effective for us to adopt a purely condemnatory position , although we must show our disapproval .
We need an action programme which is capable of genuinely improving the situation step by step , through dialogue and by supporting Tunisian society by means of joint agreements and specific programmes on respect for human rights , as we planned to do with the Cards programme for the Western Balkans
In effect , we have to take into account the fact that countries with different traditions from those of Western democratic countries have to mature culturally in their growth towards the full implementation of civil liberties , and that this happens one step at a time , with the result that the whole process takes longer .
Isolation would not pay off and would be likely to undermine the endeavours of those who are working in Tunisia to improve the quality of its democracy .
It is therefore to be hoped that the EU-Tunisia Association Council will assume the responsibility of continuously monitoring the human rights situation in Tunisia by means of a joint action carried out together with the equivalent Tunisian representatives , and that it will create a joint system to monitor the issue which can only bring social improvements to the human rights situation in Tunisia .
Mr President , human rights are being infringed .
There is no respect for press freedom and the rights to freedom of expression and of organisation , all of which are being ignored .
This is something we know about .
It is also known about in Tunisia , both by the authorities and the people .
Naturally , we shall be taking up these violations and criticising them whenever we have the opportunity to do so .
This is an extremely serious matter .
It is a question of universal rights , not only inside but also outside the European Union , and there must be criticism when such rights are infringed .
I think that the best way of levelling criticism is by means of dialogue .
This means people ' s real respect of one another , and if Tunisia and its leaders are prepared to respect our views on these matters , then I believe that we , in turn , should note that , in Tunisia , they take quite a negative view of the agreements we have in place .
I cannot find it stated anywhere other than in point 7 of the motion for a resolution of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left that all Tunisian organisations , within both the private and the public sectors , are in fact critical of the association agreement , a state of affairs which we in the EU should , of course , also take on board and respect .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have just come back from Tunisia where , for a time , I was the guest of a Member of the Tunisian Government , and on no occasion did I see evidence of any of the points which have been mentioned during this debate .
I did , however , see a country which is firmly committed to modernisation and I witnessed the great enthusiasm with which the sectors of environmental development , land reclamation , agriculture , tourism and the construction of large infrastructures are being identified .
I saw that they are attempting to boost their economy in order to avoid further migration which could certainly affect relations between the Mediterranean countries and the countries which are now part of the same European Union as well .
I personally witnessed cultural exchanges taking place between universities and saw that the country is regaining a strong cultural identity and is committed to restoring historic town centres , rural tourism and craft trades .
I noted the high level of involvement of schools in educational programmes with a series of interdisciplinary activities .
And I saw absolutely no evidence pointing to an absence of associationism .
On the contrary : very strong , living associationism exists between young people and women , in particular , and there is also a remarkable spirit of partnership between institutions .
I learned from a question that we are lamenting the fact that the local press refuses to report cases of human rights abuse .
If this is so and censorship is taking place , it means that the freedom of the press does exist there , to the extent that the local press can even refuse to report any of Tunisia ' s positions which do deny human rights .
Well then , I do not feel that the situation is so bad .
Rather , I suspect that the European Union is taking political action against not just Tunisia but also the Balkan countries , for example , in deciding to provide greater or lesser financial incentives for the countries depending on the internal policy adjustments which the countries can guarantee .
This would indeed be an operation totally removed from the real meaning of applied and shared democracy ; it would have very little to do with human rights and still less to do with relations between potential enlargement countries and the European Union itself .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , most members here in this House - with the exception of the member who has just spoken - are concerned about developments in friendly , neighbouring Tunisia .
Tunisia is our neighbour , because the Mediterranean does not divide , it unites us .
These concerns , as expressed here today , are not born of a colonial or neo-colonial attitude .
We are not talking about unacceptable interference in the internal affairs of a third country .
No , we are talking , as Commissioner Patten has stressed again and again , about critical dialogue based on the agreements which we have signed with Tunisia .
It would therefore make no sense to cancel these agreements .
On the contrary , we must use them to shape this critical dialogue .
We are talking about creating a common area of security , stability and peace , and that includes democracy , that includes respect for human rights , that includes freedom of the press .
When Tunisia keeps insisting that we are also talking about fighting extremism and terrorism and preventing extremist views , attitudes and organisations , then I agree with it wholeheartedly .
But how else is this fight best fought , if not through democracy ?
This is also being demonstrated by Tunisia ' s neighbours .
Which is why we cannot do without it .
Tunisia keeps saying that it is a question of economic and social development .
But this totally positive economic and social development in Tunisia is precisely the best basis for developing democracy still further and fighting the fight against extremism on democratic soil .
One last comment : we want to help Tunisia , about that there can be no doubt .
We must help Tunisia , just as we must help the whole area , the whole region . The Balkans are not our only priority .
The enlargement of the European Union is not our only priority .
The Mediterranean is not in the third division , it has equal status and importance .
When Commissioner Patten states , for example , that we are talking about reforms , about closing the gap between commitments and payments , then that deserves our full support .
But we must do that all together and sensitively .
We must do it in a way which does not repulse our Mediterranean partners but which invites them back into the fold .
Mr President , I have two brief comments to make . Firstly , the Council has taken due note of the legitimate concerns expressed by the Members and we will definitely bear these in mind in our dialogue with Tunisia within the existing institutional frameworks .
Secondly , to enlighten Mr Ducarme , the General Affairs Council planned for 18 June will basically aim to secure approval , within the Council framework , for the common strategy for the Mediterranean which will then in principle be submitted to the Feira European Council .
This common strategy has formed part of the Portuguese Presidency ' s programme and may constitute an added value in the Barcelona process . It contains some extremely important elements for reorganising and siting the whole external policy of the EU in this area in a more integrated manner .
At the last General Affairs Council we made an effort to deal with this issue which has some delicate aspects given that these questions are complex and multi-dimensional .
The extraordinary General Affairs Council , which will be held immediately before the European Council in Santa Maria da Feira , will allow this common strategy to be approved . This strategy will surely form an element which will greatly assist the EU ' s overall action , particularly within the Common Foreign and Security Policy , in respect of the whole Mediterranean region .
Mr President , I shall be even briefer than I was going to be , because the presidency has just answered one of the points put by Mr Ducarme .
I just want to touch on two other points he raised .
First , to say that , speaking for the Commission , we very much hope to bring forward proposals in the next few months - or weeks , if we can manage it - for revitalising the Barcelona process , a contribution to the debate about how that can be done five years after the original agreement .
If the honourable Member needs more information on Tunisia or on the Barcelona process as a whole , I hope he will let me know and I shall try to oblige as rapidly as possible .
Thank you , Commissioner Patten .
I have received six motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
China 's accession to WTO
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B5-0489 / 00 by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , to the Council , on China ' s accession to the WTO ;
B5-0490 / 00 by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , to the Commission , on China ' s accession to the WTO .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , on 17 May I asked an oral question to the Council and the Commission on behalf of the Committee which I chair , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy before the - I would say welcome - signing of an agreement between the European Union and China on the membership of the latter of the World Trade Organisation .
In this regard , I would like to make a comment and two requests .
Firstly , on behalf of the Committee which I chair , I would like to warmly congratulate Commissioner Lamy for his patience , perseverance and the skilful contacts he has been holding constantly not only with the Chinese authorities , but also with other important members of the Council of the WTO , in particular the United States , which have allowed both the Congress of the United States and the European Union to reach a preliminary agreement on the membership of China , the importance of which is obvious because it will incorporate into the World Trade Organisation more than a billion people , with all the challenges and possibly positive responses that this will involve .
Secondly , this agreement is positive because it brings with it economic , social , environmental and also geopolitical advantages for China and the world in general , especially the European Union .
What seems particularly positive to us is the opening up achieved in the field of financial services , telecommunications and insurance , which will offer opportunities , with no doubt whatsoever , to our economic operators , and also the gradual opening up of the energy markets in China which , apart from certain economic benefits , will lead to greater compliance with environmental standards in that country .
Another additional advantage is that China , through its entry into the World Trade Organisation , will be subject to its rules .
This is positive in itself and will bring China into a new and different dynamic in terms of closer relations with the rest of the world , although this must not cause us to stop being vigilant with regard to the respect for human rights , social rights and environmental rights .
In this respect I would like to say that there will be difficulties , since the position of the Commission and the Council , which Parliament supports , requires fundamental respect for basic social and environmental rights , China ' s acceptance of which , paradoxically , will be more difficult to ensure once China is a member of the World Trade Organisation with full rights .
Therefore , we also fully support the Commission and Council initiative to relaunch the round , which was frustrated at the outset in Seattle , as soon as possible , turning it into a global round .
Those have been my comments .
My two questions are as follows :
Firstly , we are very interested to know whether the Commission is willing to work closely with the United States on this package of financial assistance , which is so important and necessary , so that China may be provided with the administrative and legal apparatus for it to fulfil its obligations within the World Trade Organisation .
The other question is as follows : we have worked very well with the Commission and the Council throughout this process and we intend to continue to do so .
I believe that this cooperation gives legitimacy to a process which is being criticised .
The question is clear . More than a question , it is a request : at the end of the process , will the agreement with China be subject to the approval of Parliament ?
I believe that this hypothesis does not put the Council or the Commission at any risk , since its success is guaranteed .
As I have said , Parliament supports this agreement .
Furthermore , we will all gain in terms of democratic legitimacy with this important agreement , since , I do not need to stress , it is laid down that in important agreements Parliament has a decisive role to play .
Mr President , the conclusion on 19 May of the bilateral agreement on access to the market in goods and services between the European Union and the People ' s Republic of China constituted , as we must all recognise , an important step in the process of China ' s accession to the World Trade Organisation which , incidentally , has now been operating for 14 years .
The integration of a partner with the economic and political size of China into the multilateral trade system will undoubtedly form one of the most important factors in the world economy at the beginning of this new century .
Mr Westendorp y Cabeza mentioned the size of the Chinese population and market and the importance which this will have in terms of the internal balance of the WTO .
The universal vocation of the WTO will therefore be reinforced and the discussions on the ways of making its operation more effective will from now on be an absolutely essential exercise .
At the level of the WTO , the bilateral negotiations now occurring are just one step towards the multilateralisation of the agreed mechanisms and towards the finalisation of the process in Geneva .
This requires the group ' s work towards accession to be continued in terms of the final wording of the respective protocol .
Only at the end of this process will China ' s accession be placed on the agenda of a General Council meeting for approval by the WTO members , assuming that these have , in the meantime , carried out the internal procedures required for this purpose .
At Community level , this issue must still be discussed by the Member States as the process usually followed and known as the ad hoc Ecuador process is proving to be too tacit and , as such , is incompatible with the political and economic weight of China and with the specific importance of this particular case .
The European Union will have to give its clear and explicit assent to China ' s accession to the WTO and the Council must decide on the overall accession package which must also be submitted to Parliament for an opinion .
I will not answer the second question posed by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza as this has been overtaken by events .
It concerned the mandate conferred on the Commission and whether this was broad enough .
The evidence shows that the mandate was broad enough , even too broad for some countries , including mine , which had certain concerns about establishing this mandate .
As for cooperation and technical assistance actions , we have seen that , despite the problems noted throughout this negotiating process , China has proven its commitment to the multilateral process and has even prioritised this in certain regional choices .
It must now , during this stage , make an additional effort to apply the commitments it has made and to demonstrate the necessary willingness to comply with its multilateral obligations and to respect the rules and instructions of the World Trade Organisation .
It is therefore of the greatest importance that the Chinese authorities carry out the necessary adaptations internally .
For this reason the European Union is already prepared to provide nearly EUR 22 million for actions aimed at certain areas which may initially be more difficult to address due to the particular nature of Chinese legislation . These actions include the issues of government acquisitions and intellectual property .
The developed countries must cooperate closely so that , through technical assistance measures , China can satisfactorily meet the terms agreed for its accession to the WTO . This is a fact which these countries have recognised , as was proven at the summit between the United States of America and the European Union on 31 May when this issue was addressed .
China ' s accession will constitute a stability factor in the world economy and will give increased importance to the next round of WTO negotiations which we hope can start as soon as possible . For this reason we must all make an effort to ensure that this objective is achieved .
It is hoped that the accession process can be completed quickly through firm commitments which are compatible with the level of development already achieved by certain sectors of the Chinese economy . This will ensure that the stability of the markets will not be threatened .
However , in addition to this aspect , China ' s accession to the WTO will also have effects at political level , given that the requirements for internal reforms and greater transparency , and consequently greater exposure to external public opinion , will have an impact on the actions of the Chinese authorities in areas other than the strictly commercial area .
However , the next speaker will probably know more about this than I do .
Mr President , I wish to begin by warmly endorsing a couple of the remarks made by the honourable Member , Mr Westendorp - which , I am sure , is always a sensible way of beginning a speech in a debate in Parliament .
First , I should like to endorse in the most glowing terms possible the encomium that he delivered to my colleague , Commissioner Lamy , for the way he conducted these negotiations .
I have had some experience of negotiating with China myself and I have to say that I am lost in admiration for Commissioner Lamy 's achievement .
I should like , as he did with characteristic generosity , to say that all of us should also pay tribute to his predecessor , Sir Leon Brittan , who helped to get these negotiations up and running , even though they had to travel several more laps than he thought likely at the time .
Second , I entirely agree with what the honourable Member said about the importance of the outcome of these negotiations .
This agreement is very good for China and Europe ; it is good for the Asian region and for the world and , as we saw , it almost certainly had a beneficial effect on the vote in the US Congress .
It is good news all round .
It will be a challenge for China and , in due course , for the WTO .
However , it has always seemed to me that it is something of a misnomer to talk about a World Trade Organisation which has not contained the representatives of between a fifth and a quarter of humanity .
This is a good news story .
I want to deal with the two questions which the chairman of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has raised .
First , the question about Parliament 's assent .
Commissioner Lamy has already had an opportunity to set out in the plenary of this House in March the view of the Commission that China 's WTO accession is a trade agreement of major importance and , therefore , that it is exactly the type of agreement that would be submitted for Parliament 's assent , were the Commission proposals for the IGC to be accepted .
However , at this stage these are just proposals .
We obviously cannot anticipate the results of the IGC , so we have to stick to current Treaty rules .
As Parliament knows , the China agreement does not fit any of the categories of Article 300 ( 3 ) that would justify submission for assent .
The agreement will , however , in principle , be submitted for consultation , so the European Parliament will have ample opportunity to express its views on the agreement .
Of course , it is the Council that decides on consultation with the European Parliament .
This is as far as the legal and the institutional answer goes .
On a more political and pragmatic level , I can assure the House that the Commission will work with the European Parliament to ensure that it can make its voice heard .
The House will know that , in exemplary fashion , Commissioner Lamy has held several rounds of discussions with Members of this Parliament during the final phases of the negotiations with China .
I know that he debriefed Members right after the agreement was initialled : he phoned the honourable Member to inform him that he had finalised the agreement .
I can assure the House that he intends to continue this dialogue throughout the internal approval procedures of the European Union .
It is an indication of that old truth that being more transparent invariably means being more successful .
At this stage I should like to add , however , that on 19 May we only concluded - a point made by the presidency - our bilateral agreement with China on her terms of accession to the WTO .
The multilateral phase of China 's accession that takes place in Geneva has still to be finalised .
This is not expected to happen before the end of September at the earliest .
In other words , whatever procedures will apply within the European Union regarding China 's WTO accession , the issue is really only relevant after the multilateral phase has been concluded , because the approval procedures will start only after this date .
Second , I want to come to the extremely important point which the honourable Member raised about technical assistance to help China to implement its WTO obligations .
We have in the Commission five cooperation programmes in China , which total EUR 25 million .
They are either in place or will be implemented soon .
They include a framework programme which aims to strengthen the relevant Chinese administrative structures and capacities through a series of specialised modules targeting segments in the Chinese administration which will be dealing with WTO implementation .
Other programmes are geared towards helping China to implement specific WTO obligations .
We are currently considering how best to build on these , and new initiatives will be taken .
China 's WTO accession and the related considerable needs for technical assistance are likely to generate significant interest from other donors , including the United States and Japan , but also from our own Member States and from the WTO secretariat .
Clearly , close coordination is going to be essential in order to avoid overlaps and to develop synergies between different programmes which each donor will implement in accordance with its own procedures .
The need for coordination will be especially strong where assistance is targeted at the implementation of specific WTO agreements , and we will support close involvement of the WTO in these areas .
As regards the question of coordination with the United States , we will certainly look very carefully at our options .
We have to bear in mind that this will have some effects on the visibility of our European efforts .
The first exploratory talks on China 's technical assistance needs and the respective roles and intentions of various donors will take place shortly through direct contacts in Peking and on the fringe of the WTO working party on the accession of China next week .
I just want to repeat that this is an extremely important issue ; it is an issue on which Commissioner Lamy and I have already begun discussions .
We want to keep Parliament fully informed about our plans , but I am absolutely certain that , having made this extremely important breakthrough , it is now very important to give as much technical help as possible to ensure that it has the results in China and , therefore , for the rest of the region and the world that all of us hope for and would like to see .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , China was yet another of our trading partners to realise during negotiations in Beijing that the European Union has specific , independent weight as a major global trading area .
The Commission represented coherent positions on the part of the European Union with the support of the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers and implemented many of them .
Competition and the reciprocal opening of markets , freedom of establishment and in the provision of services , intellectual property rights , environmental protection and partnership for sustainable development are just a few examples .
For the rest , our position is based on the principles of free and fair global trade and is shaped by the European model of a social , ecological market economy , many fundamental points of which are already included in European framework legislation .
We expressly thank Commissioner Lamy and his team - and I expressly include his predecessor Sir Leon Brittan here - for the excellent result ; the Commission negotiated successfully and competently ; China has moved a long way towards opening its markets and basically accepts the rules specified by the World Trade Organisation in 1994 and further developed since .
There is no need to outline the specific successes in detail .
They range from reductions in customs tariffs , from starting rates of often over 40 % to an average of 10 % , to the opening of import and export monopolies via joint ventures in the service sector , trade chains and medium-term freedom of establishment for independent European undertakings .
So the results are clear .
But integrating China into world trade also means ensuring that it is in a position to respect and apply the rules of the World Trade Organisation , act as a responsible partner and take on new responsibilities .
We therefore thank Commissioner Patten for his assurance that technical assistance , training for China ' s specialists and for those responsible for the new chapter in cooperation will be coordinated with the United States .
But we feel that something else is needed ; greater understanding on China ' s part of the European Union ' s commercial position on the reciprocal opening of the markets .
We are counting on China ' s supporting the European Union ' s proposals for a comprehensive new round of WTO talks in the short term .
In the long term , we would stress the implications of a more intensive trading partnership with China for peace in Asia , Europe and the world as a whole .
We feel that China will , in the long term , see the obvious need for the rapid economic and social development of China to be fostered within a framework of open markets and democratic reform .
On behalf of the PPE Group , therefore , I welcome the successful outcome of negotiations with China and call on the Council to put this result in political order so that the European Parliament is able to adopt this important decision .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner Patten , ladies and gentlemen , my fellow members have already picked up on the main points .
Permit me , therefore , to address just a few aspects .
The European Union has achieved a number of successes , mainly thanks to Commissioner Lamy , who really has achieved some resounding successes .
But this also applies of course to the United States , and the same will apply to the other countries due to enter into negotiations .
In my view , one important point will be not just be to help China integrate into the world economy - it has already more or less done that - but also to help this country take a further step towards the general democratisation of its society .
We have been able to follow what is at stake in all the discussions , in the leading world press and in the lively debate between economists on the matter , but the crucial question is : what will actually happen once China becomes a member of the WTO ?
Will it mark the beginning of a further opening of society ?
Will it mark the beginning of a new round in politics ?
Will it result in institutional reforms in China ?
And , of course , will there also be a further opening of the market ?
These are the really crucial and exciting questions which we face .
I am sure that it is in the minds of all the honourable members who have spoken and I believe that it is my group ' s opinion , that we should use this opening and the integration of China into the World Trade Organisation to help it make a quantum leap .
However , we must not fool ourselves , we must not harbour any illusions , and we must insist that the WTO rules are in fact upheld , because this is , of course , the crux of the matter .
This is where we really will have to get down to brass tacks during further discussions with the Commission .
Because the package negotiated is extremely comprehensive and includes highly critical and sensitive sectors .
Critical voices are already being heard on the part of industry to the effect that success is all well and good , but ex-post control of implementation is equally important .
I think that we will be able to count on good collaboration here , so that this form of implementation can be monitored by Parliament and Parliament can be kept abreast of current developments .
One further point which I should like to address , and which I think is highly important , is our hope that with the opening of the market and with the further opening of society in China , greater respect will be given to human rights .
Human rights are a fundamental element of a modern society .
I think that this a point which we cannot allow to be sidelined , even in talks , even if they do not form a substantial part of purely economic negotiations .
I think that you have always set particular store by this .
Nonetheless , it is important that this point be reiterated constantly .
Mr President , I have two short minutes in which to make four points .
Firstly I would like to join in the warm congratulations to Commissioner Lamy and indeed his distinguished predecessor Sir Leon , now Lord , Brittan .
I hope the brevity of my congratulations does not diminish the warmth of them .
Secondly , a point addressed to the Council .
The Council 's attitude towards parliamentary assent to a deal like this is linked to the Council 's parallel attitude towards the Commission 's proposal for its extension of its own powers over areas such as intellectual property and services in Article 133 more generally .
I have to confess I get the impression that there is a certain degree of institutional territoriality here , particularly in the large Member States , where the trade and industry ministries are very reluctant to see the Commission continue to extend its scope in those new areas in WTO trade negotiations and , consistent with that , also reluctant to see the European Parliament increase its influence .
This simply cannot carry on .
It is such a weird anachronism that a policy that was communautarised back in the 1950s is as unaccountable and non-transparent as it is .
I would plead for the internal territorial interests of Member States to be overcome on this particular point .
Thirdly , technical assistance .
It is great that we are going to coordinate with the Americans , but look at the numbers : EUR 25 million is absolutely nothing in comparison to the challenge we face !
We have a total budget for China of EUR 80 million .
Even if we allocate all of that to China-WTO accession it would still not be enough .
We - the Commission , Council and Parliament - have to be a lot more ambitious in actually allocating much more money towards this enormous task .
Finally , human rights .
I hope the fact that we have signed up to this bilateral deal with the Chinese does not leave them thinking that we are going to be any more forgiving on human rights .
It is all the more important that all three institutions should now be particularly robust about the way the Chinese behave in the so-called dialogue on human rights .
Let us not give them the impression that a deal on the WTO means that we are going to be weak on human rights - it should be the reverse .
We should be all the more robust .
Mr President , if the preceding speakers are to be believed , we now have paradise in view . The Chinese , in particular , are heading there and nowhere else .
I was reading an interview in China Labour Bulletin the other day about one of the tens of millions of Chinese who have become unemployed because of the famous ' opening up ' of their country .
This person was complaining about the unemployment , insecurity and enormous widening of the gulf between the classes .
In fact , this Chinese person was so desperate that she said she wished Mao Tse Tung was back .
From all the analyses I have read , which is quite a lot ( both Chinese and Western , liberal and socialist ) , it is apparent that unemployment is coming to China .
It has already increased a great deal and , through accession to the WTO , it is going to increase a very great deal more .
I am wondering now if the Commission has carried out any other analyses .
I wonder if the Commission has any serious scientific analyses indicating that unemployment in China , contrary to what is apparent from all these other analyses , is going to decline rapidly and that social stability is going to be strengthened instead of the gulf between social classes widening further .
It would be extremely interesting to know .
Another matter is that of human rights .
A number of people here believe that human rights should benefit from China ' s accession to the WTO .
Yes , that is possible - I am no fortune-teller .
Parliament did , however , give the Sakharov Prize to Wei Jingsheng , who has a quite different view of this issue .
His assessment is that the WTO Agreement will not benefit human rights at all .
He has actively fought against it because he thinks that it does not make reasonable demands where human rights are concerned .
It would be extremely interesting to know what are the Commission ' s and the Council ' s analyses of this question .
In what way is Wei Jingsheng mistaken ?
We should like to know that we are not doing anything which , contrary to our intentions , is unfavourable to human rights .
Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , it is not pleasant to play the role of someone who repeatedly asks the same questions .
It is not , however , my fault , Commissioner , if there is a wishy-washy consensus in this Parliament .
Nor must you count on my weariness to stop me hammering out evidence which , although on the face of it appears dogmatic , should be blatantly obvious to everyone : The WTO is a machine that should by switched off before it goes any further , instead of carrying on as if there were no problem apart from the stunning failure that was Seattle .
Now , what has happened since that abortive summit ?
New negotiations have started in Geneva , in a fug that is not dispelled straightaway by Mr Lamy ' s praiseworthy speeches to this Parliament , and the European Union , hot on the heels of the United States , is negotiating the future conditions for China ' s accession .
Therefore , we have the right to ask a few questions .
What purpose do the WTO meetings serve if there is no difference between failure and success in the way internal business is conducted ?
What credibility can institutional reforms have , given that they are supposed to respond to major investigations , if , even before they are implemented , the path to imminent membership is open to a country which alone comprises one fifth of the world ' s population ?
Furthermore , are you able to tell us how the European Union and its partners categorise China ?
Do you class it as a developing country or as something else ?
How do you see the astonishing upheaval in the balance within the organisation that uses this kind of approach to the situation ?
Finally , can you tell us what - if anything - the European Union is getting from the United States , as , according to statements by Mr Lamy , the negotiations undertaken with the Chinese have been based on what the Americans had already obtained , with increased benefit for the Europeans .
Commissioner , the quality of Mr Lamy ' s work is not , of course , the issue here but , in spite of my repeated requests to see a proper assessment of the WTO carried out , these negotiations are going ahead without such an assessment having been made .
I must say that it looks like we would not be able to undertake any action that might give the impression that doubts exist as to the benefits of liberalising world trade .
I regret the fact that there was such little consultation with the Union ' s Member States and the European Parliament which are , in the main , supporters not of the fine cause that is the World Trade Organisation , of which we too are part , but of that of the frantic development of global free-trade , to the detriment of our people ' s essential interests .
Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate Commissioner Lamy on securing such improved terms and a deal with China .
After such a long history of negotiations clearly all that was needed was the question from our committee to push the matter to a conclusion .
Recently I was visiting Taiwan where people clearly hope that the accession of China to the WTO will lead to improved cross-strait relations , and we must welcome that .
I would have referred to Commissioner Patten knowing well the difficulties of dealing and negotiating with China , but he has already mentioned that .
The prospect of a change in the duty on spirits from 65 % to 10 % will be a most welcome one in certain parts of the whisky-producing areas of the UK .
I look forward to sharing that news with them in liberal and liquid fashion .
On a larger scale the position achieved in access to , and faster opening up of , the telecoms market is also good news .
China has such huge potential in this market for growth , and European operators have a great opportunity as world leaders looking for new markets .
I welcome this step in the further integration of China into the world economy but we must recall the emphasis that we , in the European Union , place upon other values in addition to trade .
In that context I would like to call , on behalf of my British Conservative colleagues , for European Parliament participation in the half-yearly dialogue on human rights .
If this Parliament were part of that dialogue we might exert additional pressure for improvement in that field .
I hope the Commissioner will listen carefully to that suggestion .
Mr President , while international big business is busy popping champagne corks in celebration of the agreement on China 's proposed accession to the WTO , China 's small-scale farmers are already quaking in their shoes .
They know that accession to the WTO will be a very mixed blessing for China and that for them , as small farmers , it could spell ruin .
So I beg to differ with Commissioner Patten .
There are many people in China for whom this agreement does not spell good news .
Powerful international agri-business knows that too .
That is why US grain companies like Cargill cannot believe their luck .
They have just been handed the biggest market in the world and can expect US farm exports to increase by USD 2 billion over the next five years as Chinese tariff cuts begin to take effect .
No wonder they are already gloating over bigger , better and more consistent markets .
But while Cargill is so delighted that its profits will rise while Chinese self-sufficiency in agricultural goods falls , the picture is a good deal less optimistic for the people of China themselves .
It has been estimated that increased competition from cheap agricultural imports could mean that about 400 million rural Chinese will no longer be needed on farms by 2005 .
It is almost impossible to conceive of such a huge figure or to think about the social dislocation and misery that will cause .
The Commission is offering technical support to the Chinese in order to help them with the enormous economic restructuring which accession to the WTO will bring .
What I would like to see is an equal concern to help with the almost inconceivable social restructuring which will inevitably follow in its wake with - I repeat - 400 million rural farmers out of a job .
Mr Lamy has been quoted as saying that the bilateral negotiations between the EU and China yielded 96 % of what the EU was demanding .
Would he like to estimate what percentage of success the Chinese people will get from these same negotiations ?
Mr President , representatives of the Commission and the Council , the volume of world trade has soared in recent decades .
Despite the giant leaps forward , many problems remain unresolved and questions left open with regard to world trade .
One of the biggest and politically most difficult of these has been China ' s accession to the WTO , and this same problem will again be associated with the implementation of the agreement in practice .
As this is a matter of the world ' s second largest economy and eleventh largest exporting country joining the most important institutional system for world trade , the importance of the issue cannot be emphasised too heavily .
I agree with Mr Clegg as regards the impression one gets that the Commission and the Council have perhaps been rather too keen in this matter to refer to the Treaty of Amsterdam and hide behind formal requirements .
I am , however , very satisfied that the Commission is in agreement with us that talks with China concerning its membership of the WTO are a matter that Parliament cannot pass over and that we will have this issue heard in this Chamber .
The fact that the talks on accession will not lead to changing the legal framework does not lessen the importance of the issue .
For that reason , an informal dialogue free from the exact wording of the basic agreement , which the Commissioner mentioned in his speech , is more crucial than ever before .
It is in the interests of the European Union as a whole to support China in the reform of its economy , administration and legal system .
It is sensible to implement the technical assistance package from the EU and the United States in a context of collaboration ; this is necessary to guarantee the speedy and single-minded implementation of the reforms .
Of the reforms in the public sector , that concerning state-owned companies is vital for continued economic growth in China .
In this connection I will make my sole comment regarding content : the percentage of ownership by foreign companies was not fixed at the level the EU was aiming at .
That was a very bad mistake .
Another important political question is how the economic life of the country is to be reformed , as that is closely linked with the fate of China ' s socialist system as a whole .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , on a point of order , when I inquired this morning about the time of this debate I was told it would start shortly after 3 o 'clock .

When I came for this debate at 3 o 'clock I was told it would be taking place later , towards 5 o 'clock .
Clearly there is pressure on our agenda today .
I wish to put forward a proposal that might relieve pressure on the end of today 's agenda , namely , the debate previewed for the late payments directive - the report of the conciliation procedure with the Council .
This is an issue which is now entirely without contention .
Everybody supports this matter .
The rapporteur , the shadow rapporteur and the chairman of the committee would all support a suggestion that this be turned into a vote without debate .
That would end pressure on the agenda right at the end of this evening .
Possibly we could have a vote on it now .
Mr Chichester , I do not feel in a position to make a decision , not even with recourse to the Rules of Procedure or the advice of officials .
I am only going to chair an hour and a half of Questions to the Council and then , when the sitting begins , the person holding the Presidency - who will be informed of your intelligent proposal - will make the relevant decision .
But we take very good note of this proposal .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0487 / 2000 ) . We will examine questions to the Council .
Question No 1 by ( H-0434 / 00 ) :
Subject : Increase in Community budgetary resources Much time has been devoted so far at the Intergovernmental Conference to issues such as the need to revise the decision-taking procedure in the Council of Ministers and the number of Commissioners . Little attention has been paid , on the other hand , to the need for a substantive increase in Community budgetary resources so as to facilitate the process of enlargement and to enable the Union to address the increasingly difficult tasks facing it both domestically and in external policy .
How does the Council view the prospect of a substantive increase in Community budgetary resources , what could be the ' ceiling ' of such an increase and how realistic is such an objective under present conditions ?
Mr President , the size of the Community budget is a general issue which has been addressed periodically , particularly within the wider debate on the future financing of the European Union prior to the negotiations on the EU financial frameworks .
However , the current context is not favourable to increasing the budget , as was demonstrated in the Agenda 2000 negotiations , and this is not the right moment to reopen this debate .
Within the Interinstitutional Agreement reached on 6 May 1999 on budgetary discipline and improving the budgetary procedure , of which the financial perspectives are an integral part , you will remember that amounts were established which represent an annual maximum limit on expenditure for the European Parliament , Council and Commission . These three institutions undertook to respect these limits .
The Council currently considers that there is no need to revise the financial perspectives .
With regard to expenditure arising from enlargement , the aforementioned Agreement specifies that , in the event of enlargement of the EU to include new Member States during the period covered by the financial perspectives , the European Parliament and the Council , deliberating on a Commission proposal , will jointly adopt financial perspectives taking into account the need for expenditure arising from this enlargement .
However , this alteration of the financial perspectives must respect the maximum limits contained in the guidelines on the financial perspectives for an enlarged Union with 21 Member States , as indicated in Annex II to the Interinstitutional Agreement . This clearly depends on the results of the accession negotiations .
I should like to thank the Minister for answering the question which I tabled , but I think that he has not answered the specific issue which I raised , which is this : in the year in which I have been an MEP , I have noticed that , although the number of EU programmes and initiatives is multiplying continuously , implying new , additional spending , no additional resources are being budgeted for them .
On the contrary , resources budgeted for other commitments are usually cut back ; this happened , for example , in order to find money for Kosovo and for developing the Balkans , for the earthquakes and for other issues which have arisen .
I just wonder why we are not making an effort to take payment appropriations up to the legal ceiling of 1.27 % of the GDP of the European Union , so that other programmes do not have to be sacrificed , and why the European Union is taking on more and more and , at the same time , limiting payments of approved appropriations , which account for a mere 1.10 % of GDP .
Also , can the Council reassure the people in the poor countries of the European Union that enlargement will not result in budgetary cutbacks ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I understand the Member ' s concern and realise that this is shared by several sectors in the EU .
The truth is that the changes which have been made to the funding allocation plan , particularly in the last year , have not affected the Union ' s compliance with its undertakings in these areas . These changes have also been made based on appropriations that remain unspent in certain areas .
However , if the situation worsens to the extent that some of the commitments made by the European Union cannot be kept in accordance with the financial perspectives , then this mid-term revision may clearly occur , as specified in the financial perspectives and for the first time by qualified majority voting .
In this way , some of the expenditure arising from enlargement , if this takes place in the meantime , may be covered .
However , given that we are currently in the first year of implementing the financial perspectives , there is no reason at the moment to justify any reassessment of the commitment made in Berlin .
The Committee on Budgets and the European Parliament agreed in the end in Agenda 2000 to reduce the 1.27 % proportion of GDP by 2006 .
The citizens of Europe want a thrifty administration and the purpose of the concept of real stabilisation is to achieve a further net improvement in the quality of the work of the Council and the Commission .
It should enable us to work even more efficiently in the future in the European Union .
Do you believe that the concept of real stabilisation can be continued after 2006 ?
I am very happy to answer the honourable Member ' s question .
I was involved in the Agenda 2000 negotiations and I clearly recall the concept of real stabilisation which was proposed . In practice this meant reducing the amounts established .
In our opinion the European Union will sooner or later have to make a choice . It must opt either for a structure with a solid set of policies and a corresponding budget at the same level or simply for a kind of savings fund .
If we were to regard the Community budget as a kind of savings fund and were to act increasingly through subsidiarity in terms of financing , the future of the EU ' s policies would very probably be in doubt , particularly from 2006 .
This is my personal view .
As the author is not present , Question No 2 lapses .
Question No 3 by ( H-0446 / 00 ) :
Subject : Plans for a common position of the EU at the Ospar Convention What plans are being negotiated in the Troika for the presentation of a common position by the EU at the meeting being held this month in Copenhagen of the OSPAR Convention on the control of radioactive and toxic pollutants in the marine environment ?
Mr President , negotiations within the OSPAR commission on issues coming under the Community competence are conducted , as you know , by the Commission in consultation with a committee of representatives of the Member States .
If , at the end of these negotiations , the parties to the OSPAR Convention were to adopt a decision which , in the Commission ' s opinion , should be incorporated within Community law , the Commission would be responsible for preparing a proposal for a decision by the Council on the adoption by the Community of this OSPAR decision .
The Council would analyse this proposal with due care .
The position mentioned by the Member has not been presented to date to the Council and we cannot , therefore , comment on this matter .
I know that the Portuguese presidency is very familiar with this issue .
As you know , the OSPAR commission met in Sintra two years ago and some progress was made on pollution of the marine environment .
My question pertains particularly to radioactive emissions .
I know France is part of the troika and will be taking up the presidency in July .
France pushed quite hard and was part of the agreement on lowering radioactive emissions , but a recent Greenpeace study shows that there are quite strong emissions of radioactivity from Cap La Hague .
Is the Council aware of this study ?
Would it like more information about this study ?
Will it bring it to the attention of the French presidency ?
On the one hand they claim to be controlling radioactive pollution to the marine environment , but on the other hand we have proof that there is radioactive pollution , so there is some contradiction there .
The Council needs to get its act together .
I take the point about the Commission 's proposals and I look forward to discussing this further with the Commission when we have a result from Copenhagen .
Neither Ireland nor Denmark have so far sent the Council any proposals on radioactive waste .
Given that the Council as such is not a member of the OSPAR commission , only the European Commission can adopt a legislative measure in this respect .
Therefore , any information which may be received in this respect by the Council will be welcome .
Question No 4 by ( H-0449 / 00 ) :
Subject : Indication of religion on identity cards The independent data protection authority in Greece has raised the issue of the religion of Greek citizens being recorded on their identity cards , saying it affects people ' s private lives and can lead to discrimination against certain individuals .
In view of Article 13 of the Treaty , can the Council say whether both the compulsory indication of religion currently applicable and the possible removal of this obligation , to be replaced by a voluntary indication , are compatible with the legal and political ' acquis ' of the European Union ?
In which Member States is religion one of the items recorded on citizens ' identity cards ?
Mr President , the Council has never been asked to discuss the issue raised by the honourable Member .
In principle this does not come under the Community competence but is the exclusive competence of the national authorities and in particular , as stated by the Member in his own question , of the Greek High Authority for Data Protection .
As I said , no proposal has been presented to the Council on this issue .
If the conduct of the Greek authorities led to any infringement of Community legislation , the Commission , as the Guardian of the Treaties , would clearly not hesitate to take the necessary steps to bring any action before the Court of Justice in respect of this infringement .
However , this does not come under the Council ' s competence but is rather the responsibility of the Commission . It is up to the latter to determine whether or not the reference to religion on Greek identity cards complies with the principle of non-discrimination on religious grounds .
However , from a preliminary analysis of this issue , we feel that the mere reference to religion does not in essence constitute any violation of the legal and political acquis of the European Union , if this reference is only for information or even statistical purposes and if it is not accompanied by any specific measures discriminating against those practising a particular religion .
In any case we are talking about actions by free and democratic countries . In order to challenge a measure of this type , a specific legal framework for complaints exists at national level .
Clearly , the Community bodies can be appealed to following action before these national bodies .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
Yesterday I tabled the same question to the European Commission .
I received its reply today .
However , there is some confusion in the matter which , as far as Greece is concerned , is an extremely important matter .
I thank the President-in-Office , although I noticed that he contradicted himself in his reply .
On the one hand he says that it is not a Community matter , it is a matter for the Member State .
On the other hand , however , he raises the question of compliance with the law .
The President-in-Office obviously has in mind the reply which the Commission gave on precisely this issue , which says that a reference to religion infringes Directive 46 / 95 on personal data .
Does the President-in-Office agree with this reply , if that is what he has in mind ?
Or does he not have it in mind , which would demonstrate a huge lack of coordination between the Council and the Commission on a very important issue ?
Mr Alavanos , there is no contradiction in this respect and the problem is very simple .
As this issue is not covered by a Community provision , it is solely a question of Greek national policy and is subject to Greek law .
Clearly , this situation will only change if a Community provision is transposed into Greek law and therefore itself becomes a Greek law .
The problem lies in determining whether or not , at this stage of the process , this reference constitutes an infringement of Community law .
Only the Commission would have the authority to act in this respect .
As it has not acted so far , this means that this is not currently a Community issue .
Therefore , at this stage , this issue does not have a Community dimension .
If this situation changes , the Commission will then be able to take the appropriate decisions , particularly in conjunction with the Court of Justice .
Mr President , I must intervene , although I had no intention of doing so , because Greece is labouring under the misapprehension that , if they are to become Europeans , Greeks must stop stating their religion on their identity cards , as they have done for the past seventy years .
The President-in-Office ' s reply is correct .
There are no plans to intervene , it is a matter for national law and that is what Greece has been practising up to now .
The principle introduced for personal data resulted in a decision whereby the reference to a person ' s religion was an infringement of personal data .
However , I know for a fact that the Community directive on this issue states that , if the person in question agrees to a reference to their religion , then it is not prohibited to include such personal data .
And that is precisely what our party and the Greek church want : a voluntary reference .
Whoever wants to , can state their religion , and whoever does not want to , need not do so .
I would like to remind you that this Question Time is for questions to the Council .
It can in no way be used to explain the positions of governments or the sensibilities of certain countries .
Question No 5 by ( H-0450 / 00 ) :
Subject : Turkey disputes the sovereign rights of Greek islands in the Aegean Prompted by the NATO exercise ' Dynamic Mix ' , Turkey has put the spotlight back on its long-standing dispute concerning the established regime of Greek sovereignty over islets and island rocks in the Aegean .
In addition , it has made accusations concerning development and environmental activities by Greece in the areas in question , many of which are funded by relevant European Union programmes .
To be specific , in its representations to the Greek Government on Wednesday , 10 May 2000 Turkey referred to ' military and other activities by Greece on geographical formations of disputed sovereignty in the Aegean ' .
Could the Council say whether it agrees with this challenge by Turkey to Greece ' s sovereign rights and whether this position accords with the spirit of the agreement which was achieved , following Greek concessions , at Helsinki , and also with Turkey ' s current status as an applicant country ?
Mr President , the Council does not have any information , rumours aside , on any representations made by Turkey to the Greek Government on 10 May 2000 .
As the honourable Member mentioned , the Helsinki European Council recognised Turkey as an applicant country .
At this same European Council , the applicant countries were also urged to make every effort to resolve all existing border disputes and other similar issues .
Unresolved disputes must be brought before the International Court of Justice within a reasonable period of time or at the latest by 2004 .
The Council will then re-examine the situation .
With regard to relations between Greece and Turkey , which form the basis of this whole issue , the Council can only welcome an improvement in these relations . It is hoped that this positive process will continue so that the issues relating to the Aegean are successfully resolved in accordance with international law .
It should be recalled in this respect , as this is also extremely positive , that Turkish troops participated in the NATO exercise which took place in part on Greek territory .
Turkish troops have never before participated in exercises on Greek territory .
The Council notes that the Greek Defence Minister described the cooperation between Greece and the Turkish armed forces as excellent and added that the exercises were carried out with full respect for all the sovereign rights of Greece .
This is an important point .
I must also note that , in terms of bilateral relations , the Foreign Ministers of Greece and Turkey , while at the NATO Summit in Florence , presented a proposal to include a range of good-neighbourly measures on the agenda for negotiations between Greece and Turkey . The aim of these measures will be to consolidate the climate of security and harmonisation between these two countries .
These are in addition to the confidence-building measures in the Aegean .
We must all cooperate , in all bodies and in all areas in which these issues are raised , to ensure that tensions are not heightened in any way and to eliminate the ghosts of the past in this respect .
Minister , I too am personally in favour of closer relations between Greece and Turkey , but subject to certain specific conditions .
And I must say in this respect that I am truly surprised by what you said at the beginning , to the effect that the Greek government has not even informed the Council of Turkey ' s challenge of Greece ' s sovereign rights .
Obviously it sees it as an unnecessary luxury .
It feels that Turkey can proceed unimpeded on its path towards the European Union , violating Greek sovereignty all the while .
But that is a matter for the Greek government .
I should like to ask you , the diplomatic language of your reply notwithstanding , whether or not you consider that Turkey should make moves in order to meet the requirements of the Helsinki resolutions and what you think these moves might be .
Mr Hatzidakis , in my opinion Helsinki represented a moment of great balance in terms of the concerns of those involved , namely Greece , Turkey and also Cyprus as a third party .
The decision taken to recognise Turkey as an applicant country was made in view of this overall balance .
However , certain conditions were indicated in the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council , particularly with reference to the resolution under international law of the conflicts involving the Aegean .
A timetable was also set for this which is indissociably linked to Turkey ' s ambitions for its accession to the European Union .
We must all bear in mind that we should be trying , in this specific area , not to aggravate the bilateral tensions which may arise here or there , where these clearly do not involve fundamental principles of identity and the basic interests of the country . We must realise instead that it is essential to reduce these tensions .
It is particularly important that we use the time factor .
At the moment signs are apparent on both the Greek and Turkish sides , with effects evident also on the Cypriot side . We should allow these countries some time before we start systematically highlighting the small incidents which may ultimately stop us from seeing the bigger picture which , after all , is much more important than these small incidents .
It would be politically more responsible at this time to try and reduce the tensions . We must therefore particularly support the efforts which the authorities of the two countries have been making , especially through their respective Foreign Ministers , in order to prevent certain incidents from being exploited , for the sake of the overall situation which is itself of considerable significance and whose resolution may be vital to ensure the balance of the geographical area concerned .
Mr President-in-Office , I should like to be a little more specific .
For Greece , as far as Turkey is concerned , there is only one issue which needs to be settled and that is the boundaries of the continental shelf in the Aegean .
Turkey has disputed a number of issues in the Aegean at one time or another .
And one of these issues is the status of the grey zones or island rocks in the Aegean .
My question is quite specific .
Do you consider , given the spirit of the Helsinki resolutions , which call on Turkey to settle its border and similar disputes with its neighbours by 2004 , that the status of the island rocks or grey zones in the Aegean counts as a border dispute ?
What is the Council ' s opinion ; is this what it is calling on Turkey to do ?
To settle as a border dispute the status of the Aegean , where Greece does not acknowledge that there is an issue ?
Mr Theonas , these issues are part of the dispute between Greece and Turkey . So far these two countries have adopted a totally antagonistic attitude towards these issues , as there are points which Turkey wants to discuss under international law but which Greece considers do not fall within this context .
Conversations and negotiations are now occurring in this respect and bilateral contacts are being made , accompanied by confidence-building measures .
We should allow some time for this process to develop before becoming involved in any potential conflicts .
We know that these differences of opinion exist and that up to now these have formed the essence of what seems to be a conflict about the Aegean which could basically , under international law , be viewed in linear terms .
We know that this is not the case and that we all have different ideas about the same subject . This is also true of Greece and Turkey but there is now a negotiating framework for this .
We must bide our time and ensure that this negotiating framework can operate , particularly bearing in mind the currently positive Greek-Turkish relations .
Question No 6 by ( H-0451 / 00 ) :
Subject : Political intervention in Georgia 's problems Georgia , the newly independent state , is encountering serious difficulties in consolidating democracy and raising its citizens ' standards of living .
Its attempts are being hindered by the problem of the breakaway of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and the wave of refugees mainly taken in by Abkhazia .
In its resolutions , Parliament has condemned this situation and has asked the Commission and the Council to support the Council of Europe ' s initiative to set up confidence-building measures in the area .
Does the Council have any strategy for this sensitive region ?
Does it intend to operate a policy designed to safeguard peace and security in the region ?
Mr President , the Council is clearly concerned about the internal conflicts in Georgia which still need to be resolved . It is also concerned about the difficulties which are being experienced in terms of consolidating democracy and improving the standard of living of the people of that country .
We are therefore giving political and economic support within the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement which entered into force on 1 July 1999 .
During the EU Summit with the three Heads of State and Government of the Caucasus in June of last year , an important declaration was approved which sets out the bases for relations between the European Union and the Southern Caucasus .
This same resolution indicated the importance of developing regional cooperation , establishing friendly relations between the countries and sustainably developing their economies .
Moreover , the European Union indicated that it was ready to use its support instruments in order to create a suitable environment for resolving conflicts in the Caucasus . In this respect , the Cooperation Council between the European Union and Georgia , which was held on 12 October , decided that the cooperation in 2000 should particularly revolve around intensified efforts to find a solution to the conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
I must remind you that the European Union is the largest donor of aid to rehabilitation projects in South Ossetia and is ready to support measures aimed at creating a climate of confidence , particularly by rebuilding the north-south infrastructures which connect Russia to Georgia .
Moreover , the EU has also been giving assistance to almost 300 000 displaced persons within Georgia who were forced to abandon their homes due to the conflict .
The EU is encouraging the resolution of this conflict so that these people can return to their homes as quickly as possible and is ready to offer additional assistance in this event .
The Council supports all the efforts made by the competent international bodies , particularly the OSCE in South Ossetia and the UN in Abkhazia , with the aim of contributing to acceptable solutions which can return the political and economic relations to normal and ensure the return of the refugees under safe conditions .
The war in neighbouring Chechnya represents an additional threat to Georgia .
The Council fears that this conflict may spread to Georgia and welcomes the extension of the OSCE ' s monitoring mission along the respective borders .
At the request of President Shevardnadze , the European Union is now studying possible ways of helping to reinforce and ensure the efficacy of this monitoring mission .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office , for the information which you have given me .
It became clear during my recent visit to Georgia and from what was said by representatives of the Georgian Church during the recent meeting between the Patriarchate and the European People ' s Party that , in the eyes of the people of Georgia , European policy is ineffectual because , apart from humanitarian aid , it has not helped to solve any of the problems .
The problem of refugees , which include many Georgian citizens of Greek descent , has not been solved .
And I should like to ask you what additional measures you feel need to be taken and extended , as you have just said ?
And one more question : do you believe that the conflict to which you referred is part of Russian policy in this region ?
Also , has the Council taken account of this possibility in its policy in the region ?
Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , with regard to the measures which the European Union can adopt in this area , I can only point to the plan mentioned and the set of initiatives which the EU has introduced on the ground .
You should remember that we have a limited capacity for intervention in certain areas and that , as was said today in other respects , the difficulties in the EU ' s external action framework and the financing of this framework limit the EU ' s capacity to be present in all conflict situations .
However , given the strategic importance of the area , the European Union has been doing whatever it considers possible in this respect .
I agree that other measures may be possible but there is not currently a framework of financing which would allow us to go further , particularly in terms of acting to reinforce the infrastructures .
As for the situation in Russia , regardless of political opinion and what may be underlying the Russian position , there are currently no practical signs which point to an objective intention by Russia to destabilise these countries .
Effects are being felt , as I said , from the war in Chechnya and are likely to be felt in the future by neighbouring countries but I cannot infer from this that there is necessarily an intention on the part of the Russian authorities to spread any kind of instability in neighbouring areas .
Question No 7 by ( H-0454 / 00 ) :
Subject : Human rights : Egypt Further to the European Parliament resolution of 20 January 2000 on the violence in Upper Egypt , what steps has the Council taken to ensure that the Coptic Christian community in Egypt is fairly and justly treated and , specifically following recent events , that those arrested at El-Kosheh were offered a fair trial and , indeed , that the arrests were made with no element of religious discrimination ?
The Council has on several occasions discussed the fundamentalist violence and assassinations carried out against the Coptic community in Upper Egypt . We are continuing to closely monitor this situation .
In the meantime a series of positive events has occurred , in particular the release of the secretary-general of the Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights and the implementation of the law on non-governmental organisations which it is hoped may bring about greater freedom of expression .
At every opportunity and at various levels , the European Union has reminded Egypt of its concern about the human rights situation and about the need for Egypt to respect fundamental freedoms , particularly given its status as a member of the EU-Mediterranean partnership .
The negotiations on the Association Agreement with Egypt were concluded last year and it is envisaged that this will shortly be signed .
Once in force , this Agreement will turn the political dialogue between the European Union and Egypt into an institutional matter , especially in the area of human rights , which will naturally enable greater intervention and more scope for political pressure in respect of anything which may be regarded as non-compliance by Egypt with its obligations under this Agreement .
Article 2 of the draft Agreement specifies that the relations between the parties , like the provisions of the Agreement , are based on respect for democratic principles and the fundamental human rights set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . This will naturally form the backdrop to the bilateral relations and political dialogue which are integral to this Agreement .
In this context , we will of course continue to remind Egypt , as we have done prior to the establishment of this legally binding framework , of its responsibilities and , in particular , of the need to respect human rights and to preserve fundamental freedoms .
I wish to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I would say this question was prompted by the very large number of letters I receive from constituents about this particular issue .
It is perhaps the issue I have received more letters about in the last year than any other .
It strikes me from what he said that it is very strange that after several of the Coptic Christians had been attacked and disturbed by the others , that it was only Coptic Christians who were arrested .
The President-in-Office said in his reply that the Council will remind the Egyptians of their responsibilities and wait until they have signed the association agreement and can bring an institutionalised political dialogue to bear .
But why does he not use the signing of this agreement as a basis on which to force the Egyptians to come to a more equable , reasonable and non-discriminatory approach to their Coptic Christian citizens ?
Mr Purvis , as I have already said , we have not waited for the signing of the Agreement to indicate to the Egyptian authorities , when appropriate , our disapproval of any kind of conduct which does not respect fundamental rights .
This issue has been addressed in the bilateral political dialogue and has naturally been raised within the normal framework of relations between the European Union and third countries .
In this particular case we believe that the Agreement has its own negotiating context and it would not be right , after the Agreement has been approved by the European Union and agreed by the Council , to make its final signing dependent on the resolution of an issue , however important this may be , which is only one part of the whole picture .
On this particular issue and regardless of whether we strictly agree with your reading of the situation that the Coptic community is being subjected to specific measures , our information indicates that , even if the Coptic Christians are being affected the most by these repressive measures , this does not point to an attitude of particular retaliation against the Coptic community .
There is an ongoing conflict between traders and certain local communities which has affected the Coptic community but which does not necessarily indicate a specific intention by the Egyptian authorities on this issue .
However , the European Union will continue to carefully monitor this problem and will certainly raise this issue with the Egyptian authorities regardless of whether the Agreement has been signed .
Mr President , I was in Egypt at exactly the time when these events took place .
I saw that the situation was serious , but that , as you said , the Egyptian authorities were making a huge effort .
Nonetheless , I should like to ask whether we perhaps need systematic monitoring of the situation of minorities throughout the Mediterranean , i.e. for the Barcelona process , especially the situation of the Christian minorities living in the Mediterranean , some of whom are in a far worse situation in other countries than in Egypt .
I can only agree with the honourable Member when he says that there are situations in other countries in the southern Mediterranean which seem more serious than this issue .
It is practically impossible for the European Union to constantly monitor all situations in all the countries with which we have a relationship within the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
Within the Common Foreign and Security Policy and particularly bearing in mind the assessment being made , especially in the framework of our political dialogue within the association agreements , we continue trying to highlight our concern about the gravity of various situations . We cannot expect the European Union to operate as a kind of international human rights monitor .
There are other specific institutions to do this work . However , we will ensure that the due consequences are felt in our bilateral political relations with regard to any negative development in these respects .
I also agree that there are much worse situations in other countries within the Barcelona process , some of which perhaps do not occur to us when we are speaking , which must also be duly assessed .
However , the European Union cannot be expected to do the work of the international institutions in this area .
Question No 8 by ( H-0457 / 00 ) :
Subject : Significance of Euro-11 Will the Council say on what issues Euro-11 has , since coming into existence , taken decisions that have been of political significance to the European Union and its Member States ?
Mr President , Euro 11 must be one of the biggest mysteries within the Community institutions because this question comes up on a regular basis .
The third phase of economic and monetary union saw the beginning of informal meetings of the Euro Council or Euro 11 as it also known . This brings together the finance ministers of the countries in the euro zone .
These meetings are held monthly and before the formal meetings of Ecofin which involve all fifteen Member States .
Euro 11 meetings essentially address issues relating to the specific responsibilities which the eleven countries share in matters involving the single currency .
Whenever the issues go beyond this scope , the meetings are extended to all the Member States as is laid down .
In all cases where decisions must be taken , Ecofin takes these in accordance with the procedures established in the Treaty .
This was the guidance given by the Luxembourg European Council of 12 and 13 December 1997 .
Any other mystery for which the operation of Euro 11 may be criticised can only stem from a failure to understand this reality and the information which is actually in the public domain . The issues discussed by Euro 11 and transferred subsequently to Ecofin , which is attended by all the other countries which have not adopted the euro , are widely known , even in the press .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Presidency for its answer to my question .
The fact is that , in those countries which are to decide whether or not to join the common currency , such as Sweden and Denmark , there are discussions taking place about the significance of Euro-11 .
I think it is important that the Presidency should again state that Euro-11 has no formal right of decision-making whatsoever .
The question , however , is that of whether any individual questions in the informal Euro-11 discussions can be pointed to which have subsequently led to formal decisions in ECOFIN .
I wonder if the Council of Ministers can provide examples of any such concrete questions from the discussion in Euro-11 which have led to a new policy ' s having been created .
The honourable Member ' s question raises an interesting point .
As Euro 11 and the institutionalisation of the third phase of economic and monetary union require a form of closer cooperation which is pre-established in the Treaty , the question is whether an acquis will be created in Euro 11 which must be transposed to the full Union .
There are currently no elements of policy coordination between the countries in Euro 11 which naturally affect or should affect their behaviour in Ecofin .
However , it makes perfect sense that countries which are part of an effective policy model and which are involved in implementing policies involving , for example , the single currency framework can separately define and coordinate a position . However , this can only be ratified in Ecofin .
This point is important for understanding that perhaps in the future , when different policy integration models exist , we will see more elements and more ways of working of this kind .
This may be the future and we will see whether the Feira European Council integrates closer cooperation into the Intergovernmental Conference .
If so , we will very probably see several models emerge .
How can we avoid this ?
For a country such as the honourable Member ' s perhaps the problem will be solved by being part of the Euro Council .
However , until this decision is taken by the authorities in his country , the Euro Council will consist exclusively of the eleven countries which have actually adopted the euro .
I understand the answer of the President-in-Office of the Council in the following terms : that there are no instances of negotiations in the Euro 11 having , as it were , pre-empted the formal negotiations and decisions in the competent council , which is ECOFIN ; that no acquis has been created ; and that what takes place , rather , is an exchange of opinions on the problems encountered by the 11 countries which participate in the euro .
I think I heard the President-in-Office of the Council say something along the lines that there were agendas for these informal meetings and that these agendas were to be publicly available .
I have never seen any such agenda , and I should like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council to state clearly to what extent agendas are available in advance of the meetings .
The reason why both Swedish and Danish MEPs are raising these questions is that we have obtained the impression that the Euro 11 is an influential body . However , I understand from the answer of the President-in-Office of the Council that formal authority and the power to make decisions of a legal and political nature still lie with ECOFIN .
We must be clear on this , Mr Krarup .
Issues relating to the single currency are addressed jointly but solely by the eleven members of Euro 11 .
If Euro 11 wants to address any other type of issue which does not concern the single currency , this decision is shared with the other Member States which are not part of Euro 11 .
It is as simple as that .
What cannot be avoided is that the coordination of the policies of the Euro 11 countries , particularly on the single currency , and the effect that these policies have on the overall context of the EU ' s economic and financial policy do not appear to be linked to the EU ' s own coordination .
It is natural that there is prior coordination between these countries and it is natural that this coordination ends up having some influence on the final decision taken in Ecofin .
This happens at contact group level and in the relations between various countries in various contexts .
I know of several cases in which government sectors of EU countries meeting at Council level have talked separately and coordinated their positions so that these appear linked in the institutional contexts of the Union .
You will say that this is not part of the normal procedure .
That is true in that case but in the case of Euro 11 this is institutionalised in the Treaty and it is this which is specified .
There should be no doubt on this .
Mr President-in-Office , from what you have just said , is there therefore an understanding or an expectation in E-11 that after they have had an informal discussion about the euro in Euro-11 , they will all vote the same way when they go to Ecofin , even if they disagreed originally ?
Is there a procedural expectation that all eleven will vote the same way in the formal decision-making in Ecofin ?
Mr Newton Dunn , all I can say is that the ministers are responsible for their own positions . Therefore , if at the Euro 11 meeting they have different opinions but the discussion leads them to a joint conclusion I do not see why this same position should not be taken in Ecofin .
I do not see any disadvantage in the existence of various levels of coordination , particularly when these are institutionalised in the Treaty itself .
Question No 9 by ( H-0458 / 00 ) :
Subject : Trying to discover , through clouds of secrecy , what the Council has decided In previous answers to me , the Portuguese Presidency has insisted that everything decided by the Council is open to the public .
I have expressed continuing deep scepticism about the Council 's claims .
As a test case , will the Council inform me precisely where in the Council 's published documents I could have discovered that Belgian fishermen had been persuaded to stop fishing in the Irish Sea by Britain 's Fisheries Minister secretly giving them 190 tonnes of the British North Sea plaice quota and ten tonnes of the British sole quota in the English Channel ?
I discovered this from a newspaper , but where could I have found it legitimately through the Council 's officially allegedly open documentation ?
The Member ' s question begins by noting that the Portuguese Presidency has insisted that everything decided by the Council is open to the public . Yet this assertion by the Council causes the honourable Member some confusion .
On the specific case mentioned , what is happening is as follows . The fact that Belgian fishermen will not be fishing in the Irish Sea does not stem from any Council decision as the regulation approved by Council provides for fishing quotas to be granted to Belgium in these waters .
It actually stems from each Member State ' s right to exchange with other Member States the fishing quotas allocated to them . In accordance with the basic regulation of the common fisheries policy , the Member States , having notified the Commission , may exchange all or part of their fishing quotas .
The same article establishes that Member States shall annually inform the Commission of the criteria which they adopt internally for distributing their fishing quotas .
Therefore , the quotas available to Member States are established and allocated by a Council decision , with each Member State being responsible for distributing these among the national fleet or , if appropriate , for exchanging part of these quotas with another Member State . In this case the latter only needs to inform the Commission to ensure the effective control and management of fish stocks .
We therefore cannot find any Council document which refers to the exchange of notes between Belgium and the United Kingdom given that , under Community legislation , it is Member States which are responsible for deciding this by mutual agreement and given that this does not require approval by the Council .
However , with regard to the overall distribution of quotas , the honourable Member must be aware that this is published in the Official Journal , in the minutes of the Council of Ministers ' meetings and also in the annexed declarations .
We do not feel that there has been any breakdown in the transparency for which the Council is responsible .
Up in the gallery , listening to you and me , are visitors .
Everything is open here in Parliament .
They can hear what we are discussing and agree or disagree .
But the Council of Ministers meets in secret .
Maybe you can slide out of this example and say it is a Member State talking to the Commission and they send them a letter .
Nevertheless these matters are done in secret .
If we - you and I - want the public to understand and agree with the decisions we take , surely you agree with me that it must be done in public ?
I do not agree , Mr Newton Dunn .
No government in the world takes its management decisions in public .
We can discuss the issue of whether or not legislative decisions should be taken in public .
This is something which we have been discussing in the Intergovernmental Conference .
However , we have not yet reached a definitive conclusion and until then the Council rules are what they are .
I do not feel that this is a negative practice on the part of the Council as we are actually working in line with the provisions of the Treaty .
Question No 10 by ( H-0460 / 00 ) :
Subject : Tibet and the World Bank Is the Council aware of the World Bank 's ' China Western Poverty Project ' proposal to move tens of thousands of non-Tibetan farmers into Amdo , thereby breaching international law concerning population transfers to occupied territories ?
Is it also aware that this project has been condemned by the German and United States Governments but supported by the British Government ?
Will the Council press the World Bank to abandon the scheme and the British Government to withdraw its support ?
Mr President , I will be very brief .
The Council has not examined the issue raised in the Member ' s question .
The Member States are responsible for assessing the specific projects to be financed by the World Bank .
With regard to projects for Tibet financed by the European Union through its cooperation programme , the EU ' s position is that these projects must benefit native Tibetans .
Can I say firstly that I was astonished by the Minister 's response to my honourable friend on the subject of human rights in Egypt .
If Europe does not stand for human rights then I do not know what it does stand for .
I would like to test him , if I may , on Tibet because Tibet has now been illegally occupied by China for many years .
Does the Minister agree that no matter how many years before Tibet regains its freedom , no European state should recognise the illegal actions by the Chinese Government in Tibet and that the transfer of tens of thousands of non-Tibetan people into Amdo is illegal under international law ?
The World Bank has now recognised this and I understand is abandoning its so-called Western Poverty Project proposal .
The British Government has not yet withdrawn its support and all I ask the President-in-Office to do is to remind all Member State governments on the Council - including Britain - that they must not endorse or be seen to endorse illegal acts and abuses of human rights and national rights against the people and the nation of Tibet .
Mr Bowis , I note your concerns and we will certainly convey these to the Member States .
However , I must say that the European Union has not ignored the issue of Tibet .
For example , troikas of heads of mission have been sent on fact-finding missions to Tibet . This issue is also regularly raised in the dialogue on human rights between the European Union and China .
The last round which took place in Lisbon on 25 February was preceded by a démarche with the Chinese authorities which included the problem of human rights in Tibet .
The European Union is not hiding from the issue of human rights in Tibet . However , as the Member must be aware , the European Union has not in recent years taken a clear position on the basic issue .
No definitive decision has been made within the European Union on tackling the basic issue and this is a point which must be raised openly .
The European Union has a lot more than just the ability to send investigative parties , have discussions , make recommendations and so forth .
In the case of Egypt , as has already been said , we have the European-Mediterranean programmes and association agreements .
In the case of China we have very many major trading arrangements and , potentially , their accession to the WTO .
Could we not use our power , our muscle , in order to achieve our human rights objectives and not just go on talking and talking without seeing any results ?
I can only repeat what I said about the fact that , within the European Union , no official joint position has been adopted on the Tibet issue , regardless of the human rights issue .
On this issue of human rights in particular , the reactions and attitudes of the EU must be proportional to the importance of the issue .
Although this is certainly an important issue in terms of discussing China ' s accession to the World Trade Organisation , for example , it cannot be used to block negotiations of this significance .
We must find a measure which is appropriate for the reactions and the various situations .
Question No 11 by ( H-0462 / 00 ) :
Subject : Effective action against death boats in the Straits of Gibraltar The policy on containing immigration and strengthening barriers along the Straits of Gibraltar is based on a seriously flawed approach and has attracted public criticism from the Andalusian government and the Ombudsman .
Does the Council not believe that , if this project is to bear fruit , an agreement needs to be concluded with Morocco to combat the mafias operating in this area and introduce effective surveillance measures such as observation vessels , in order to prevent people from dying in the attempt to cross the Straits and ensure that the planned investments in the north of Morocco are in fact carried out ?
The Member ' s question refers to the Council ' s actions , firstly with regard to the checks carried out by Member States at external sea borders and secondly the measures which may be taken in the country of origin in order to prevent illegal migration and combat the activities of traffickers .
Measures to reinforce the effectiveness of the checks carried out by Member States at their external air and sea borders have been implemented , particularly within the Schengen area , and are now being integrated into the Community acquis following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Although these measures are carried out by Member States , the Council controls their actual application through its competent bodies .
By way of example , based on a decision of the Schengen Executive Committee of 18 December 1998 on the coordinated use of consultants in respect of documents , measures are being introduced which are intended to combat illegal migration by air and sea in cooperation with various African countries .
Moreover , a 1999 decision of the Schengen Executive Committee approved a mutual aid project for the exchange of officials to give assistance and advice in carrying out security and control tasks at external borders .
In addition to the Schengen acquis , practical measures of the same type are also being taken on behalf of the European Union . These are generally based on the Community acquis and particularly on the common position of 25 October 1996 which established the assistance and information missions carried out away from the border .
Such measures are coordinated within the competent bodies of the Council but do not for the time being cover any African countries .
In terms of addressing the deep-rooted reasons for people wanting to escape and emigrate from certain African countries , we can refer to the action plan for Morocco approved in the Council in October 1999 .
This action plan is one of a set of five , each containing an exhaustive and coherent approach focused on the existing situation in a country of origin or transit of asylum-seekers which is regarded as being important .
For each country selected , the action plan presents a balanced combination of options which the European Union offers in terms of foreign affairs , development and humanitarian and economic assistance .
In the action plan for Morocco , which specifically covers the situation referred to by the honourable Member , this country is regarded as a country of origin and transit for economic migration to the European countries .
The measures recommended in this action plan include using existing channels and improving information-gathering , distributing correct information on immigration , creating strategies for combating illegal trafficking and promoting measures intended to apply the readmission agreements .
Also recommended is the promotion of direct foreign investment and vocational training , in which small companies are also involved , and assistance for the voluntary return and reintegration of Moroccans who live in EU countries .
In signing the action plans established by the High Level Group , the Tampere European Council of 15 October 1999 recognised that the European Union still lacks an overall approach to the immigration phenomenon which covers the political , human rights and development issues in countries and regions of origin and transit . This is an important point .
To achieve this objective , poverty must be combated and living conditions and employment opportunities must be improved , conflicts must be prevented and democratic states consolidated .
This requires greater coherence in the internal and external policies of the Union which are the responsibility of both the EU and the Member States .
Partnership with third countries also constitutes a key element in the success of this policy .
The EU is aware that , in order to implement the action plan for Morocco , partnership and cooperation with the Moroccan authorities will be needed .
In this context , in June of last year , a mission to Morocco took place before the action plan was finalised in order to establish a dialogue with the Moroccan authorities .
Another mission of this type is now planned for the end of this month , specifically intended for holding discussions with the Moroccan intermediaries .
As I have said , the EU ' s policy covers development and humanitarian and economic assistance for Morocco .
The consolidation of the action plan for Morocco is clearly a long-term strategy but it is through the dialogue now under way in this context and on the Association Council that progress will be made .
I would like to believe from this long answer , which I did not fully understand , that the Council has a well-intentioned attitude to this very serious problem .
Given such an inconsistent state of affairs as the European Union giving more resources and being more effective , for example , in the control of meshed drift nets , in the control of fishing , than in the field of the rafts used for illegal immigration , I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council if it would not in his judgement be appropriate for us to have a periodic assessment of the situation in the Straits of Gibraltar and a report on the tiny advances made in this area .
I believe that you have been very explicit , that you have answered in many words , but these words disguise a low level of effectiveness .
The European Union , together with Morocco , and employing control measures for ships in the Straits , would thereby prevent these losses of human lives which now number more than a thousand , and which are our responsibility .
The Monitoring Centre for immigration is nothing more than a story in the press .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , are you not in favour of a periodic assessment ?
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , firstly I must say that I agree with you .
This is indeed a very serious situation involving regular and even daily human tragedy which must be addressed .
The Spanish authorities have been in contact on this issue with the Moroccan authorities and the Spanish Prime Minister , Mr Aznar , had a meeting just recently with his Moroccan counterpart about this problem .
Development measures are being introduced in the northern area of Morocco , which are starting to improve this situation and the economic conditions that have led to these migratory flows .
As for the possibility of us periodically carrying out a quantitative assessment of these incidents , I believe that the Spanish authorities may be able to provide the necessary information in this respect .
This information is in fact widely available within Spain as it is distributed by the Spanish authorities .
What I want to try and explain to you - and this is why my original explanation was so long - is that the measures taken by the European Union in this respect or which are intended to have an effect in this respect are long-term measures which obviously cannot provide an immediate response to a given situation . They are measures which are intended to work at the root of this situation by creating the conditions to keep the Moroccan people in their own country .
They are development measures which are within the spirit of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
I realise that your immediate reaction may be that the practical effect of this type of long-term measure is limited .
I did say that these measures would involve many small steps .
We must all realise that the European Union has a set of policies which it aims to implement and that these policies involve strategic choices .
These choices cannot be systematically prejudiced by overly general actions leading to worse humanitarian effects than may have occurred anyway .
We must realise that , in their bilateral relations with Morocco , the Spanish authorities are currently responsible for solving part of the problem .
The European Union is generally involved in a series of projects , in the context of its relations with the southern Mediterranean countries , which include projects for development , population settlement and guarantees of improved economic conditions .
We cannot turn the European Union into a kind of technical instrument for the practical resolution of specific situations .
Question No 12 by ( H-0466 / 00 ) :
Subject : Decision concerning deployment of EU military personnel The decision to strengthen EU emergency forces for crisis management has raised the question of the legal basis for the deployment of EU military personnel .
According to the Swedish government 's interpretation of the decision taken at Cologne in 1999 , a relevant UN Security Council resolution has to have been adopted .
Will the Council therefore state where and when a formal Council decision was taken to the effect that military personnel from the European Union may be deployed only after a UN Security Council resolution has been adopted ?
Mr President , the decision by the Member States to develop their military capability by 2003 was taken in Helsinki .
The headline goal specifies a capacity of 50 000 to 60 000 personnel . This decision reaffirmed that the European Union ' s crisis management actions will be conducted in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter and the objectives of the OSCE ' s Charter for European Security .
The Helsinki declaration , which was approved by the Heads of State and Government of the Fifteen , expressly states that the European Union recognises the primary responsibility of the United Nations Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security .
The need to respect the principles of the UN Charter and the Charter for European Security is clearly recognised , so much so that the report to be presented by the Portuguese Presidency to the Feira European Council next Monday stresses the fact that , in the area of crisis management and conflict prevention , the European Union must establish close cooperation with the United Nations , the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
Yet a UN Security Council resolution is not needed to generally legitimise the EU ' s action .
However , the EU undertakes politically and at the highest level to respect the primary responsibility of the Security Council . Therefore , for a given operation , the Union undertakes to respect this responsibility and the resolutions adopted by the UN Security Council on a case-by-case basis .
However , you should note that some of the Petersberg tasks may be carried out without the authorisation or approval of the UN Security Council .
In fact the Petersberg tasks include , and I quote , ' humanitarian and rescue tasks , peacekeeping tasks and tasks of combat forces in crisis management , including peace making ' .
Therefore , only in the latter , for which the use of military force is required , is the existence of a UN Security Council resolution considered necessary .
It is clear that the implementation of actions , particularly humanitarian ones , does not require legitimisation by the UN Security Council . This does not mean , however , that the principles of the UN Charter do not have to be respected when carrying out this type of task .
Thank you for your answer , but I am afraid that it still does not provide proper clarification .
On the one hand , it is said that deployment is to take place in accordance with the UN or OSCE Charters ; on the other hand , the Council ' s representative says that no decision needs to be taken in the Security Council .
The Swedish Foreign Minister has stated that the expression ' in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter ' is to be interpreted as ' following a decision in the UN ' s Security Council ' .
She also said , in the course of last year ' s conference in Cologne , that , if other countries wanted to align themselves with the UN , Sweden would have the option of using its veto .
I should first of all like to know whether the Swedish Government has informed its colleagues in the Council as to whether it is planned to use the veto in the event of an EU action , that is to say an EU military action , being taken in the absence of a decision in the UN ' s Security Council .
Moreover , I should like to hear a still clearer statement . Can or cannot EU military personnel be deployed without a clear decision in the UN ' s Security Council or in the OSCE ?
It ought to be easy to answer yes or no to that question .
Mr Gahrton , the Petersberg tasks have several dimensions .
Some are purely humanitarian , for example rescue tasks .
Do you really think that we need to have a UN Security Council resolution in order to carry out a rescue task in a serious humanitarian situation ?
I also clearly said that any situation which may involve the use of military force , namely peace-making , naturally requires recourse and subordination to the Security Council .
As for the other tasks , we only have to comply with the obligations accepted by the European Union in the context of the UN , particularly bearing in mind that some EU countries are members of the UN Security Council .
Therefore , the spirit of the UN Charter will naturally be followed in the type of activity which the European Union may carry out within those Petersberg tasks which do not involve the use of military force .
I am still not quite clear about your answer and would just like to ask whether you think that governments in neutral countries are being somewhat economical with the truth ?
Mr Gahrton said that his government stated that it is only after a UN Security Council resolution has been adopted .
But from what you have said , that is not the case .
It appears that governments in neutral countries have a tendency to mislead citizens .
Is that the case ?
Mrs McKenna , the agreement reached in Helsinki allowing these new military structures to be established was a carefully considered agreement which was prepared under the Finnish Presidency . As you know , Finland is a country which has very legitimate national concerns in this respect and which clearly will have taken these aspects into account .
What we are currently trying to create within the European Union , and will eventually create , is a capacity for specific intervention which , in those areas not requiring the use of military force , will not need a mandate from the UN Security Council . In other areas a resolution will of course be necessary .
We expressly accept the need for this Security Council resolution where military forces are to be used in a given context .
The traditionally neutral countries , particularly the EU Member States which are not members of NATO , have managed to safeguard all their concerns in achieving this balance because this issue is clearly very delicate for these countries .
They are not deceiving their people nor are they being economical with the truth . They are saying exactly what their commitment is .
Clearly , their right of final veto over any decision is always guaranteed by the decision-making mechanism itself . Therefore , they can decide on a case-by-case basis as they see fit .
This is the fundamental rule of the European Union for any situation requiring the participation of military forces .
Mr President , there were approximately one hundred military conflicts in the Nineties , the majority of which were civil wars .
I want to ask whether , in connection with the scenarios that have been gone through , a consensus has emerged that it will not be possible to deal authoritatively with certain types of conflict under the existing Treaty .
In other words , is it agreed that certain military conflicts come within Nato ' s or some other organisation ' s sphere of authority but definitely not under the EU ' s ?
I will only say that this military capability , this intervention capacity of the European Union and this extension of its area of activity are all specified in the Treaty of Amsterdam which entered into force in May last year . It is only since then that these issues have been raised .
Question No 13 by ( H-0471 / 00 ) :
Subject : Arms supplies to Mexico The forthcoming export of P-90 revolvers to Mexico is further proof that Belgium is not very particular about human rights .
Following the insurrection in Chiapas there is evidence of increasingly serious violations of human rights in Mexico , with torture , arbitrary arrests and ' disappearances ' etc .
The European code of conduct on arms exports , adopted on 8 June 1998 , prohibits exports of arms to countries where there is a risk of the arms being used in an internal conflict .
Does the Council feel that these supplies of arms to Mexico are in conformity with the European code of conduct ?
If so , is there not a case for tightening up the code of conduct ?
If not , what will be the Council 's response to the Member State involved , Belgium ?
As you know , the European Union ' s position on arms exports is set out in the code of conduct approved in June 1998 .
Respect for human rights is one of the code ' s main conditions which must be met in order for authorisation to be granted .
Although decisions are taken individually by each Member State , the latter must take full account of the provisions of the code of conduct . This is therefore a matter of political good faith .
The Council does not receive any information on the reasons why Member States grant or refuse export licences and therefore cannot assess the grounds on which these decisions are based .
However , particularly since the establishment of the code of conduct , the exchange of information on arms exports has begun to occur within the European Union . This exchange is the subject of an annual report and will clearly help to identify common ways of tackling the problems .
We must realise , however , that this issue is still subject to subsidiarity in that the decisions are taken by each Member State , even though the code of conduct forms the backdrop and reference for these decisions .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , allow me to hide my amazement at your reply .
It is , of course , the case that with this conduct of conduct , we only have a very weak tool at our disposal to combat inadmissible arms exports .
I would like to ask you if there has ever been consultation within the Council to tighten up this code of conduct or to make it more easily enforceable ?
I fear that the same fate that has befallen our foreign and security policy as a whole , and which has been discussed so many times , will also befall this code of conduct .
At the end of the day , we rely on goodwill and , if that is not there , we might as well forget it .
Mrs Maes , I almost totally agree with what you have just said . However , the current code of conduct was the only one possible .
I can say this as I attended and participated in the negotiations on this code . The reality is that the code clearly gives no guarantees with regard to monitoring how the Member States interpret their responsibilities .
Quite frankly , there has not been until this moment , within the European Union , a consensus on or even a majority inclination towards reconsidering this issue .
The code of conduct was regarded at the time as a very important qualitative step forward in terms of the disparate practices of the Member States which existed at that time .
The aim was to tie the various Member States to a basic set of principles and to the observance of certain standards , while still leaving them completely free in this matter .
This is what is happening today . I realise that the code of conduct is very weak , it particularly does not have a binding nature and cannot go any further than a political sanction .
Therefore , publicising this type of situation - and I am not just referring to the situation raised in the question - particularly where this is taken up by the media , will put healthy pressure on the Council . In this way the European Union will one day be able to guarantee that the practices of its countries and those involving certain types of lucrative activity will be in harmony with the principles which the EU claims to defend .
This is the big test that the European Union and its Member States will have to face in the future .
Question No 14 by ( H-0474 / 00 ) :
Subject : Restoring normal relations with Austria In view of the response given earlier in the year by the Council to the recent political developments in Austria and of the need to promote the best overall interests of the European Community , will the Council now state if it is prepared to restore normal relations with Austria at every level ?
I would have been surprised if there had not been a question on this issue which is why I am glad that it has finally come up .
The Council of Ministers of the European Union does not have to express an opinion on a decision taken by 14 Member States in the context of their bilateral relations with Austria .
This is not a matter for the Council .
It would be different if , by not complying with any aspect of the Treaty on European Union , Austria were found to have infringed the principles of Article 6 , for example , and therefore had to be punished or the application of the provisions of Article 7 had to be justified .
As this is not the case , what is happening now in the relations between the 14 Member States and Austria is a bilateral issue which is not the responsibility of the Council .
Thank you for agreeing to take the question .
I am certainly taken aback by the President-in-Office 's response .
The fact is that the sanctions were imposed by the Council .
I cannot see how the Council can now wash its hands of at least discussing the possibility of lifting those sanctions .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office if he is aware that recent public opinion polls in Austria indicate that over 80 % of Austrian citizens want to see the sanctions lifted .
How then can the Council continue to ignore the democratic decision of the Austrian people ?
Does the President-in-Office not agree that failure to lift the sanctions now is undermining the democratic foundations on which this Union was established ?
I would ask him to give this House this evening an assurance that he will use his undoubted influence to have the matter discussed at the summit in your country next week .
Certainly , what is happening does not reflect the European aspiration to unity .
I am extremely disappointed that the Council , in this way , would want to wash its hands of what is a very serious matter .
Mr Hyland , the Council is composed of fifteen countries . I am not aware that Austria has participated in any debate or vote in Council in which any type of measure has been adopted against it .
No EU body has adopted any measure against Austria .
During the term of the Portuguese Presidency , there has been no working body of the European Union in which Austria has not had , like this Parliament , the option of full and active participation with regard to the whole of the EU ' s operation .
The bilateral decisions , not sanctions , which were taken by the 14 Member States in respect of Austria are political acts which one country is entitled to adopt in respect of another .
Every country has every right , with regard to the development of the political situation in another country , to adopt an attitude and to draw the due consequences from this .
The consequences in this matter are that Austrian candidates are not being supported in international organisations , Austrian ambassadors are not being received at a level above director-general and there is a freeze on political visits .
These are the famous ' sanctions ' .
If any country has interpreted this attitude more extensively then this is a matter for each country . These ' sanctions ' are therefore bilateral as each country is doing what it wishes in this respect and the responsibility is collective .
The responsibility for the position taken by the 14 Member States was freely assumed by these countries .
Any of these countries is free to disengage itself from these measures and we have to ask ourselves why up to now none of the 14 countries has done this .
This issue is therefore not a matter for the Council .
The Austrian authorities have had the opportunity to raise this issue within the European Union . It was in fact raised by the Austrian Foreign Minister during the informal meeting of foreign ministers .
It was raised the day before yesterday by the Austrian Foreign Minister in Luxembourg and Doctor Wolfgang Schüssel will very probably take the opportunity afforded by his presence in Santa Maria da Feira to raise this issue .
However , this decision is not a Community decision but a bilateral one , whether you like it or not .
I wanted to ask the President-in-Office to clarify something .
You are saying that the Council is not getting involved in these bilateral measures because , strictly speaking , it is not a Council decision .
So has there not been any consultation within the Council at any time ?
It is nonetheless being mooted that the sanctions will be brought up again in Feira .
You are saying that Austria might raise the issue again , but that is not possible in a Council meeting .
It will thus need to be raised again in separate meetings of a bilateral nature .
Do you yourself not think that this is a little peculiar ?
It does not seem peculiar to me for the following reason .
As I said at the start , in terms of strict compliance with its Community obligations as specified by the Treaty on European Union , Austria has not behaved in any way which may lead to action in the specific context of Article 7 .
This is clear and no one can dispute this just as no one can dispute that the Austrian elections were free and that the Austrian people are free to choose the government they want .
What can also not be disputed is that the other governments are free to be unhappy about the Austrian Government if they consider that this government contains a party which does not respect a set of basic principles which these governments have collectively undertaken to respect and which Austria has also undertaken to respect .
What I must say to Mrs Maes is that we are all Austrians in that we all have citizenship rights which must be respected in Austria .
We are therefore not indifferent to a political development which may lead to the presence , in the executive bodies of a Member State government and therefore a friendly government which shares with us and which has decided to share with us a basic set of principles , of a party which clearly conducted an electoral campaign based on other principles .
With regard to the issue of using the Community bodies to raise this issue , we are a free Union in that each Member State has the right to raise this issue formally or informally in the specific context of the Union .
As this is not an EU matter , this issue was never placed on the agenda and this will not occur under the Portuguese Presidency in any formal Council body .
The representatives of the Austrian Government are clearly totally free to raise this issue and will have every opportunity to debate this if the Member States want to do so .
At the Lisbon European Council , the 14 Member States decided to entrust the Portuguese Prime Minister with giving a collective response . At the informal meeting in the Azores there was a debate and several Member States expressed their opinions on the situation .
I am not sure what will happen in Feira but clearly Doctor Wolfgang Schüssel is totally free to express his opinions and to see the reaction of the other Member States to his words and arguments .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office , finally , if he and his Council recognise the outcome of democratic elections within this Union ?
Secondly , does he believe that the Portuguese presidency acted in haste as a result of a series of telephone calls throughout Europe when that decision was taken ?
Would it not have been wiser to summon a meeting of the heads of state for an important decision like this which - remember - will have consequences long after our time here in the European Parliament ?
I would like to hear the views of the Portuguese presidency , and maybe other presidencies , when others coming from the extreme right or indeed the extreme left enter government within the Union .
This should be a Europe of unity and solidarity .
To use a slang word it is a ' cop-out ' to say that it is not a matter for the Council .
Someone must take an initiative to resolve this serious problem .
It has given stature to an individual who does not deserve that stature .
In fact it has strengthened his position , not weakened it .
I will start with the last part of the honourable Member ' s question by saying that we were not the ones who gave stature to someone who does not deserve this .
It was Doctor Wolfgang Schüssel who did this by agreeing to an alliance with the party of Mr Haider .
With regard to the result of the Austrian elections , I clearly said that we fully respect the result of these elections .
Austria is a free country and one where the elections are held in a totally legal manner and with full transparency .
The problem is that the result of this free election , as has happened in the past in other countries , brought a certain party to power .
You should realise that there is actually something strange in the Austrian internal situation .
The party which received the most votes was the Social Democratic Party which did not want to form a government . The party with the second highest number of votes was the FPO which was not invited to form a government .
It is rather strange , in terms of usual constitutional arrangements , that in a European country the second-placed party was not invited to form a government but the third-placed party was instead .
Therefore , this is not a case of business as usual . It actually involves a kind of reassessment given the potential capacity of Mr Haider to become the leader of an Austrian government .
We do not dispute the Austrian elections and we do not dispute the right of the Austrian people to choose the government they want .
However , no one can force us to enter into relations with a government containing a party which has so far not renounced what it said in its electoral campaign nor the gravity of what it said .
It is a shame that this is not being clearly emphasised .
The gravity of what was said by Mr Haider and by the FPO in the elections is something which should make us all think , bearing in mind the future of Europe .
We should think about the racist and xenophobic statements which have been systematically made by this party . Curiously , it did not distance itself from these during its last conference , and instead reaffirmed all its pride in its past statements when it had a specific opportunity to rectify the current situation .
Nothing leads us to believe that there has been any positive change which may justify a new attitude of the European Union and , in particular , which may create the opportunity for any type of discussion on this matter within the European Union .
We do not feel that this issue is a matter for the European Union but is rather for the other 14 governments to decide .
So far - and we will have to wait and see what happens next - these governments have maintained a position of recognising that this situation is serious and that it requires a change , but not necessarily by the 14 governments . There is in fact an almost media-wide presumption that the change in attitude at this time should come from the 14 countries .
Why ?
What has changed in the Austrian situation which could lead us to change our attitude ?
Only time ?
We consider that it is the Austrians and the Austrian Government which must change if they want us to adopt a different attitude .
That is the essence of the matter .
Why systematically place the onus on the 14 countries ?
Why must the 14 Member States change ?
What has happened in Austria to justify this change ?
Clearly this does not necessarily mean that we will not consider other ways in the future of assessing the development of this situation and in fact this is what will happen in the coming days .
Thank you very much , Mr Seixas da Costa .
I would like to thank you for your continual presence , your unselfishness , the intelligence with which you have replied to us , as well as your patience , and we would like to wish you much success in your personal role as Minister and also to the Portuguese Presidency .
May this success match that of the Portuguese football team at the beginning of Euro 2000 .
May you achieve much for Europe !
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 15 to 28 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.35 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. ) .

Change to the agenda
On the recommendation of the Presidency and in accordance with Rule 111 of our Rules of Procedure I propose an amendment of the agenda for this current part-session .
By letter of 8 June 2000 , the Council requested from Parliament its opinion of the proposed Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 974 / 98 on the introduction of the euro 2000 / 137 ( CNS ) and a proposed Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1103 / 97 which lays down various provisions on the introduction of the euro 2000 / 134 ( CNS ) before the European Council in Feira on 19 June 2000 .
The Committee on Economic Affairs has decided to apply the simplified procedure in accordance with Rule 158 of the Rules of Procedure to both texts .
I therefore propose that they be included in accordance with the procedure without debate .
Is there any objection to the proposal ?
If not , the agenda is thereby amended and the deadline for the presentation of amendments is 10.00 a.m. on Thursday 15 June 2000 and the vote will take place on Friday 16 June 2000 .
( Parliament gave its assent )
Reconstruction of Central America
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0133 / 2000 ) by Mr Marset Campos , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a Community Action Plan for the reconstruction of Central America [ COM ( 1999 ) 201 - C5-0111 / 1999 - 1999 / 2114 ( COS ) ]
. ( ES ) Mr President , in 1998 , Hurricane Mitch devastated Central America ( Honduras , Nicaragua , El Salvador and Guatemala ) resulting in 20,000 victims and losses of more than EUR 5 billion ( 10 % of the GDP of those countries which are already burdened by eternal foreign debt ) .
It destroyed crops , homes and infrastructures of every type , thereby jeopardising the future of its peoples .
Europe ' s response was immediate and significant , through the Stockholm Conference , and it was consolidated , following the European Parliament ' s proposal , in the Commission ' s initiative which we are currently debating .
I would like to highlight four issues .
The first relates to our assumption of responsibility in the event of these catastrophes .
The connection between our economic activity and the increase in pollution , with the greenhouse effect and the onset of climate changes makes it advisable for us to immediately ratify the Kyoto protocols on the reduction of the gases which cause this effect .
Furthermore , our model of unequal development leads to poverty and indebtedness in these countries .
It is a contradiction to preach the reconstruction of Central America taking account of respect for the environment , according to a model of sustainable development , while we continue to maintain the same economic relations with those countries .
The second issue involves the global objective of our assistance .
The Commission ' s proposal is sensible insofar as it centres its attention on two fields : health and education .
However , it should be more ambitious , so that it may coordinate and integrate all the different initiatives in those countries .
This requires a substantial increase in our staff , a measure which this House supports .
This action will allow for synergy between the different forms of aid and will guarantee that the effort made will not be limited merely to reconstruction - since , in that event , things would continue in the same way - but will offer an opportunity for regional integration , harmonious and sustainable development , creating wealth and general well-being , and for the consolidation of democracy in these countries which have just thankfully left behind years of violence and confrontation .
In this respect , two facts worry us .
The threat of hostility between Nicaragua and Honduras as a result of border disputes would cast doubt upon the good sense of our aid , and we therefore think that both of those countries should be subject to the decisions of the International Court of Justice .
The other is the recent re-emergence in Guatemala of political kidnappings , such as that of the university professor Mayra Angelina Gutiérrez , political killings , such as that of the Community leader , José Amancio Mendoza , or threats against journalists ( the case of Gerardi or the Nobel Prize winner , Rigoberta Menchú ) which are of concern .
Aid for reconstruction must be accompanied by firm and accountable commitments to safeguarding human rights on the part of the Guatemalan Government .
The third question concerns the way in which we are going to carry out aid and regional coordination and integration .
It is essential that we incorporate the most dynamic and responsible sections of society , the indigenous peoples , as well as the full and broad participation of women , the social organisations which display efficiency and solidarity and , lastly , that there is no partisan use of aid nor fraud in its management .
That is why we need to carry out internal and external audits of the application of our aid .
Increasing our effectiveness as the European Union also means that we must participate officially in the Stockholm monitoring group .
The fourth and last point is currently the most important : the amount of aid .
Although it is considerable , we believe that the amount indicated by the Commission , EUR 250 million , is insufficient given the magnitude of the disaster and the slow rate of the area ' s recovery .
The European Parliament therefore requests a significant increase .
We are concerned by the items appearing today in the press indicating that the Commission intends to reduce all European Union aid , including that destined for Latin America , because of its commitments in Kosovo .
We believe that we cannot behave in such an absurd way , since for Latin America this aid offers hope of escaping underdevelopment and freeing itself from the heavy yoke which originates from the North .
The European Parliament has already stated that it would not commit itself to any action which would mean cuts in the aid to other parts of the world .
We therefore insist that this is a crucial and key point .
If we behave in this way , we will ensure that other actions , both with the European Investment Bank and with other financial bodies , are significant and would aid the immediate execution of the programmes approved . All of this should be accompanied by the presentation of periodic reports to the European Parliament on the evolution and assessment of the results obtained .
Finally , I would like to acknowledge the warm and excellent cooperation of all the members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and its staff , as well as the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , some regions in the world are struck by the hand of fate several times in quick succession .
In the 1980s , the European Union made a major commitment to Central America in the San José process , in order to help establish peace and democracy in this region .
This process was a success .
And then , just a few years ago , these countries were again hard hit , this time by a terrible hurricane , and they are still suffering the consequences .
Thank goodness that Europe is again taking action , offering assistance and helping to reconstruct Central America .
We need to publicise the fact that the European Union is funding at least 62 % of public development aid in Central America .
This entitles the European Union to play a political role in Central America , which is not just the preserve of its large neighbours ; Europe too can make a contribution here to peace , democracy and reconstruction .
We therefore welcome the Commission ' s proposal .
The Committee on Budgets supports the idea of earmarking EUR 250 million for this region for the period from 1999 to 2004 .
It is also a good idea to make this aid conditional upon a commitment by the countries to work together .
That was the model used in Europe after the Second World War , when the duty to work together , cooperate and overcome borders were the sine qua non for Marshall Plan funds .
Our contribution to reconstruction aid will likewise be conditional upon a commitment to peaceful coexistence and cooperation .
I also expressly agree with the rapporteur : we should not allow the reconstruction of Kosovo to be funded , as it were , from the budget for Central America .
If the reconstruction of Kosovo is a European task decided by the Council , then it must also provide the necessary funds , which is why we are voting today on a sum of money as a direction marker , a direction marker which was decided before the conflict in Kosovo .
The Commission report predates the Kosovo conflict and we have made no changes to it .
We stand by the sum proposed for Central America .
I think that is the most important signal we can send out today .
Mr President , our committee undoubtedly agrees with Mr Marset Campos ' s report .
However , I should like to draw the House ' s attention to a number of points which , as far as we are concerned , are right at the top of the international aid priority list .
International aid must , without fail , be well coordinated .
The Commission , for its part , must set up suitable structures on the ground .
However , it must also cooperate as efficiently as possible with the international organisations which have been working there for several years already .
The same applies when it comes to involving the people affected , especially the indigenous population .
We must work with these people on the ground during both planning and implementation , that is essential as far as we are concerned .
Not only does it save costs , it increases efficiency and , more importantly , prevents fraud .
We know that in El Salvador , for example , the erstwhile Calderón government diverted aid of EUR 1 million in order to win votes in the right-wing camp .
If we really want to help the countries devastated by the hurricane , then of course we need to do more than just implement a few aid projects on the ground .
We all know that full well .
It is therefore essential that we remit foreign debts and build up regional and , above all , sustainable structures in both the ecological and the economic sense of the word .
The Union must also guarantee these countries access to the markets for their products , which must be assessed from both an ecological and a social point of view , because there is little point in giving out aid , on the one hand , and excluding these countries from our markets , on the other .
I take the same view as the previous speakers , that it is unacceptable for the Council to argue that money now needs to be diverted from Latin America to Kosovo .
Robbing Peter to pay Paul can hardly be called a policy ; on the contrary .
The Council keeps heaping more and more tasks on to the Commission and the European Parliament ; it also needs to ensure that they can be funded by entering the relevant amounts in the budget .
Mr President , as the rapporteur , Mr Marset , has said - and we support his words and his report - Hurricane Mitch has been the worst natural disaster in the history of Central America .
The human losses number more than 10 000 deaths ; almost another 10 000 have disappeared and more than 2 million people have been affected ; the material damage amounts to more than EUR 5 billion which is equivalent to 10 % of the GDP of Central America .
A significant part of the economic and social infrastructure has been destroyed and there has been a great reduction in the region ' s capacity for production and export in the short and medium term .
The countries most affected , Honduras and Nicaragua , are the poorest in the region .
The destructive effect of Mitch was exacerbated by deforestation and the lack of an adequate system of flood control , which demonstrated once again that environmental degradation affects the poorest most and highlights the intrinsic link between poverty and environmental deterioration .
As the Commission has said , the consequences of Mitch will considerably reduce the results of the efforts towards economic recovery and investment made there during the last decade by the European Union .
In April 1999 , the Commission approved a special action plan , provided with EUR 250 million , which this Parliament fully supports in the terms in which it was approved .
With regard to the model for implementing this programme , the Committee on Development and Cooperation supports option 1 proposed by the Commission .
Only in the event that it is not possible to carry out option 1 as a result of a lack of sufficient human resources , could option 2 be considered valid , by means of the contracting of highly qualified European experts .
As draftsman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation I must not end without asking , once again , for the cancellation of the foreign debt of the Central American countries , an initiative which must be dealt with by the European Union as a whole and in a coordinated fashion and not only by certain Member States acting on individual and particular initiatives .
Lastly , I believe it is also necessary to ask , within the strategic reconstruction plan , for the proposal of measures aimed at increasing credits from the European Investment Bank in that region .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Marset Campos , on the excellent report which he has presented to us .
This report has inevitably been influenced by the tragic consequences of Hurricane Mitch .
The European Parliament - and I believe we should remember this - reacted immediately by calling an extraordinary meeting on 4 November 1998 which was attended by the Commissioners then responsible .
In its resolution of 19 November , the European Parliament expressed the terms in which the European Union would respond to the situation created by Hurricane Mitch .
This response had to be formulated with the greatest diligence and speed through the approval of a strategic plan for the region within the shortest possible time limit .
I remember the date : November 18-19 1998 .
We must say that this request by the European Parliament , at least with regard to diligence and speed , has not been attended to , and this is a cause for regret .
The lack of human resources , while it may be an excuse from an administrative point of view , cannot and must not be a pretext for the establishment of political priorities , especially in the case of basic needs of countries which have suffered disasters on a massive scale .
To transfer this responsibility to the budgetary authority is not correct .
The Commission must at all times ensure the appropriate allocation of resources in accordance with the priorities agreed .
Commissioner , this morning , in the debate on the common security and defence policy , I had the opportunity to tell your colleague , Mr Patten , that I have never had , do not have and will never have any hesitation in decisively supporting the Commission with a view to clarifying and broadening the scope of its competencies .
On the contrary .
However , as other Members have said during this debate and as I had the opportunity to say also to Mr Patten during the budgetary debate , it is difficult for me to understand why the Commission has no difficulty in managing the EUR 800 million which it proposes in the preliminary draft 2001 budget for the Balkans but that , nevertheless , it has difficulties managing EUR 250 million which have been set aside in the plan for reconstruction in Central America , which are not envisaged for one year , but for four years .
In any event , Commissioner , the countries of Central America have not carried out a policy of genocide and ethnic cleansing .
They have included , unlike other geographical areas in their agreements with the European Union , a democratic clause which provides an essential element on which the whole relationship is based .
The countries of Central America have taken on very painful processes of structural adjustment which have meant great sacrifices for their societies .
They have done their duties with regard to the multilateral institutions and have fully complied with what the European Union expected of them .
Mr President , European civil society has already shown how sensitive it is to the tragedy suffered by the peoples of Central America .
It is now time for our institutions , in the face of a disaster of this type , to be a match for our civil society and for the circumstances .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Marset Campos , for his excellent motion for a resolution and also for the great clarity of vision with which he has interpreted the spirit of this resolution , which must not be limited to solidarity but shift the focus onto much more tangible political initiatives .
I do not wish to trawl through the figures recording the consequences of the hurricane again . I would simply stress the fact that the social and environmental damage concerns us far more than the economic damage caused , and it is that which is affecting this region .
And since misfortune is never fair , particularly when meting out its after-effects , it is the poorer bands of society which , as always , have been worst affected .
I would like to start by describing a paradox : the region hit by the hurricane , which is often hit by hurricanes as violent as this one , also includes Florida .
Yet although Florida suffers the same weather conditions as Central America , it reports infinitely less serious damage .
This is my point : we must start from here and consider the environmental and social vulnerability of Central America if we are to realise that the emergency relief culture and policy will not suffice , and this must be the focus of European Union aid .
This resolution has the advantage of going beyond emergencies .
The Community action plan is a chance to combine the reconstruction process with an element of change - change which these countries genuinely need - and to invest in a new economic and social development process based on the priorities of health , education and high quality services , which , in these countries , are directly responsible for the quality of life , and , above all , the quality of their democracy .
The resolution explains in great detail that all this is possible provided that two conditions are upheld and satisfied .
First of all , we must activate the monitoring and inspection measures , in order to avoid wastage , unlawful activity and fraud .
To this end , the resolution calls for the European Union to have sole responsibility for planning , execution and monitoring of the aid .
We are calling upon the Commission to take up its responsibility , and we consider it vital that it does so if we are to provide effective aid .
However , the second condition is much more important : we need to increase the Commission ' s financial and human resources .
The funds appropriated are not sufficient and the staffing is certainly inadequate .
In an area which has been greatly affected by political violence , the provision of aid - which is intended not only to provide emergency relief but to facilitate the restoration of democratic order as well - specifies and assumes a quality of preparation and a level of human resources which is quite different from that which has hitherto been envisaged .
We consider that greater and more effective use should be made of the cooperation of non-governmental organisations , which represent not only extremely experienced and extremely reliable resources in the countries concerned , but , above all , tangible resources which enable us to make our intervention more dynamic and more effective .
In other words , Mr President , Members of the Commission and the Council , I feel that it is time for the European Union to stop just declaring its solidarity and secure genuine , substantial fairness .
This plan must do more than just provide immediate alleviation of the effects of the hurricane : it must also bring about redistribution of the country ' s resources and restore the country ' s opportunities .
The resolution adopted by the European Parliament in November 1998 was also a step in this direction in that it referred to the cancellation of the foreign debt of the countries in the region , which amounted to USD 17 billion .
I would like to conclude by reiterating the invitation to the Commission and the Council contained in the resolution to support the total and immediate cancellation of the foreign debt .
Mr President , there is little to add at this point in the debate , especially after the excellent report by Mr Marset , which I agree with completely .
However , I would like to stress certain things that he has said .
It is very important to speak of behaving cooperatively - we have spoken about behaving sensibly - by focussing especially on education and health programmes , as the report itself says , and he has also spoken about coordination and the need for staff .
For those of us who were in Kosovo just a few days ago , we must specifically highlight something which has been said by many of the visitors in the delegation . That is , that , unlike other interventions , the main feature of the one carried out in Kosovo is that it was directed in an integrated and perfectly coordinated fashion , which increases the efficiency of our action .
On the other hand , as Mr Salafranca has pointed out very clearly , I also absolutely share his disagreement not only with the budgetary restrictions , but also with the difficult fact that obstacles are placed in the way of countries such as those in Central America in whose agreements certain clauses have been included , while we do not act in this way in other regions .
For those of us whose leitmotif for political action is solidarity , we also require efficiency , the sustainability of programmes and the creation of policies in the places where we take action , which will help these treasured societies of Latin America to reach higher levels of development and social justice .
I will end , Mr President , with the following quote : " We must be rebels , but we must also be competent " .
To interpret this in another context : let us show solidarity , but , in doing so , be efficient .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the awful disaster caused by Hurricane Mitch sets three main challenges for European policy .
First : we must help with reconstruction in these countries .
The Commission document provides a good basis for this , although some of what is written in it has yet to be implemented in practice .
I think it is particularly important to use the know-how of European organisations and organisations in Member States for reconstruction and to involve non-governmental organisations and local experts .
I do not think that calling for more new posts in the European Commission every time a new challenge arises is always the right response .
Perhaps Commission staff could be reassigned .
Secondly : we must give these ill-fated countries greater access to European markets than we have done in the past .
It is paradoxical that Nicaragua and Honduras , which were two of the least developed countries even before Hurricane Mitch , fail to qualify for the same treatment as many , many others , such as the ACP countries , which we treat well , and rightly so .
I cannot see why Nicaragua and Honduras still fail to qualify for the same treatment .
I do not want to quote the perennial example of bananas - the report does that .
I support this passage and also what Mr Kreissl-Dörfler has said .
I would like to quote the example of sugar .
In the case of sugar , which is an important product for Nicaragua , Nicaragua has no access of any importance to European markets .
It might help if we were to facilitate its access to the European markets .
The third challenge is that we need to fight the causes of these disasters .
I am well aware that we cannot simply say that the increase in greenhouse gases caused Hurricane Mitch .
However , there are many scientists who assume that it probably did . We just cannot say for certain .
But all the scientific committees agree that the number of disasters such as this will increase significantly if we industrialised counties continue to pump out the greenhouse gases at the same rate .
They will of course affect all of us , but they will always affect poor people most , which is why we must at last take more decisive action here .
Mr President , I should like to follow on from Mr Liese ' s closing comment on climate change , to which Mr Marset Campos also referred .

It is perhaps not by chance that we have suffered tremendous devastation in Central America , Venezuela and Mozambique , not to mention in Europe , and it is likely to increase .
It seems reasonable to suppose that it is not increasing by chance and that it really is the result of man-made climatic changes .
I would therefore like to see a link established between how we view these disasters and energy policy .
There really is a link and I should like to draw your attention to it .
I only wish there were not .
The second point I would like to make is that aid should be used to integrate Central America .
This has been a perennial cause for concern to the European Parliament and we have called for it on many occasions .
In the final analysis , of course , this is up to the people of Central America .
But perhaps the shock triggered by Hurricane Mitch gives us an excuse to overcome the hostilities and difficulties between the individual countries .
In any case , the people would be grateful and , for the rest , our aid would be worthless without any progress with integration .
The third point I should like to make concerns the implementation of this aid .
I do not envy the Commission this task because I know full well that , in a few years ' time , a report on the alleged or rightly criticised misuse of funds will land in our lap and I should like to point out that the cost of controlling these funds often exceeds the gain .
I hope that we shall be giving the Commission a certain amount of room for manoeuvre in the use of these funds because the speed at which programmes are implemented is often much more important than accounts in black and white down to the last penny .
I know that this is a comment which a parliamentarian should not make nowadays , but I make it nonetheless because I am right .
Finally , I should like to point out that the hurricane in October 1998 went beyond Central America .
It is now June 2000 . In other words , we too are an unwieldy apparatus and perhaps we too need to consider how we can speed up the process .
Even if we pass a resolution today , we are still a long way from building up the country ; on the contrary , it will take many years , perhaps a generation .
I consider that to be far too long .
.
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking , on behalf of the Commission , the European Parliament for the quality of this report and congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Marset Campos , on his report on the Commission communication on the Action Plan for the Reconstruction of Central America .
I am also grateful for the support and confidence that Parliament has given the Commission on the implementation of this important Community Action Plan .
The EUR 250m regional programme for the reconstruction of Central America , spread over four years , will contribute to the reconstruction and the transformation of the four countries most devastated by Hurricane Mitch - Honduras , Nicaragua , El Salvador and Guatemala .
The programme is based on the principle of sustainable development , as has been underlined by several speakers .
It provides for assistance in education , vocational training , public health and social housing .
The primary beneficiaries will be those who live in extremely disadvantaged rural areas where the consequences of the disaster are most acute .
Attention will be paid in particular to the indigenous peoples and to reducing vulnerability to this kind of catastrophe in the future .
The Commission is aware that the success of such an ambitious and complex programme also depends on the degree of coordination among the various actors present .
A coordination group is being set up between the Commission and the Member States .
Another important element will be the Stockholm Follow-up Group .
Until now the Commission has always been involved in an informal way in the activities carried out by this group .
In order to ensure maximum transparency , the Commission will submit an annual report on the progress of the RPRCA to the Member States and Parliament .
A first report of the activities carried out by the Commission has been distributed among the parliamentary Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
Following the initial emergency and other post-Mitch aid , we are now actively preparing the implementation of this reconstruction programme .
The mobilisation of the statutory personnel necessary for decentralised management and implementation of the programme certainly delayed the rapid launch of the programme , as has been emphasised by several speakers .
These problems have now been overcome .
The first official will arrive in Managua on 17 July and the remaining officials in the following weeks .
No further delays are expected at this point .
The Commission is taking all necessary steps so that the programme can be in place and operational within the following three months .
I quite understand the arguments Mr Salafranca raised about human resources .
As you know , it is not a question specific to this debate .
However , you should bear in mind that for the Kosovo programme we set up a specific agency .
In the case of this programme we had to deal with the staff who were available , due to the constraints of human resources .
Let me stress - and I share the view of Mr Salafranca and others - that the amount of time it has taken to get this aid to the region is wholly unacceptable .
We cited it as an example in our recent proposals for the overall reform of our external assistance programmes .
It is just another reason why the Commission , and Commissioner Patten in particular , is so determined that we should drive forward those reforms so that we stop letting others and ourselves down in this way .
Since the issue has been raised by several speakers , I should like to take this opportunity to guarantee that the financing of Kosovo will not be to the detriment of money allocated to Latin America , and definitely not to this specific programme .
Additional measures have been adopted by the Commission in the framework of the Community Action Plan .
These include the European Community contribution to the HIPC debt initiative , and approval of an improved General System of Preferences Scheme for Central America and Council Regulation of 21 December 1998 applying a multiannual scheme of generalised tariff preferences has been extended to 31 December 2001 .
In addition , the Commission is taking part in the HIPC debt initiative , contributing some EUR 50m to both Honduras and Nicaragua .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.
Asylum procedures
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0123 / 2000 ) by Mr Schmitt , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Commission Working Document : Towards common standards on asylum procedures [ ( SEC ( 1999 ) 271 - C5-0157 / 1999 - 1999 / 2148 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Amsterdam has at last paved the way for joint action in the area of asylum law and refugee and immigration policy .
In my view , this was long overdue , because the decision to move from a purely economic community to political union was taken a long time ago .
That the Treaty of Amsterdam moved in this direction was therefore all the more important .
Unfortunately , when it happened , Parliament was only granted the right to be consulted on moves in the relevant legal areas , which is why I expressly state here that I trust that the Commission will continue to ensure that Parliament remains fully involved , despite the fact that it only has a right of consultation .
Having said which , one thing must be made clear : given that , officially , we only have the right to be consulted , we shall only have any effective influence on the Commission and on how the relevant legal provisions develop if we , as a Parliament , agree on common principles and waive the need for full implementation of individual political goals .
I think that we have chosen a good approach to this issue over recent months during our discussions of the Commission ' s working paper .
I know from my own group , I must add , that , because of how the report is drafted , the view of hardly anyone here in the House is wholly represented .
That is precisely what happens when you make compromises and try to find a consensus .
You are satisfied on many points , but not always 100 % .
Allow me to highlight the main points which I think are important for future asylum procedures .
First : we must summon up the courage to separate the three main groups , i.e. asylum , on the one hand , and the temporary admission of refugees from crisis regions and immigration policy , on the other .
Secondly : we must ensure that qualification procedures are shortened and simplified , without sacrificing sufficiently high standards of careful examination .
Thirdly : our aim must be to allow asylum seekers to apply for asylum just once within the European Union .
However , this means ensuring the same procedural law applies everywhere and is applied uniformly .
This means training officials in charge of processing applications to a high standard .
These officials must have access to cross-border information .
And we must also ensure that asylum seekers are treated in exactly the same way , wherever they make their application .
This includes welfare , accommodation etc .
We need to guarantee that , in theory , you will face the same procedure everywhere , irrespective of whether you make your application in Spain , Germany or England .
If we can guarantee that , then inversely , it is only logical to rule that just one application is allowed .
Fourthly : I think that the Member States of the EU should be required to draw up a uniform , binding list of countries subject to a visa requirement and safe third countries and countries of origin .
I know that some people are critical of this .
But , in my view , it is the only way to ensure that officials take decisions on the basis of the same criteria and to create legal certainty for applicants in the Member States .
One important point which I should like to address , and which we have made clear several times in the report , is that the burden must be divided between the Member States .
How exactly this burden will be divided obviously still needs to be discussed .
But one thing is clear : the door on which the majority of asylum seekers or refugees knocks cannot be left to chance .
One country alone should not have to bear the burden .
I know that asylum law is a difficult and politically sensitive issue but I think that we have made a start in the discussions in committee over recent months .
We have discussed extremely constructively and fairly with each other .
This discussion has encouraged me and I am convinced that Parliament is now in a position to give its joint support to the continuing legislative process and , possibly , to discuss other difficult issues , such as an immigration law , constructively .
Mr President , allow me to start by thanking Mr Schmitt , not just for his report , but also for the excellent cooperation and for what he has just said to us .
He speaks from the heart .
Common principles were indeed seen as more important than individual political objectives .
I should also like briefly to thank my committee , the Committee on Legal Affairs , for the confidence which it placed in a neo-parliamentarian , someone who has just climbed on board , in entrusting me with this sensitive issue .
The right to asylum is enshrined in various treaties but , because of different definitions and interpretations by national courts , the law is applied to differing degrees .
This obviously contradicts the principles and objectives of the EC Treaty , Title 4 of which refers to asylum policy as an important means of establishing an area of peace , security and justice .
Establishing a uniform asylum law and harmonised implementing provisions is therefore a Community objective .
The document presented by the Commission starts by explaining that legally binding instruments need to be adopted for the asylum procedure .
Eight specific points are dealt with : Communitisation of the Dublin system , EURODAC , minimum standards for admission , minimum standards for recognising refugees , minimum standards for granting or withdrawing refugee status , complementary , subsidiary protection , temporary protection for displaced persons and , last but not least , a division of the burden .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has also achieved a consensus which pleases me greatly ; here too individual political objectives had to be put aside and we drafted a good opinion which was useful for Mr Schmitt ' s report .
I think that we shall have a highly constructive vote in favour of our common ideal tomorrow .
I wish us all the courage and strength to push forward on the final point which you addressed .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to highlight two positive things .
The first is the working document presented by the Commission , which was the starting point for the report .
It is a sound basis for instituting a debate which should culminate at some point in a legal act setting out common standards for an asylum procedure .
The second is the report , which I particularly wish to highlight , because the rapporteur really has succeeded in finding a broad consensus right across the political divide on a very delicate matter .
That is no easy task and we have all experienced quite the opposite here , which is why this is an excellent piece of work .
I should like to pick up on three points which I think are particularly important and which I would ask the Commission to take into consideration .
The first is the question of how to divide the burden and has already been addressed .
We must not concentrate on just one aspect ; we need to remain receptive to a distribution in terms of people .
If you look at refugee movements , you will see that they always affect the same countries .
Austria , for example , where I come from , is always near the top of the list when it comes to admitting temporary refugees or asylum seekers .
It is on a par with Luxembourg , Belgium and the Netherlands .
Others have a much lighter burden to bear and greater solidarity between the Member States is needed here .
I should like to highlight the question of shortening and simplifying the qualification procedures without - and that is the crux of the matter - compromising careful examination .
It is an important point , because asylum seekers are entitled to a fast decision and a fast answer on their future status .
The third point is that which gives legal certainty and which , when implemented , helps to ensure that identical decisions are taken in all Member States .
It is the point which requires us to keep up-to-date lists of safe third countries and countries of origin .
It will help enormously if we manage to draw up these lists .
It attracted a broad consensus but I fear that this consensus will not perhaps hold up if all the amendments proposed by the Greens are included .
They want much that is positive , but they want a lot that is total , as Mrs Merkel once remarked .
If , for example , they want to implement the total extension of the definition of refugee or total access for asylum seekers to the job market or work to reverse the burden of proof , then the consensus achieved with their vote in committee will be jeopardised .
I call on them to consider withdrawing these proposed amendments so that the broad consensus can be maintained .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Pirker has addressed an important aspect of the debate now behind us , namely the fact that this was the first time we have held a debate over several months in a political field in which , for as long as I have been here in Parliament , we have only ever become entrenched , which was marked by a willingness all round to compromise and , more importantly , by the ability all round to compromise .
So let me say straight away that you , Mr Schmitt , have carried out what I see as an exemplary piece of work .
We always extend our ritual thanks to the rapporteur but , in this case , I should like to do so in a special way , by saying that you have astounded all of us sitting on the left side of this House .
The Secretary-General of the Berlin CDU , an important regional branch of the Christian-Democrat Union in Germany , has quite clearly stated in the report submitted here , and which bears his name , that he is in favour of maintaining the individual ' s right to asylum as a fundamental right . As a German Social Democrat , all I can say is well done !
Your party leadership in Berlin - I mean the federal , not the local leadership - maintains exactly the opposite , namely that an immigration law is needed and that the individual right to claim protection is therefore no longer needed .
Assert yourself in your party .
I guarantee that you will have the support of the German Social Democrats , if no-one else .
It is clear from what Mr Pirker has said that you have obviously been engaged in real missionary work in your group ; but good works deserve to be praised .
What we have achieved - and Mr Pirker has indicated that he is ready to vote in favour - is a report which addresses the standards which need to be applied to the asylum procedure so that comparable conditions and requirements for applying for and claiming asylum can be created uniformly throughout the European Union .
When we speak of standards , we mean formal processes , procedural processes and we must do our best , in doing so , to guard against loading them with ideological connotations or questions of principle of a long-term , political nature .
That is one of the reasons why we are telling our fellow members in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance that we reject all their proposed amendments except one .
This one amendment deals with remand pending deportation , which we too feel is an instrument worth examining .
I am not judging that .
We shall reject your proposed amendments because we need to learn in this Parliament , as legislators , that we should and must deal in the legislative process with the subject matter which needs to inform the law .
But here we are talking about the procedural , not the substantive right to asylum .
That is something else entirely .
The Greens ' proposed amendments contain a discussion of the content , not the form of asylum law .
As you will certainly have noticed , we in the Socialist group have not filed any more proposed amendments to plenary ; nor do we need to because the Schmitt report as voted by the committee corresponds in a very large measure to what we , as Socialists , have in mind : the fundamental vested right guaranteeing everyone who wishes to use it access to the procedure .
It is important to us to have a guarantee of legal support in the procedure in a form which ensures above all - and we consider this to be tremendous progress - that those involved in the procedure are dealt with in a language which they can understand , i.e. that they are given the support they need to understand the procedure , that they can claim legal counsel in every case , that they can appeal to the court against the initial administrative decision and , as the most decisive point for us - I would remind my German fellow members of the debate within Germany - that this appeal has a suspensive effect .
That is a huge step forward for us .
It also means - and we went into this in considerable detail in our contribution to the debate in committee - that , where the applicant has temporary leave to stay during the appeal procedure , this procedure cannot take years ; on the contrary , there must be a fast-track procedure , because the public and the applicant both have a right to swift completion of the procedure .
All in all , Mr Schmitt has submitted a report which we in the group of the Party of European Socialists can support and I am fairly certain that this report will get what it deserves , i.e. a large majority .
Mr President , fellow members . A word on a personal note : Today is the last sitting in which I shall act as coordinator of the group of the Party of European Socialists .
I shall soon be devoting myself to different tasks in my group .

I should therefore like to take this opportunity to thank all my fellow members , Mr Wiebenga , Mr Pirker , Mr Ceyhun and Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , with whom I have worked so closely in this capacity over recent years , for always cooperating with me so fairly and trustingly .
Mr President , we from the Liberal group will deeply miss Mr Schulz ' s pure and crystal-clear democratic input in this area of policy .
It is unfortunate , but we wish you all the best in your new job .
This was the fun part of what I wanted to say .
What shape is the European asylum policy in ?
That is hard to say , as there is not really a European asylum policy to speak of .
We in this Parliament , the delegates as well as their predecessors , have for years been pushing in the right direction .
So far , the European Commission , that is to say the present Commissioner ' s predecessor , failed to come up with the goods but , prior to the Treaty of Amsterdam , had little say in the matter anyway .
The previous European Commission may have had the will , but did not have any power .
The bottleneck , as we quite often noticed , was located within the Council of Ministers .
Most governments showed willing too , but they were subject to the rule of unanimity .
Then there was the Tampere Summit .
Dozens of proposals were submitted there , also in this area of policy .
Things were looking up , according to many journalists .
They had , however , overlooked the fact that the crippling policy of decision-making on the basis of unanimity still applied .
It is unlikely that a scoreboard will be able to unlock this paralysis within policy .
All it will do is make it clear to the outside world which body and country are responsible for the paralysis within policy .
What needs to happen now ?
All sorts of things need to happen .
As far as we , the Liberal group , are concerned , both the European Commission ' s working document and Mr Schmitt ' s report , which we are discussing today , are a useful leg-up to the next phase and , in our opinion , and I would echo the opinions of previous speakers , Mr Schmitt has adopted a level-headed approach in his report .
We will be voting in favour of the tenor of the report and we are backing it .
Mr President , the Treaty of Amsterdam made one thing clear : there is no way of getting past a common asylum and immigration policy .
The initiatives of the European Union on reuniting families , the anti-discrimination package , temporary protection for war refugees and , at long last , the attempt to harmonise asylum law make this very clear .
Now , with the Schmitt report - for which , by the way , I thank you in my capacity as coordinator of the Greens - we have the first clear stand by the European Parliament , even if a number of sensible proposed amendments - our proposals , which are also recommended by the UNHCR - have been rejected .
Mr Pirker , I do not see a problem with this - you can reject them again tomorrow .
One way or another , we shall be voting in favour of Mr Schmitt ' s report .
These are the usual parliamentary rules of play and with them we can all live happily under one roof - that is my assumption .
Tempus fugit !
We must implement the Treaty of Amsterdam by the end of 2004 .
There are difficulties at hand though .
The national states are often not prepared as yet to support European rules .
But this should not divert us from our purpose .
Mr Schmitt ' s report goes in the right direction and calls on the Commission to take specific steps by proposing legislation .
I hope that we will be able to persuade the Member States of the merits of our approach .
Mr President , the Schmitt report draws Parliament ' s attention to the extremely topical issue of defining clear , common standards governing the right to asylum . This is necessary not only for legal and administrative reasons but also and especially in order to uphold the dignity of asylum seekers .
Clear , well-defined rules governing the matter are also necessary in order to avoid the right to asylum being confused with the problem of immigration .
I used the word ' problem ' intentionally , for the very reason that the absence of an adequate immigration policy has meant that our citizens often perceive all forms of immigration as a problem , a burden and even a hazard , instead of as a social and economic resource and a source of cultural enrichment .
In Italy , for example , unregulated or , even worse , illegal immigration is related to organised crime .
In this confusion where illegal activity is ever increasing there are no rules and no certainties . In particular , the human rights of neither European citizens nor immigrants are genuinely being upheld .
It is therefore urgent for us to define an immigration policy , and therefore also a reception policy and a migration flow control policy , a policy which takes into practical account the genuine existence of social phenomena and which refuses to be conditioned by ideologies .
This is the framework within which the right to asylum must take its place : it is a sacrosanct right which every self-respecting civil society must uphold .
This paper from the Commission paves the way for a drastic extension to the opportunities for implementing binding EU legislation .
It is a leap forward in the development of the Union , and that is what is behind my wishing to remind you of a simple fact , namely that the root cause of the asylum problem is social breakdown in countries in the vicinity of the EU .
East , and especially south , of the EU ' s borders , an increasing majority of people live in a sea of social destitution and political oppression , and it is that which triggers the asylum problem .
The EU is the region ' s superpower - economically , politically and militarily .
Political breakdown in neighbouring countries in the Balkans and in North Africa is the EU ' s responsibility .
It is not just a question of passivity and sins of omission .
It is a question of the EU and the Member States having , by virtue of economic hegemony , political dominance and military power , contributed actively to the forms of social breakdown that turn our fellow human beings into refugees .
Do the EU ' s institutions and Member States now want to change these basic conditions ?
No , for these are the EU ' s very rationale .
Is the main message of the Commission ' s working document and of the report we have before us that there is a willingness to do something about the core problem ?
No .
Nor are Christian love of neighbour and human solicitude , or even just general decency , the pivotal factors .
This document is another building block - and an important one - in that Fortress Europe we are constructing with all the means at our disposal to keep our wretched neighbours out in the cold .
It is not a question of our being obliged to guarantee legal rights to our fellow human beings .
Rather , we ought to be exercising justice in the sense of sharing the burden fairly , with the rich countries giving in accordance with their abilities .
We should not regard refugees as interested parties . Moreover , the flow of refugees is limited .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , I would firstly like to acknowledge Mr Schulz .
I would like to say to you , Mr Schulz , from the bottom of my heart , something which I would like somebody one day to say about me : you have been a good adversary , that is to say , a hard adversary , always frank , forceful , often discomforting and there is no doubt that we will miss you .
Mr President , allow me now to come to the point and say that this seems to me to be an important Commission document because it genuinely launches a debate which many previous documents pointed to , in particular the Tampere conclusions , but the content of which needed to be clarified .
There is , without doubt , a great need to clarify the existing differences between the asylum procedure , reception conditions , the interpretation of the definition of a refugee , the links between that asylum procedure and the ' Dublin mechanism ' procedures and other forms of protection and , in this respect , this document perfectly focuses the debate .
I am not going to mention all of the points highlighted by the other speakers , but I would like to insist on two points in particular .
Firstly , I believe that the Commission correctly relates the issues concerning asylum procedures , the object of a future directive , to the Dublin Convention procedure and the notion of a safe third country .
I must say in this regard that I have put forward an amendment which is against the system of lists .
It is problem of method .
Fiji was a secure country until a few days ago , and overnight it ceased to be one .
If we employ a system of closed lists , difficulties will arise in terms of keeping the lists up to date , which would cause enormous harm .
The other amendment which I have signed concerns the distribution of burdens .
We are all aware that the principle of solidarity requires a distribution of the consequences stemming from the current asymmetry in requests for asylum .
Firstly , we must say that if we achieve harmonised asylum procedures , the level of requests will also tend to become more homogenised .
Secondly , I would like to say that this report has one virtue which I would like to highlight amongst others - although I have been critical on some points - and that is that it very much insists on legal certainty , on judicial safeguards , on the asylum seeker ' s right to defence and , in particular , on everything contained in point 4 and , of course , on everything relating to legal assistance , with the possibility of making contact with NGOs and the UNHCR .
Evidently , this fits in very badly with the measures on distribution by quotas which have an image which is closely connected to deportation .
Therefore , Mr President , I hope that certain groups , and in particular the PPE Group , will reconsider this amendment , which takes up the amendment of the Group of the Greens precisely .
In other words , it is not an amendment of a conservative or any other origin , nor of any particular geographical origin .
It takes up an amendment of the Group of the Greens which was not approved in committee and I believe it should receive the support of the House .
Mr President , now we have heard words of praise , we Greens , but we have also been attacked slightly .
Perhaps you are right to attack us , Mr Pirker , when we think slightly beyond what is planned here in this document .
For example , with regard to access to the labour market . However , a fellow member in your group , if I remember correctly , our new Home Secretary , expressed a similar thought once .
We are also concerned here about the independence of asylum seekers and about social realities .
Mr Schulz has reproached us Greens on the same count .
As I said , perhaps you are right , but if we are talking about the individual right to asylum , then this also implies that there must be an individual examination in special cases .
That also forms part of the legal framework .
We cannot just evince an interest in what happens within the EU and consider that we have nothing more to do with what becomes of an applicant outside the EU .
It is no longer our sovereign territory , which is why this one proposed amendment is highly important and significant , precisely in order to ensure that there is no risk of persecution in the land of origin for rejected asylum seekers present on EU sovereign territory and that asylum seekers enjoy effective protection against refoulement in the third country to which they are deported .
That is the responsibility which we simply wish to accept in engaging in this debate , a debate which - and here you are right - needs further discussion and needs to be examined in much , much greater detail .
We have made a start , a good start and must progress hand in hand .
I shall be pleased if we progress by so much as a millimetre .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Schmitt , on his excellent report and on his suggestions for rationalising the Commission ' s proposals .
The disappearance of internal borders and the creation of the area of freedom , security and justice require us to make an effort to harmonise our asylum and immigration policies and to reinforce checks at external borders .
As has already been said , if we are to address this problem seriously we must establish a clear distinction between the entry of asylum-seekers , within the meaning of the Geneva Convention on the status of refugees , the entry of migrants for economic or other reasons and the temporary reception of refugees from regions in crisis . These are all different situations which must be treated differently .
The applications for asylum are not distributed evenly , as Mr Pirker pointed out .
There is clearly a disproportion in the number of asylum applications being recorded in each Member State .
This disproportion is bad for the European Union as a whole because it creates inequalities between Member States .
The procedures for granting legal refugee status and the conditions for assessing applications must therefore be harmonised so that these are equivalent in terms of the level of protection of asylum-seekers . A cost-sharing policy must also be established .
Solidarity must be for all .
It is essential that common rules are adopted on the reception of asylum-seekers , on the requirements to be met in order to obtain refugee status and on the process of granting or refusing this status . In particular these rules must prevent asylum applications being made simultaneously in several Member States .
Mr President , today marks the beginning of the second year of our mandate as Members of the European Parliament .
I hope that the next four years will be better and more fruitful for all of us .
I would , however , say that we have started our second year of parliamentary activity on an upbeat by discussing and - tomorrow , I believe - adopting this major initiative on the definition of common standards on asylum procedures .
There is nothing more European than this , and I therefore welcome Mr Schmitt ' s report .
I support the report and agree with every word it contains .
A pensioner who , as a member of the Pensioners ' Party , always comes to see me off at Bergamo airport when I come to Strasbourg , said to me : " Yes , I agree . Exiles should be granted asylum .
It is right for refugees and those who have been persecuted who have to flee from their own land to be granted asylum , but I live on ITL 700 000 a month which is a day and a half of your travel allowance .
Who is going to help me ?
I would be willing to help and even accommodate asylum seekers . " And I replied , " Do not worry .
You will see that the Commission will also use those who do not have work who are admitted into our country to help elderly people who are not self-sufficient and who need help . "
In addition to this , I would argue that it is right for the burden of providing asylum to be divided , at last , between all 15 Member States of the European Union .
I hope that the Commission will bring this about , starting with the events in Kosovo , so that the States which bore the brunt of providing asylum for Kosovars will be reimbursed by all the other States .
Mr President , having seen over the years very difficult discussions in Parliament relating to this subject , it is indeed a pleasure for me this evening to see such widespread support for this report .
The sense of consensus is to be welcomed .
It is a good working document and we have a good basis to start working , so I congratulate the Commission as well .
I feel slightly uncomfortable , given that Ireland is the home of the Dublin Convention and has only very recently begun to receive an appreciable number of refugees and asylum seekers , that unfortunately , the Dublin Convention is not working terribly well .
About 85 % of the people arriving in Ireland have not been stopped at the original port of call or processed in the country in which they originally arrived in the Community .
While I can fully appreciate and have great sympathy with the concerns of colleagues calling for burden-sharing , there is a fairly large amount of informal burden-sharing going on anyway .
Reception countries are happily turning a blind eye to the people passing through their countries on the way to third countries .
Having said that , I believe very strongly that we need to harmonise legal procedures so that we can offer a safe haven to those many people seeking refuge in the Community and also so as to have a humane and caring reception procedure that is uniform throughout the Community .
Because of the work I have been doing in this particular area I am very concerned about the criminal activities of some asylum seekers who are exploiting members of their own communities , through trafficking in women and young people .
Cooperation between police forces , where there is widespread information on prostitution amongst young girls in the Member States , has unfortunately to be an intrinsic part of our asylum policy .
What is clear , particularly in my own country at the moment , is that we must challenge the alarming rise in racism and xenophobia within our communities .
It is a deeply disturbing phenomenon in my own country .
We need clear implementation of good , humane laws and we will all benefit from them .
I thank Parliament for the support that has been expressed for this communication .
I especially congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mr Schmitt and Mrs Echerer , for their excellent reports .
I would ask you to convey my good wishes to Mr Schulz , who is no longer here .
I am sure he will come back to this debate , if not for functional duties , out of enthusiasm .
The Commission has now received reactions on this working document from several Member States , from numerous NGOs , and with the report of Parliament , will be in a position to fulfil one of the commitments of the scoreboard , which is to present a directive on minimum standards for asylum procedures .
It is my intention to present this proposal for a directive in the autumn of 2000 .
I should like to remind the House that the Commission proposed to the Tampere European Council to adopt a single European asylum system .
But the decision of the European Council in Tampere was to endorse an approach based on minimum common standards .
So the directive is , in my opinion , the most relevant instrument to address these minimum standards for asylum procedures which will have to reflect the cornerstones of the policy of the European Union with regard to asylum as was underscored by the European Council in Tampere : an absolute respect for the right to seek asylum , a full and inclusive application of the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and maintaining the principle of non-refoulement .
The Commission welcomes the approach the European Parliament has taken in many parts of the motion for a resolution .
The Commission endorses the recital calling for asylum policy to be conducted on as factual a basis as possible .
We fully agree with Parliament that common standards of asylum procedures should not be based solely on the premise that administrative and judicial activities have to be expedited but should likewise be informed by the need to preserve the dignity of asylum seekers .
We have to recognise that finding a balanced solution between simplifying the procedures on the one hand and guaranteeing legal certainty and respect for the rights of asylum seekers on the other hand is not an easy task .
But we are determined to come up with a solution that can be considered with a broad consensus as a balanced solution .
The Commission shares the view of the European Parliament that entry of asylum seekers , migration for economic or other reasons and temporary admittance of displaced persons and refugees in the event of a mass influx must be treated as entirely separate matters .
The resolution calls for temporary protection within three years .
On 24 May 2000 the Commission adopted a directive on minimum standards for giving temporary protection in the event of a mass influx of displaced persons and on measures promoting a balance of effort between Member States in receiving such persons and bearing the consequences thereof .
We have already sent such a proposal for consultation with the European Parliament .
I should like to say that this proposal on temporary protection addresses explicitly the question raised by several speakers on burden-sharing as we have adopted an approach on burden-sharing on the proposal we have already submitted to the Council for a European fund for refugees .
So I should like to stress that this proposal cannot be seen as separate from the other proposals that are already on the table and that they take into account the sensitive question of solidarity among Member States .
I should like to remind the House that with regard to asylum , the scoreboard that has been submitted reflects the conclusions at the Tampere Summit where a two-stage approach was adopted by the Heads of State and Government .
The first step consists of harmonising standards relating to asylum and protection , and the second step is the introduction of a common asylum procedure as such .
To achieve the first step , the Commission will not only come up with a proposal for a directive on common standards for fair and efficient asylum procedures , which we are now discussing , but will also bring forward , inter alia and as soon as possible , proposals on the determination of the state responsible for the examination of an application and on common minimum conditions for reception of asylum seekers .
I should like to remind the House that , as I have already said , we have already put forward for consultation by Member States a working document that aims to replace the Dublin Convention by a Community regulation , having in mind the concrete experience and the vulnerabilities and deficiencies that have arisen in the application of the Dublin Convention .
With regard to the second step , the Tampere conclusions invited the Commission to come forward with a communication on a common asylum procedure and a uniform status for those who are granted asylum valid throughout the Union .
It is my intention that by the end of the year 2000 this communication will be brought forward .
The Commission notes - as has been emphasised by several speakers - that the European Parliament has taken a general position on rationalising Community law on asylum matters in this resolution .
The Commission will not only study the resolution very carefully in order to prepare its proposal for a directive on common standards on asylum procedures - that I reiterate will be presented in the autumn of this year - but will also reflect on them whilst preparing the communication it will put forward by the end of this year on a common asylum procedure in the long term .
I sincerely feel encouraged by the fact that this communication has such broad support in the House .
With such commitment , both from the Commission and Parliament , I sincerely hope we will succeed .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Crime victims in the EU
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0126 / 2000 ) by Mrs Sörensen , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Rights and Freedoms , Justice and Home Affairs , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on crime victims in the European Union - Reflections on standards and actions [ COM ( 1999 ) 349 - C5-0119 / 1999 - 1999 / 2122 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this communication , the Commission has certainly demonstrated its willingness to make a tangible contribution towards improving the position of crime victims .
It points out that within an area of freedom , justice and security within the European Union , citizens must be entitled to effective legal protection .
The Commission would also like to launch a discussion on the treatment of victims and would like to see measures taken to improve their plight .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs feels that a number of the proposed measures are too dependent on the goodwill of individual Member States and it calls for rules at a European level .
Why is this so necessary ?
There are countless examples known to us of how victims have been treated in recent years : child abductions , in which case the parents and relatives are also the victims , victims of terrorist attacks , victims of organised crime , break-ins , robberies and the like , stalking , not to mention intimidation .
But victims must not suffer twice : firstly from a crime and secondly from the system .
There is a need for clarity concerning the rights of victims and for transparency concerning their status .
The measures proposed in the Commission communication appear to be geared exclusively towards victims from one Member State in another Member State , or third country victims legally resident in one Member State in another Member State .
However , the package of measures should also take account of Member State victims in third countries and third country citizens illegally resident in a Member State .
The status of a victim should not have any effect on his rights or on the possibility of acquiring such rights .
In the context of the enlargement of the European Union , particular attention should be paid to the treatment of victims from the candidate countries .
Since they are concerned with both civil and criminal procedures , the Treaties provide the European Union with instruments for increasing the protection of crime victims on its territory .
It is regrettable , however , that the unanimity rule currently applies .
The scoreboard submitted by the Commission for reviewing progress in implementing the area of liberty , security and justice should be modified in such a way as to guarantee and speed up the legislative follow-up to the present directive .
It is disturbing , however , that the measures concerned with aid to crime victims are not intended to come into effect until 2004 in this scoreboard .
We cannot let victims wait for that long .
By providing measures in 2001 , victims will at long last be able to look forward to fair treatment .
After all , treating victims with understanding and dignity also plays a preventive role .
The proper treatment of victims will help destigmatise them and enhance their emblematic role .
When granting aid to victims , it is important not only to provide financial and legal assistance , but also to take measures first of all in the field of anonymity , privacy and safety of the victims , as well as in connection with the religious and cultural aspects , and to provide medical , psychological and social assistance . In addition , it is important to recognise the family of the victim as fellow victims and as witnesses , and to recognise the right to be assisted by an interpreter and to be questioned in the mother tongue .
A special system should also be set up for the legal , psychological and physical protection of victims of domestic violence , stalking and genital mutilation .
In particular , additional measures are required for minors .
For this purpose , specially equipped rooms need to be provided where the questioning of minors can be registered on video , so that they are not obliged to be confronted more than once with a traumatic experience .
It must immediately be possible to provide the victim with material , medical , psychological and social assistance which is free of charge at the time of being offered .
Victims should also be informed of the availability of the various forms of assistance .
It is extremely important that , depending on the nature of the crime , specialist assistance is provided .
In this context , it is important to do away with a number of prejudices : some forms of crime are regarded more seriously in some countries than in others .
There is also evidence of a discriminatory response to victims reporting crime .
Member States should be obliged to set up special police units for crime victims .
I would also draw attention to the importance of a legal basis for , and harmonisation of , the measures for protecting victims .
The study carried out under the Grotius programme by An Wergens provides the requisite basic information .
The useful experience available in respect of existing measures in certain Member States can play an important role in harmonising measures or drawing up a common package of measures .
An initiative of this kind is a first step towards crime prevention .
But given the fact that organised , cross-border crime is on the increase , the initiative should culminate in a common prevention programme on a European and international scale .
Finally , pending the introduction of a harmonised instrument for cross-border protection of victims , the Member States themselves and the candidate countries , in conjunction with NGOs , will need to enhance the protection of victims .
It is also important to assess safety aspects in urban development and spatial planning in order to prevent crimes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentleman who have been so patient .
Talking about strengthening the position of crime victims is like relating a story with a happy ending .
From the beginning , we met palpable resistance from many quarters , but now most people agree that this is something important and commendable .
This applies to all the European institutions .
We need to focus upon the victims ' perspective and upon strengthening their rights in the Union .
People who make use of their freedom of movement should not have to be exposed to crime .
If they do in fact become crime victims , they should at least not have to suffer twice and end up in a worse situation than citizens of the country concerned who are themselves crime victims .
This applies irrespective of what the particular crime might be .
The position of crime victims ought therefore to be strengthened on a number of levels .
One can hardly talk about strengthening the position of crime victims without also talking about crime prevention measures .
In November 1997 , Parliament took the initiative and requested an action plan regarding preventive measures .
An action plan of this kind was adopted by the Council in December 1998 .
These questions were highlighted again in Tampere in the autumn of 1999 .
We have embarked upon a new process .
The best way of helping crime victims is , in fact , to ensure that no crimes are committed , but that cannot always be done in practice .
The best way of preventing crime is to disseminate information .
To be able to devise an effective crime prevention strategy , we need in fact to know what we are talking about .
For example , there are still no definitions of the concepts of crime victim and organised crime .
In addition to introducing crime prevention measures , the position of crime victims must be strengthened in more concrete terms once crimes have actually been committed .
It is partly a question of making people more aware .
Crime victims ought also to know to what rights and possible forms of aid they are in fact entitled .
Most Member States have services which provide crime victims with some form of first aid .
Travellers may , sometimes more than the local population , require various forms of specific aid .
This may take the form of special measures including help with language and translations , as well as psychological help .
The police , social services and non-governmental organisations of various kinds will , of course , be involved in providing these forms of aid .
European cooperation has , in actual fact , already been devised and is in the process of development .
In particular , the European Forum for Victim Services has developed sound guidelines relating to the position of crime victims .
The Commission ' s proposal involves introducing minimum standards for receiving crime victims with a view to being able to provide them with information and support where necessary .
This is excellent .
The police will play an important role because they are the point of first contact , and special training is often required in this connection .
It is difficult for foreign crime victims to follow the legal proceedings at a distance , which is why special measures are also required to guarantee the legal position of foreign crime victims .
Discussion of this issue began in the Commission during the last session under Commissioner Gradin of Sweden .
The issue will be taken up again under the Swedish Presidency .
In actual fact , this is , in a way , a story with a happy ending because there is quite a lot of agreement as to the objectives .
Thinking European is often the same as moving Europe forward .
In this case , we have common interests across party divides and national frontiers .
There ought , therefore , to be good opportunities to think European .
I therefore welcome the Commission ' s communication and I want quite especially , of course , to thank Mrs Sörensen for her work on this report - a report we fully support .
We shall then wish to urge the Commission to come back with directives .
We hope for concrete action in the future .
The necessary conditions are broadly present .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when these issues are addressed , the public authorities are usually more concerned about the aspects of dissuasion and security , crime prevention , approval of penal frameworks and action by police forces and the legal apparatus .
However , it is also essential that we consider the people most affected by crime : its victims .
Whoever they are , we cannot allow them to become a double victim , firstly of the crime and then of the system .
Adequate protection must be guaranteed for crime victims within our Union and it is essential that equal treatment for these victims is also guaranteed , whether in court or before the authorities . Active means of support must also be developed .
The personal dignity of the victim must be respected and their safety , privacy and family must be protected given that this Union which we are gradually building is based on respect for rights and freedoms , guarantees of safety for people and their property and effective legal protection . In other words , this is a Union based on the values which characterise contemporary democracies .
We therefore welcome the Commission ' s initiative which is clearly compatible with the effort to create an area of freedom , security and justice . It is essential that there are minimum rules on the protection of crime victims which ensure , throughout the European Union , an adequate level of legal assistance in cross-border proceedings .
This is particularly important on issues such as access to justice , protection and effective application of the rights of victims in proceedings or their right to participate , receive the necessary aid , obtain and provide information , understand and be understood and so on . Victims must also have the right to compensation for damages , including court costs .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
It is an important area and she has rightly drawn attention to it .
It refers to the new powers of the Community over the last few years : rights of asylum , immigration and general cooperation in civil matters .
It is therefore crucial that we use these powers to improve the position of victims of crime .
At the time of the crime , especially personal , physical or violent crime , many victims , if not all , will be vulnerable , distressed , upset , probably angry , and desperately in need of support .
As the rapporteur has said , they do not need to become victims again .
Nor do they need to feel that they are being branded almost as criminals themselves .
We need to ensure - and this report goes a long way towards it - that the procedures do not negate the situation or make it worse , but rather , that they support and assist the victims .
The rapporteur has said that we also need to make certain that safeguards are in place so that there is no intrusion into the privacy of victims .
We must in particular draw attention to intrusion or possible intrusion by the press .
I am particularly pleased that this report includes support in the language or dialect of the victim of crime because sometimes that is an area that is overlooked .
Likewise the necessity for training of police officers and others in authority .
Ethnic minorities , very often women , children - those who sometimes find the system difficult - will be the ones who are most at risk in this sort of situation .
Those who perhaps are in fear of authority are especially vulnerable .
The PSE Group is pleased to support this report and to congratulate the rapporteur .
However , there will be no surprise that we will reject those amendments that have been put down in the name of certain members of the TDI Group .
Those amendments do not improve the report ; rather they are a crude attempt to add the biased , distorted and racist sentiment of the signatories concerned .
I congratulate the rapporteur on her work .
I congratulate the Commission on bringing this forward , and I wish it every success in the future .
Mr President , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I should like to welcome this report and to thank Mrs Sörensen for her excellent work in drawing up such an important document .
I welcome the underlying Commission communication , but I would say , on behalf of my Group , that we regret that this communication was not much stronger .
It is quite clear that the Treaties provide the Union with the instruments that are necessary to strengthen protection of the victims of crime .
I think , for example , of some of the conclusions of the Wergens report , and we would have expected more from the Commission than proposals for greater dialogue and the exchange of best practice .
We need clear measures to help victims with access to assistance , justice and compensation .
However , it must be said that if we feel the Commission could do more , the biggest problem is by far the Member States .
It seems to us incredible that seven Member States have still not ratified the 1983 Convention on compensation for victims of violent crime and that standards of justice are still so low in so many Member States .
Let me give just one brief example from my own constituency .
Mr Pike , a lorry driver in my constituency , was recently assaulted by his employer in the Netherlands .
Mr Pike is not a wealthy man and the cost of legal redress is high .
He does not have access to legal aid in Britain because he has to employ a lawyer in the Netherlands to help him .
He does not have access to legal aid in the Netherlands .
He is unable to secure any compensation or , indeed , any justice for the injuries he has suffered .
Unless we are able as a Union to help in relatively clear and simple situations like this , our citizens will not have confidence in the single market and will not feel part of the European Union .
I hope that we can take up some of the ideas put forward in this report to improve their situation .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , Patsy Sörensen , for the care and accuracy of her report .
On the other hand , I would like to focus my attention on the presentation of various amendments to the draft text which include people affected by terrorism as the victims of crime in the EU .
I completely agree with this , as well as the fact that certain groups use violence to try to impose their ideals .
What I believe , Mr President , is that when we speak of imposing ideals , and of victims , we should not only refer to terrorist organisations , of which there are too many and which must cease to exist in a democracy such as the one we want for Europe .
In this respect , we must also reject and condemn the impositions and violence sometimes exercised by bodies and apparatus of the states , as in the case of GAL and other previous cases in Spain .
Democratic justice must apply to all without exception , and moral reparations and material , medical , psychological and social aid etc. must reach all the victims of terrorism without exception , including , of course , the victims of the above-mentioned state-sponsored groups .
Only in this way , acting fairly , will we achieve a Europe which lives in peace and prosperity , which is the founding aim of our Community and I believe that this is still our greatest aspiration .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her valuable work .
The Commission has tackled a very important issue in its communiqué .
The question of more effective help for the victims of crime will not be solved merely by improved legislation .
We can only make permanent improvements through combined , broad-based dialogue on the part of NGOs and the national authorities .
Compared to the authorities , NGOs often , in practice , have more flexible and versatile approaches to problem solving .
For example , Internet-based info-banks and service telephones provided through voluntary work could be developed in parallel with the services provided by the authorities .
The rigid nature of the courts and especially the high costs involved often prevent victims of crime from discovering their rights .
The situation is in untenable conflict with EU principles of the rule of law .
People have to enjoy true justice without having to pay for it .
The minimum level of legal protection in the Member States of the EU must not be allowed to slip to that which exists in the United States .
The EU and its Member States must also ensure that the victims of crime do not have to suffer twice over for the wrong done them .
In particular , when it comes to organised crime , many victims forsake the opportunity to go to trial as a result of pressures or for fear of vengeance .
EU Member States must develop more effective cooperation among the authorities in post-trial situations , for example , in the areas of plaintiff and witness protection programmes .
The added value of Europol in this process must also be investigated carefully .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission communication on victims of crime in the European Union , since it studies the process of creating common policies , as well as greater cooperation between the Member States at a time when we are all aware , including this Parliament of course , of the need for this type of communitisation .
Bearing in mind the enormous number of citizens of the European Union who suffer as a result of crime and , in particular , terrorism , I welcome this report which we are debating today since it contains certain points which , in my view , are particularly noteworthy .
One is the sensitivity it shows by specifically highlighting the fact that there are certain social groups - women , children , immigrants , homosexuals - who are more vulnerable than the rest of the population , as well as the fact that there are also certain sectors who , ignoring the most basic democratic principles , prefer to use violence to impose their objectives .
We must start by achieving a common definition of the concept of the victim to include families and dependants , since they also suffer the consequences of crime .
On the other hand , I also fully share the opinion that everybody resident in the Union should be clearly included , so that they may be subject to all the different measures that we are debating today , regardless of their status .
Nevertheless , it is regrettable that the adoption of the proposed measures is to be postponed until 2004 , since I believe that they must be adopted as soon as possible .
From another point of view and bearing in mind the ever increasing importance and influence of the media in our society , special attention should be paid to the way in which the media deal with the reality of these people , which is not always respectful of individual rights , above all when we are talking about minors , whether they be victims or delinquents .
With regard to these people it is also necessary to apply certain measures so that they can rebuild their lives correctly , not only from an economic point of view , but also through psychological , legal , medical and social assistance .
To sum up , they should be guaranteed full protection and , for that purpose , I am convinced that it is absolutely essential to cooperate with the NGOs and associations in the sector in every Member State .
I must finally stress my deep concern about the need to pay due attention to the victims of terrorism , since these are people who suffer from a very serious and specific form of crime which , unfortunately , does not only take place in my country , Spain , and which threatens democratic coexistence and freedom .
Mr President , as the Commission says in the introduction to its communication , we cannot seriously speak of a citizens ' Europe without dealing with the rights of victims .
I would like to express my agreement with what has been said by other speakers about the hope that the Commission will be more ambitious than it has been in this communication .
I also urge it be ambitious .
Please allow me , Mr President , to focus on the problem of the victims of terrorism .
I must begin by expressing my regret at the fact that a certain Member who spoke previously gave the impression that he reluctantly accepted the importance of the victims of terrorism , and then straight away focussed on other issues .
However , I would like to highlight the importance of this report and Mrs Sörensen ' s cooperation .
This is a balanced report which has been sensitive to the victims of terrorism , because if there are three groups of victims which must receive our special attention , they are , as the Treaty says , victims of trafficking in human beings , victims of crime against children and victims of terrorism .
I must therefore congratulate Mrs Sörensen , since she has hit the nail on the head by stressing that certain groups need specific attention .
We must not forget that complete attention must involve psychological attention .
This complete attention must also involve the consideration of family relatives as also being victims .
This is especially true in the case of terrorism .
Therefore , Mr President , I believe that this is a step which we hope will encourage the Commission to implement , with the Treaty of Amsterdam in their hands , more ambitious measures in this area . This , as the Commission says very clearly , is an obligation for all of us if we want to be able to speak proudly of a citizens ' Europe .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I should just like to say , if you do not mind , that I could be tempted to take bets on what language you use to address Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , at 12 noon .
Late payment in commercial transactions
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0154 / 2000 ) by Mr Murphy , on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on combating late payment in commercial transactions ( C5-0225 / 2000 - 1998 / 0099 ( COD ) )
Mr President , unfortunately Mr Murphy cannot be here with us this evening and I therefore have the honour of representing him here today .
However , I am at a disadvantage .
I was not involved in the work of the conciliation committee , although I have studied the documents .
So please forgive me if I am not quite as well informed as the members who helped in the conciliation procedure .
I should like to thank those members because , even as someone who was not involved , I can say that this is an important directive .
It is important to SMEs , it is important to the public sector , it is probably a far more important instrument for promoting employment than many of the resolutions passed here in this House .
I can still remember the earlier debates : late payments are a breach of contract and this directive stipulates that the purchaser must pay the vendor the full sum owed within 30 days of receipt of the goods .
Otherwise , he must pay a penalty in the form of interest etc .
Discussions with the Council gave rise to a whole series of problems which we have now managed to settle , several sittings later .
One of the main problems was the question of retention of title , whereby the vendor retains ownership of the goods pending full payment .
It was also agreed that freedom of contract cannot be invoked in order to limit the effects of the so-called anti-abuse clause . We have agreed on a clear regulation here which ensures that the debtor cannot procure additional liquidity or additional advantages at the creditor ' s expense .
In addition - and this was an important point - the principle of equal treatment between the public and private sectors has been acknowledged .
As far as interest is concerned , we have compromised between the 6 % proposed by Council and the 8 % proposed by Parliament , agreeing in the conciliation procedure on 7 % .
All in all , it is a reasonable result and , I repeat , it is a result which will mainly help SMEs in the Union .
I personally was most surprised to read that late payments were one of the main reasons for bankruptcies in Europe .
Apparently some 450,000 jobs are lost in the EU every year as a result .
We often spend a great deal of money on very few jobs .
Here we are achieving the desired effect cost-free , as it were , and I think that Parliament should make it clear to the outside world that it has done job security a huge service .
Allow me to close with one more comment regarding the Commission .
Late payments are a breach of contract even when it is the Commission which is late paying .
This does not figure in the directive but , in my experience as an MEP , we often hear complaints when we visit SMEs and large companies alike , that the Commission is often far too late honouring the payment commitments which it has entered into in research promotion or other areas .
I hope that the Commission will be guided by the spirit of this directive and make its own payments on time , because here too , I repeat , this is breach of contract .
My warmest thanks once again to everyone involved and I hope that Parliament will vote in favour of this compromise tomorrow .
Mr President , about four or five years ago , former Commissioner Christos Papoutsis told me at a meeting that he was considering some sort of attempt to regulate late payments .
I smiled and told him that I wished such a thing were possible , because it would be a relief to millions of SMEs , but that I thought it would be extremely difficult .
I am pleased that we now have before us a directive making that wish come true .
We have heard and we know what it costs SMEs , what it costs the European economy , what it costs workers when certain companies , which can and do throw their financial and purchasing weight around , or public sectors which can and do throw their weight around , acquire extra liquidity free of charge , at no cost to them , but at the expense , mainly , of SMEs .
Approximately half a million workers lost their jobs and one in four companies went bust because bigger and stronger companies got away with not paying them on time .
Today marks the beginning of a new era , an era which will , of course , dawn in two years ' time , once this directive , which gives SMEs different prospects for a different future , has been transposed into national legislation .
It gives them reason to believe that they too have the power to trade in a fair competitive environment , an environment which has been missing all these years , an environment which the SMEs of the European Union have been trying in vain to achieve .
Have you any idea how soul-destroying it is when a small businessman , with limited access to bank loans , is expected to subsidise companies with a far bigger cash flow or the huge public sector of a country ?
It is a bitter pill to swallow .
What I can say is that the negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council were a most pleasant experience .
Of course , I can say now that it was a pleasant experience because the outcome has been extremely positive for Parliament .
And it would be no exaggeration to say that Parliament was the institution of the European Union which understood exactly where the interests of European society and European business lie , which is why we used all our arguments and exerted all our pressure to persuade the Council that all the European Parliament ' s proposed amendments went in the right direction .
And , of course , I must thank the SMEs and Parliament and the Executive Commission , which also helped to achieve this result , and it is a good result .
Finally , I should like to close by saying that every SME in the European Union and millions of workers in small- and medium-sized commercial , handicraft and professional companies in the European Union will look towards us tomorrow , towards the plenary of the European Parliament in Strasbourg , in the belief that a new day has dawned for them .
Mr President , I have already received many reactions from within the SME world to the text that we will be adopting tomorrow and , partly on behalf of all these SMEs , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work .
I hope that Mr Linkohr will pass on these congratulations to Mr Murphy .
I would also like to thank the Commission for its cooperation , which has been as constructive as ever .
We should be proud of the common text which we will be adopting tomorrow and which we were able to adopt in the Conciliation Committee .
It is regulating what should be regulated .
Nothing more , nothing less .
It is also regulating matters to the extent that they need to be regulated at European level . Again , nothing more , nothing less .
And it is regulating matters in a legally well-organised way .
We can defend it perfectly from all angles , both with regard to transactions between traders and transactions between traders and the government .
Mr President , as early as in 1993 - at the very outset of the internal market - we , together with Parliament , asked the Commission to submit a proposal to regulate late payments .
Initially , the Commission ' s reaction was low-key , in the form of a recommendation . It subsequently took a tougher line with a proposal for binding rules .
It took all of us two years to make the political choices and to formulate them in a technically correct manner .
We have now provided the framework ; all that is left now is the transposition .
The Member States have been given two years to do this in .
Let us hope , together with the thousands of SMEs in whose interest it is for the Member States to respect the transposition period , that our Member States act more swiftly .
In fact , let us encourage them to do so .
As far as I am concerned , a European Cup should go to the Member State which manages to finish its homework first .
I have another question for the Commission .
I should like to have known whether it plans to formulate proposals on conditions for setting up debt-collecting agencies , which is one of the issues which we discussed for a long time in the course of the preliminary work but which we left out of this directive for a good reason .
My question is whether the Commission is planning to make proposals in this respect at a later stage and , if so , when ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my view , this directive is , without doubt , the most important directive for the small and family-run businesses of Europe .
A good day ' s work deserves a good day ' s pay .
But some have had to wait for it longer than others .
The stronger the partner , the more power he has to make a business wait .
Here , for the first time , we have a regulation which ensures that the company ' s liquidity is secured once the service has been provided , and within a foreseeable period of time .
I am delighted that we are debating today in the small circle , because you can see that this directive is totally uncontested and that the European Parliament stands fully behind this directive .
We know that some 450,000 jobs are lost every year as the result of late payments .
When we talk about job security and job creation , then we have a very important and crucial directive here which helps us to secure 450,000 jobs a year in Europe .
That deserves the headlines in the press but , as you know , the fight for jobs is already taken for granted .
I am proud of the fact that the European Parliament is making such an important contribution to this .
This initiative was intensively promoted to start with by Marianne Thyssen , Mr Folias and Mr Murphy and we are proud of such an excellent result in the House .
Payment within 30 days , precautions to ensure that payments are actually made and that the company receives the money within 90 days .
It is a sensational result .
Congratulations !
I am proud to be a member of this Parliament .
Mr President , allow me to begin by congratulating everyone who has been involved in the creation of this directive and especially those who have done the hard work of negotiating during the conciliation procedure , which I know has been hard , although I personally have not followed it - I followed the two readings , but not this third reading .
As the esteemed Member , Mrs Thyssen , has said , this directive deals with what it can and must deal with , no more and no less .
I believe that this is a magnificent definition .
The Commission ' s initial proposal was much more ambitious , but since we are moving in that pioneer territory of the internal market - that territory which involves elements which are still the competence of the Member States such as procedural rules and civil law , ownership reservations , or Article 5 of the procedure for the recovery of non-contested debt etc ... - the Commission ' s proposal was not in accordance with the Treaty , since we lacked a legal basis .
The present proposal is less complete , if you like , but no less effective .
I believe that it will have significant repercussions , which have been listed by previous speakers .
Above all , I am going to highlight one more , and that is that it opens up the road to seriously dealing with the need to fully enter into this pioneer territory .
This is because , today , there are still genuine obstacles to the perfection of the internal market , genuine obstacles to the four freedoms laid down in the Treaty , precisely because we do not have a clear legal basis .
Now , with the Treaty of Amsterdam , we may have a clearer legal basis , but we must make a great effort to establish effective coordination and harmonisation in all of these areas .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rarely does a directive have such wide-reaching social implications as the one we are discussing today .
It will affect millions of small businesses and millions of individuals who carry on economic activities , even though this may not as yet be apparent .
In my opinion , the forecast , as it was established at the end of the negotiations between the Council and Parliament , is precise and essentially correct .
A balance has been found which will certainly influence the relations between buyers and sellers significantly .
It is a measure which facilitates the market , not one which places restrictions on it , although it does lay down rules - for rules are sometimes essential in order to maintain the free market - and it is therefore a positive preventive action which essentially protects the weakest : both those who are weakest financially and those who are weakest socially .
There are some areas of Europe - including certain areas of Italy , for example - where a very successful company has a substantial , decisive , unambiguous influence on the market , which almost amounts to a monopoly .
Clearly , this company influences not only prices but also time frames , including settlement periods .
This is sometimes negative for those who need to work and are forced to have recourse to this company .
The issue is that of equal conditions for public and private industry , which I see as a positive thing and which will affect , or , rather , will be a positive development for public accounts .
In fact , you will be aware that public companies settle within a certain period , and this time limit means that it will no longer be possible for private companies who deal with the public sector to impose large , excessive burdens on public companies .
Consequently , public expenditure will also be reduced .
Mr President , in one way it is a good thing that the public in the 15 European states does not take too much notice of what we are doing , especially on evenings such as this where you , Mr President , the Commissioner , seven members and roughly the same number of officials must stand by our posts .
This is an issue which is seemingly unimportant but which in fact affects several million companies - I myself am a small businessman - and tens of millions of consumers .
There is a proverb in Italian : Non e mai troppo tarde - it is never too late !
But it is too late for many small and medium-sized enterprises , family businesses and young entrepreneurs .
And many companies will not survive the delay before what we will hopefully decide by a large majority tomorrow is actually transposed into law .
Unfortunately they will no longer be able to take a positive view , as entrepreneurs , of this positive step in the right direction .
It will help SMEs , bring greater legal certainty and improve property rights ; in the final analysis it is an employment programme , providing help for young enterprises and family businesses but also protection for the consumer .
I think that this aspect cannot be stressed enough .
All that is left is for me to thank all those involved , who have striven over the years to achieve this result . I hope that the intended beneficiaries will indeed be able to reap the benefits of it as quickly as possible .
Mr President , the Commission should like to take this opportunity in this debate to congratulate the European Parliament and particularly its rapporteur , Mr Murphy , on the very positive result achieved in the Conciliation Committee .
The tough negotiations , as good negotiations always are , have made the adoption of this directive possible . I am convinced , and several speakers have underlined this , that this is a particularly important directive for European businesses as it affects all commercial transactions between these businesses and between authorities , in both the public and private sector .
In saying this I believe I have responded to a comment made by Mr Linkohr .
We hope and we are convinced that the directive will have a positive impact on the daily commercial transactions of all businesses , whether these are large multinationals or small and medium-sized undertakings .
However , it is only right to point out that this type of directive is essentially intended for small and medium-sized undertakings because , given the operating rules of the market , it is these which will gain the most positive benefits from the effectiveness of the directive on late payments .
I am convinced that we have therefore adopted a legal framework which is simultaneously serious , rigorous and effective .
The Commission will do everything in its power not only to guarantee the appropriate transposition of this directive into national law during the next two years but also to reassess the late payment situation in the future in view of the actual application of the directive .
I must conclude by again congratulating Mr Murphy and this House on the decision to be taken .
Mr President , I had asked the Commission whether it intended to submit a proposal on conditions for the setting up , and mutual recognition of , debt-collecting agencies in Europe .
I appreciate that this does not fall within the remit of the Commissioner and that he is unable to provide me with an answer right now .
But I would like to receive a reply in due course , because this issue has been the subject of many a discussion in previous meetings .
Mr President , given the Cartesian evidence that this is not an issue falling within my area of responsibility , I can only say to the Member that I have noted her question and that , as usual , the Commission will certainly give her a direct answer .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.30 p.m. )
Madam President , the Austrian political scientist and professor , Anton Pelinka , has been prosecuted following a comment he made about Mr Haider .
Mr Pelinka was member of the committee of the European Observatory for Racism and Xenophobia in Vienna .
According to treaty obligations , he should be receiving support from the Austrian Government , but despite repeated requests , he has received inadequate support in terms of infrastructure .
In a press release , Mr Schüssel stated that , in the light of these experiences , the treaty stipulations are pitched far too high .
Mr Pelinka resigned because he felt unsupported by the government and was replaced by a member of one of the parties in government .
I know that the President has always been very committed to the issue of combating racism and xenophobia .
I was there when she gave her speech in Vienna to mark the opening of the Observatory .
We are also responsible for the functioning of the European institutions .
I would like to ask you whether you are prepared to write a letter or contact the Austrian Government to express your concern about the restriction of the freedom of expression and to point out the obligations which the government has in this respect and which it cannot escape unilaterally .
Thank you , Mrs Buitenweg .
We are investigating the matter you have just told us about very carefully .
Madam President , yesterday , the European Parliament decided by democratic majority no longer to convene in Strasbourg on Fridays .
You subsequently issued a press release in which you expressed your regret about this .
You have , of course , every right to do so .
Everyone has their own personal and political responsibility .
It is , however , somewhat confusing if the President of the European Parliament expresses regret regarding one of Parliament ' s democratic decisions and if she does so on Parliament ' s official letter-headed paper , with a reference to the services of Parliament .
I would ask you not to cause any confusion when you have to carry out your personal responsibilities vis-à-vis your electorate - which is something we all understand - and to do so on your own letter-headed paper .
Mrs Van der Laan , you will agree that even when entrusted with the office of President of the European Parliament , we remain free politicians .
I was speaking personally .
I said that , personally , I regretted that vote , I understood the practical reasons which led to it and , with the Conference of Presidents , I would consider the best way of dealing with that vote , in the interests of this House .
I do not think I abused my position .
Madam President , I would like to make you aware of something very inconvenient which happened to me which , in my opinion , undermines the dignity of the Members of this Parliament .
On Tuesday afternoon , I went to Poland to take part in an international conference .
At the Görlitz border post , as can happen , the German police expressed doubts as to my identity .
In order to convince the police and improve the situation I produced my European Parliament pass .
At this point , the German police thought that the document was a fake and detained me for eight hours until , after intense discussion , the necessary clarification had been obtained .
I had to spend eight hours under surveillance in a room and I was not allowed to use a telephone .
It was only after the intervention of the Polish authorities , who , moreover , recognised the validity of the document - and this bodes well for enlargement - that I was allowed to continue my journey .
I will submit a more detailed description of the incident shortly , but , for the time being , I would be very grateful if you could make the German authorities aware of the problem .
Border police need to be aware of the existence and function of this document .
Mr Mauro , what happened to you is totally unacceptable .
Please let me have a note as soon as possible so that I can take it up with the authorities concerned .
It is all the more unacceptable because it is clearly stated on that document , that passport , that it must be recognised by the authorities of European Union countries .
It really is absolutely unacceptable .
We will try to put an end to it .
Madam President , the trouble with this pass is that nobody knows about it !
We make virtually no use of it at all .
That is why I think you should remind the authorities once again that this pass is valid within the EU .
Yesterday , Mrs Karamanou said that she wanted to travel to America on it , which is of course impossible .
It clearly states in the pass that it is only valid within the European Union .
But to prevent this sort of thing reoccurring , perhaps the German authorities , and also of the authorities in other countries , should be made aware of its validity .
Mrs Pack is quite right .
If we want to prevent such incidents recurring , a teaching initiative in fact needs to be taken , so that everyone knows exactly what it is all about .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I would not want Members of this House to think that I do not have a sense of humour .
I did refer yesterday to the man or woman dressed as a cigarette packet standing outside this Chamber .
But I was making a serious point and maybe yesterday it was taken rather too lightheartedly .
I have a letter from you , Madam President , dated 6 April , in which it was agreed by the College of Quaestors that the area around the Chambers in Brussels and Strasbourg should be regarded as a neutral zone in which demonstrations , exhibitions or similar activities intended to influence Members would not be tolerated .
You went on to say that you would investigate ways of ensuring that there would be no recurrence .
I hope that you and the College of Quaestors will take this seriously because it is an encroachment on the right of Members to come to this House and vote freely on issues that their electors have sent them here to debate .
The jobs of one thousand people in my constituency are now at risk as a result of the decisions that were taken here yesterday .
Mr Perry , I can assure you that the Quaestors and I will take this very seriously and will take action to prevent a recurrence .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
European Council of 19 / 20 June 2000
The next item is the joint debate on the :
Council and Commission Statements - Preparation of the European Council ( Santa Maria da Feira , 19-20 June 2000 ) , including the situation in the Middle East
oral question ( B5-0492 / 2000 ) to the Council , by Mr Napolitano , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the Feira European Council
oral question ( B5-0493 / 2000 ) to the Commission , by Mr Napolitano , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the Feira European Council .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this opportunity .
This is the third time I have appeared before you in the six months of our Presidency and once again this allows the Council to have a direct dialogue with this House .
The Portuguese Presidency has always tried to maintain a frank , open and constructive relationship with the European Parliament , both with the plenary and its committees .
It is in this spirit that I will present our preview of the Feira European Council .
I will firstly refer to the timetable as it is fixed at the moment . On the morning of the 19th there will be the usual meeting with the President of the European Parliament .
This will be followed by a session with the Chair of the Convention , Roman Herzog , who is responsible for drawing up the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union . This will not be a deliberative meeting as the Charter is still being drawn up according to the chosen methodology .
Instead this will be an exchange of information . This seems necessary at this point so that Mr Herzog can inform the Heads of State and Government about the progress of the Convention ' s work in drawing up the Charter and also so that he can ensure that the various Heads of State and Government are up to speed on this issue .
Clearly this cannot and will not be a deliberative meeting , but simply an exchange of information .
Immediately after there will be a working session involving the finance ministers . This will address the issues of the follow-up to the Lisbon Special European Council and economic and financial affairs .
Lunch will be devoted to the Intergovernmental Conference and , in particular , closer cooperation .
The Council will have to indicate whether or not the latter issue is to be added to the agenda of the IGC .
The afternoon session will be devoted to the issues of enlargement of the Union , the common European security and defence policy and external relations .
I would point out that the Presidency invited the President of South Africa , Thabo Mbeki , to join us at this point so that we can also consider the issue of Africa-Europe relations and regional political issues .
We are delighted that President Mbeki has accepted our invitation , particularly given the importance of South Africa in regional terms and for the European Union and its Member States .
The next day , the 20th , will be devoted as usual to reviewing the draft presidency conclusions .
The Council will provide an opportunity to assess the progress achieved during the term of the presidency in areas which we regard as particularly important .
In doing this , we will try to show the ways in which European integration can continue to be developed , thus enabling to the greatest extent possible the resolution of the many issues which await us in the coming months on the European agenda .
As there is not enough time now to describe in depth the items to be considered at Feira , I will instead identify some of the issues which we regard as a priority and which deserve our attention .
The Intergovernmental Conference will come to the European Council through the presentation of a report by the Presidency .
This report is ready now . It was formally delivered yesterday to the President of the European Parliament and will today be made available on the Internet in all languages for general consultation .
As you know , this Parliament has followed the work of the Intergovernmental Conference with great interest and cooperation . I must point out that the participation of this House represents a step forward in qualitative terms with regard to all previous intergovernmental conferences on the reform of the institutions and treaties .
The Presidency ' s report basically consists of two parts .
The first assesses the progress made by the IGC to date and describes the trends emerging from the discussions . The second part contains a series of proposals , lists and tables illustrating the options which the IGC will have in the next six months .
Using the mandate conferred on us during the Helsinki European Council and after sounding out the Member States , we will be recommending that the issue of closer cooperation is included on the agenda of the IGC .
I am convinced that based on the work carried out , we will be in a position , with the leadership of the French Presidency , to conclude the IGC before the end of this year as planned .
As for the development of the common European security and defence policy , again based on the report which we will present to the European Council , I believe that significant progress has been made .
I would highlight the formation and entry into force of the new political and military bodies and civilian crisis management bodies for the first time in the history of the European Union and also the approval of the rules governing relations between the EU and NATO and between the EU and third countries . The decision taken on the location of all these bodies , in terms of buildings and installations , should also be stressed .
We have tried to take advantage of our simultaneous presidencies of the European Union and the WEU which has resulted in a clarification of the WEU ' s role and the use of its capacities and acquis by the European Union .
We are now entering a vital phase of this project and we must therefore prepare for the Capability Commitment Conference which will take place in November of this year . Its aim is to create and commit assets and capabilities which will allow us , as planned , to achieve the headline goal .
Yesterday , in the General Affairs Council , these documents were voted on and approved .
With regard to enlargement , this presidency launched the negotiations with the Helsinki Group . As we reported yesterday at ministerial level , several chapters have already been concluded , even with this Helsinki Group which is the most recent group .
We have also made decisive progress with the previous group , the Luxembourg Group , as all the chapters , with the obvious exception of the ' Institutions ' chapter , were already open with this group .
Feira European Council will indicate a renewed commitment not to slacken the negotiating pace , given the agreed principles , and to continue with enlargement as the main historic challenge of the European Union .
To this end I must stress that we inherited 16 chapters from the Luxembourg group . We have closed 10 and opened 6 .
With the Helsinki group , we have opened 10 chapters and closed 8 . We have also recognised full applicant status for Turkey , approved the framework regulation and accession partnership , and also a unique financial framework , and we have held the first Association Council with a view to adequately preparing for assessment .
As for the state of enlargement negotiations , given that yesterday and the day before we held 12 consecutive Intergovernmental Accession Conferences with the 12 applicants , the following negotiating chapters are now closed : 16 with Cyprus , 13 with Estonia and the Czech Republic , 12 with Slovenia , 11 with Hungary and Poland , 7 with Malta , 6 with Slovakia , 5 with Romania , Latvia and Lithuania and 4 with Bulgaria .
This is interesting not only in terms of the rate of development of these dossiers but also as an indication of the way in which the applicant countries are reacting to the negotiating process . This is very important .
During yesterday ' s Intergovernmental Conferences , the future Presidency also announced its working timetables in this respect so that this historic challenge can very clearly be met , based on the agreed principles , and so that there is no frustration among the applicants with regard to our intentions .
Another item for the Feira European Council will be the follow-up to the Lisbon Special European Council . In this respect documents will be presented on the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines for the Member States , the eEurope 2002 Action Plan , or the Information Society for All , the progress in applying the Financial Services Action Plan and also the approval of the European Charter for Small Enterprises .
Clearly , the whole area of social policy and employment continues to be a subject for analysis by the Heads of State and Government .
On economic and financial affairs , I must highlight the formalisation of Greece ' s entry into the euro . Greece will now join the other 11 Member States which have already moved into the third phase of economic and monetary union .
A report will be presented on the progress made on the tax issue .
As you know , an intense series of contacts is occurring in this area . The Portuguese Finance Minister has established this information network and there will be a meeting of Ecofin on 18 and 19 June , separate from the European Council , at which it is hoped that positive work can be achieved to find a much sought-after solution to this issue and the credibility of Europe as a financial market .
Briefly on external relations , it must be emphasised that the Portuguese Presidency has been significant for having managed to administer the new institutions created by the Treaty of Amsterdam which has only just entered into force .
I must thank the High Representative and Secretary-General , Xavier Solana , and also the Commissioner with responsibility in this area , Christopher Patten , for their open , careful and dedicated cooperation .
The potential of this new model of external representation of the Union is considerable and it is fair to say that the next few months will demonstrate this .
A very important step forward at Feira would be the adoption of the Common Strategy on the Mediterranean .
This strategy will allow not only the whole chapter on the traditional area of the Barcelona process to be harmonised but will also allow an open methodology to be defined which will ensure , at the due time , the transition to a situation of peace , with the Middle East also being fully incorporated within this strategy . I must also highlight the report by the Secretary-General of the Council and by the Commission on the Western Balkans .
This is an area in which our joint commitment is producing encouraging results . The approval of the Action Plan for the Northern Dimension and the report on applying the Common Strategy for Russia should also be emphasised .
We therefore have a series of important items on our external policy agenda .
I have tried in this presentation to give you a fairly comprehensive preview of the Feira European Council . I am , of course , prepared to continue this exchange of ideas through any questions or comments which you might have .
I have highlighted the fact that this European Council has a fairly full agenda .
This is because we have a variety of objectives which are both fundamental and decisive in the context of the European priorities . These objectives include institutional reform , enlargement , the extraction of appropriate conclusions from the Lisbon Special European Council , now with a more rigorous and considered action plan , and also , of course , the various external policy issues which are of concern to us .
We will have the opportunity at the Feira European Council to take some important decisions in the economic and financial area and to approve a series of discussions on external security and defence policy , involving both the military and civilian components . These discussions will be very significant not so much for the future of the European Union but more for the present as this is an area where progress has been made , is starting to be visible and will surely be significant not only within Europe but also internationally .
Madam President , thank you giving me this opportunity to speak on the oral questions tabled by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
The presidency has already drawn up and submitted the report on the Intergovernmental Conference .
We hope that , when it presents this report at the Feira Council , it will take into account the questions tabled by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and , of course , the opinions which will be expressed this morning by the representatives of the political groups .
The main point raised by the questions of the Committee of which I am Chairman is that we should not just restrict ourselves to recording the agreements and disagreements expressed around the Intergovernmental Conference table , but familiarise ourselves with the extent of the challenges and risks facing the Conference .
The future of the development of Europe and the validity and sustainability of the institutions of the Union is at stake , with the now sure and fast-approaching prospect of enlargement to include a further 12 countries , and our relations with the citizens and their approval and support are also at risk .
In our questions , we referred to Mr Fischer ' s speech .
His speech and others which preceded or followed it - and , of the most recent , I would cite Wolfgang Schäuble ' s extremely dramatic speech - should have contributed to impressing upon everybody the current responsibility of the institutions and , in particular , the governments of the 15 Member States to bring the Intergovernmental Conference to a conclusion .
Clearly , all the questions regarding the future of the Union cannot be resolved here , of that we are aware , but in Nice we must create the institutional conditions necessary for a new stage in the life of the Union .
In the oral question to the Commission , we requested clarification regarding its undertaking to reorganise the Treaties and provide a fresh perspective on the problems of governance , points on which the Commission had already made its opinion clear .
In our oral question to the Council , we requested clarification of the issue of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and its incorporation into the Treaties .
In conclusion , I would add that it is important to include the topic of closer cooperation on the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference - and we greatly appreciate the efforts of the Portuguese Presidency in this area - but , in our opinion , the agenda cannot be extended to include this subject alone without serious consideration of all the other points put forward by Parliament in the resolution of 13 April .
This is cause for serious concern , particularly for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , and we are also very concerned by the serious difficulties encountered during these four months by the Portuguese Presidency in its endeavour to define satisfactory solutions for the three issues left unresolved after Amsterdam , particularly the issue of qualified majority voting .
We await the responses with confidence .
Madam President , after the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Gama , and having listened to Mr Napolitano , chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , who had questions for the Commission in particular , I , in turn , would like to share with you the Commission ' s thoughts on the eve of this important European Council in Feira , but first I must present President Prodi ' s apologies . I am speaking on his behalf .
The importance of the Feira Summit has been rightly highlighted at this delicate stage in the process of European integration and I want to start by saying that the Commission expects this European Council to provide the political impetus for adapting the Union before the great enlargement .
This Council has important decisions to take in several areas , which I would like to review with you , if I may , in particular to ensure follow-up to the Special European Council of Lisbon .
I would like to mention three of the priorities the Commission is seeking to highlight at the European Council .
Both Mr Napolitano and Mr Gama mentioned the first : genuine institutional reform right now .
Next , of course , is the foreign policy we need to develop and , finally , the third priority is a real European security and defence policy .
The Commission is committed to effective and rapid follow-up to the Lisbon European Council - that is the least that might be expected of it .
So the first priority is genuine institutional reform right now , driven forward by the Portuguese Presidency .
There is now a dynamic to the IGC negotiations and the group of representatives led by Francesco Seixas da Costa has worked well .
I would also like to testify here , if I may , Madam President - because I participate conscientiously in the work of the group - to the very active part taken in that work , under your authority , by your two representatives , Elmar Brok and Professor Tsatsos .
Ladies and gentlemen , with the Presidency report now available , the Feira European Council should give us a snapshot of the progress accomplished so far and I hope that snapshot will be ' proactive ' - as we can expect after listening to Mr Gama .
I am especially thinking of the progress on what I consider the most important item in the negotiations : the extension of qualified majority voting and , consequently , the extension of codecision .
Of all the issues not dealt with in Amsterdam , for lack of courage or political will at the time , this is undoubtedly the key point , and it is indeed the only thing that can prevent and reduce the real risk of deadlock in the enlarged Union ' s decision-making process .
The Feira Council should also put ' enhanced cooperations ' on the agenda of the Conference , as the Commission and Parliament have been taking turns to advocate , so that it is easier to use these ' enhanced cooperations ' in the future . And yes , I did indeed say ' these cooperations ' , not reinforced cooperation .
That is a crucial point for us as well .
In addition to those comments , and in answer to Mr Napolitano ' s questions , I would like to say this . Ladies and gentlemen , you need have no doubt that the Commission definitely intends to keep on working towards what must be our ambition for this Conference : success in Nice , not just reaching a conclusion in Nice , because succeeding and concluding are two different things .
In the debate now in progress about the future and purpose of the European Union , the essential first stage is definitely putting the Union into working order now to make the enlargement a success .
And I want to reaffirm my conviction that this reform of the institutions is certainly not , in our view , a pretext for delaying enlargement . It is the condition for making it a success .
So that reform is also the obligatory route for all future evolution in the construction of Europe .
This first stage , this first step , must be respected , in the knowledge that there will be others .
From amongst the issues we , like you , are committed to , I would like to mention the reform of the Treaties . Although this is not - or not yet - on the agenda , it is something we are working on .
The draft basic treaty , presented at our request by the Institute of Florence does , I think , demonstrate the legal feasibility of this exercise .
The Commission will express its opinion on this study on 5 July , and adopt a communication on the reform of the Treaties .
Personally , I think more time will definitely be needed than is available before the Nice deadline to deal with this issue seriously and in depth .
But as you yourself have said , Madam President , we must at least make a start on it , at the latest in Nice .
We think it will be useful to start discussing it now and finding a method of making progress in that direction .
The European Council could express an opinion on undertaking this exercise immediately after Nice , possibly linking it to another difficult issue we still think ought to be dealt with in Nice , though we are not sure that it will be : incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaties .
Mr Napolitano mentioned the report on governance announced by President Prodi .
That is a second point .
Before the end of this month , the Commission will specify the issues it wishes to look at with a view to improving the way decentralisation of responsibility within the Union is organised , strengthening coherence between its policies and achieving greater and fairer citizen participation .
To be frank it is too early to tell you about the precise contents of this white paper , but quite clearly its drafting , between now and summer 2001 , will take account of all proposals and views about the long term aims of European construction and their implications for organising European policy .
As I speak to you today , I am also hoping this white paper on governance will contribute to the exercise I was talking about a few minutes ago : a reform of the Treaties , that simplifies and clarifies them , producing in , I hope , the not too distant future a text or basic treaty that is easy to read , incorporating rights , values , institutions , the principles of our common policies , and finally clarifying the powers and objectives of the Union .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights Mr Gama mentioned is a political challenge for all of us .
The Commission hopes the work of the convention drafting this Charter will be completed before the end of the year .
Your representatives , to whom I pay tribute , and my colleague , Antonio Vitorino , attach great importance to it .
The Charter should create added value , without affecting the acquis in the Treaty , by codifying in a single text all the fundamental rights upheld by the Union and adding the fundamental economic and social rights which form a part of that acquis , plus some new limited rights .
Of course , the precise form and status of the Charter , and the relationship between the new text and the rights guaranteed by Member States and the Council of Europe , will continue to be discussed and I cannot anticipate the conclusions , at least , not before the Biarritz Summit .
The convention chairman , Mr Herzog , will take stock of the convention ' s work at the Feira European Council and we hope the debate that follows can provide fresh impetus to this crucial process for the Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to talk about the Commission ' s second great priority : the development of foreign policy and a genuine European security and defence policy .
The political dimension of the European Union is also involved .
First I want to talk about the enlargement .
As the Council President mentioned , following Helsinki , negotiations are now in progress with all the candidate countries .
During the Portuguese Presidency the negotiations with the Luxembourg Group entered their final chapters .
In Feira , the European Council will be noting the progress achieved as set out in a Presidency report , and encouraging all the candidates to pursue their efforts to prepare themselves for accession with determination .
We too have to prepare , by reforming the institutions , and there is a long way to go .
That said , from now on , we who are already in the Union must set out to explain the coming great enlargement better and give the citizens of our countries better information about it .
We should debate the advantages and the changes involved in it with them .
That is what the initiative taken with you by Günther Verheugen is about , and we attach great importance to this public debate he will be taking part in , because we are aware of a feeling of disquiet among citizens in all our countries , a need to understand , and a growing sensitivity to the issue of enlargement .
It is better to prevent any damage that might be caused by lack of explanation or debate rather than have to repair it .
In the area of European security and defence policy , the Commission is happy with the decisions taken since the Helsinki European Council .
The temporary bodies are in place within the Council and the development of the overall capacity target is making encouraging progress .
The defence ministers have been involved in that work and at Feira the European Council will be presented with a progress report measuring , as you said , Minister , what has been accomplished under the Portuguese Presidency , and it will draw up guidelines for the work ahead .
The Commission is contributing actively to these developments , in particular as regards civilian crisis management .
On this point , Chris Patten recently submitted a proposal for a regulation to the Council , to create a rapid reaction force .
The Commission has also undertaken an in-depth review of its own organisation and procedures in the area of foreign policy , in order to adapt them to these new challenges .
I would like to stress that the Commission ' s work is complementary to all the developments in European security and defence policy .
Coherence is absolutely essential and the institutions must work together on this .
Under foreign policy , the European Council will in particular be debating the situation in the Western Balkans and the implementation of the common strategy towards Russia .
The Council should also adopt the common strategy for the Mediterranean region .
For the Western Balkans , the Commission will continue to work with the Member States and with the Secretary General , Javier Solana , to achieve a rapprochement , a real rapprochement , between the countries concerned and the European Union , through a stabilisation and association process .
On Russia , the Feira Council will finalise the Union ' s common strategy towards that country just a few months after the inauguration of President Putin ' s new government and his declaration of intent to introduce economic and political reforms .
Ladies and gentlemen , despite certain positive economic and political signals , the situation in Chechnya continues to call for prudence and vigilance at this stage .
As regards the Middle East , let me mention two major events which have changed the face of politics there in the last few weeks , so that , although the situation in the region is currently delicate , there are grounds for hope .
First , the European Commission , along with the entire international community , was delighted at the Israeli Government ' s decision of 24 May to withdraw from South Lebanon , in line with United Nations Security Council Resolutions 425 and 426 .
We should pay tribute to the Prime Minister of the State of Israel , Ehud Barak , for having taken this difficult decision after 22 years of occupation .
In the immediate future , it is essential that all the parties concerned refrain from any act of violence , either inside or outside Lebanon , and cooperate with the United Nations forces .
As for the Union , it will assist the reconstruction of South Lebanon as soon as conditions allow .
The Commission has already sent a mission to evaluate reconstruction needs in situ .
Likewise , following the death of President Harez el Assad , the Union must also encourage a smooth political transition process in Syria , as well as continuing economic reform and modernisation in that country through a strengthening of the rule of law , through a strengthening of human rights and through political pluralism .
Talks between Syria and Israel will be able to find fresh impetus in this new political context and could lead to a just and durable peace agreement .
Finally , the Feira European Council ' s agenda will include the common Mediterranean strategy , which many of you , quite rightly , value highly .
Not only will it contribute to strengthening the Barcelona process with a view to the forthcoming Euro-Mediterranean Summit in Marseilles , it will also help consolidate the European Union ' s contribution to the peace process .
Finally , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to talk about the effective and rapid follow-up to the Lisbon European Council , which the Commission is very committed to , just as it is committed to the proper preparation of this Council .
At Lisbon , we set ourselves a very ambitious objective , complete with targets and a timetable : to promote the transformation of the European economy and European society over the next ten years .
Since then , the European economy has shown continuous improvement .
That is reflected in falling unemployment rates everywhere , even though there are still too many pockets of poverty within the Member States .
In this improved context , the Commission , the Council and Parliament must act together to make the Lisbon objectives a reality , not contenting ourselves with words and hopes , but putting them into practice .
Progress has already been made .
Together with the Council , we have presented a draft action plan to make the eEurope initiative a reality as from 2002 .
Feira should approve this plan and I want to underline two key factors in the programme presented by Erkki Liikanen : first the reform of the regulatory environment for communications and electronic commerce , then , access for all citizens , especially young people , to the resources and qualifications needed in the communication and information age .
In particular , implementation of the eLearning initiative recently proposed by my colleague Viviane Reding will help achieve this .
So , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission , its President and all the commissioners , are naturally determined to deliver what the Council and this House expects of them and to do so within the deadlines .
We have presented proposals on government contracts , postal services and enterprise policy .
We will shortly be presenting guidelines relating to the new European Social Agenda , to deal with the problems of social exclusion , which I mentioned earlier and which persist .
We have also contributed to the development of the Charter for small firms , which Mr Gama mentioned and which will be adopted at Feira .
The high level working group on social protection is preparing its interim report on the modernisation and improvement of social protection .
I also want to stress the major role played by this House in all these issues .
We are particularly pleased that the new regulatory framework for electronic commerce has been rapidly adopted and we hope - we feel sure - that the same fruitful collaboration between Parliament , the Council and the Commission will be maintained throughout the legislative process so that progress can be made as rapidly as possible on each of the areas of interest defined in Lisbon .
We trust the Feira European Council will acknowledge all the progress made .
But the European Council must also provide fresh impetus for intensifying these efforts , particularly in the areas where short term action is still necessary to achieve the Lisbon objectives .
I am thinking of reducing Internet costs , implementing the action plan for financial services , creating a European research area and the ' single sky ' , and , finally , greater efforts to raise employment levels , fight exclusion and prepare the new Social Agenda .
All this requires a commitment from all the operators involved and the political impetus to introduce the necessary measures , but in our turn we must convert this political will , ladies and gentlemen , when the time comes , into priority expenditure , both by the Union and by the Member States .
There again , perhaps Feira can point us in that direction .
Just before I end , ladies and gentlemen , let me very briefly mention three important economic and financial points .
First , the one Pedro Solbes will report on : the main economic policy guidelines and the coordination that goes with them , essential for a better balance between the two pillars of economic and monetary union .
We are persuaded that the guidelines thus defined are , with the Luxembourg , Cardiff and Cologne processes , essential for proper progress towards the Lisbon objectives .
Then , Greece has made a marvellous effort to achieve convergence , and we are in a position to extend the euro zone to that country , as the Commission has proposed .
We will be presenting recommendations to that effect to the Heads of State and Government at Feira and trust they will be followed .
Finally , the fiscal package .
As you know , the Council has not reached agreement , but discussions continue .
On 18 June there will be a special Ecofin Council , and we hope it will open the way to an agreement , provided all the parties demonstrate goodwill and a desire to reach a conclusion .
The various speeches have reflected the abundance of important issues , even though we need to concentrate our political attention and energy on the three essential points I have raised : reform of the institutions , foreign policy and the CFSP , and the follow-up to Lisbon .
Ladies and gentlemen , a European Council is a result achieved by a presidency .
I want to say , on behalf of the Commission , how very active the Portuguese Presidency really has been .
But a European Council is also the result of the effort made by each institution .
So I feel sure that the effort everyone has made will result in the Feira European Council making progress possible on all these fundamental issues , responding better to the challenges of the Union as a whole , responding better to the expectations of the citizens of our fifteen countries , but also to the expectations I mentioned just now , those of the citizens of the twelve countries of Central , Eastern , Baltic and Mediterranean Europe who are soon going to join us .
Thank you , Mr Barnier .
Mr Klaus Hänsch has asked to move a procedural motion .
Madam President , I have a very small question for the Commissioner about the expression he came up with , which I found quite remarkable and highly amusing . I refer to the ' proactive snapshot ' .
Is this by any chance the Commission ' s special contribution to the development of the new technologies ?
One could say that , certainly , Madam President , but I would not want to tie the idea down to too technological a definition .
You realise , of course , that the expression implied , first , thanks to the Portuguese Presidency , which has worked well and allowed us to do some spade work and clear some ground .
That had to be done , and it was likewise necessary for the report it has just drafted - in addition to being an objective and lucid snapshot of the strengths and weaknesses of the negotiations - to propose going further , without shutting any doors .
It has done so , in particular , on a point Mr Gama mentioned , the fourth Amsterdam ' leftover ' , and I hope the ' enhanced cooperations ' will allow us to move on .
We hope all the Heads of State and Government , as well as the Portuguese Presidency , will take that snapshot as a model to set a ' proactive ' seal on the remaining six months , so as to succeed - and I do mean succeed - in reforming the institutions at Nice .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , next week ' s summit in Feira could be an important summit if the work it is to do is carried out properly .
Europe will not fall from the sky like a ripe fruit - it has to be shaped by working on it day in , day out .
The procedures to be agreed in Feira for the future of the European Union represent a significant step along this path .
I therefore hope that this will be a meaningful working summit .
We , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats , have two fundamental objectives as this new millennium commences .
Firstly , the Intergovernmental Conference must be concluded in Nice this winter , but not just for the sake of completing it , but rather in order to achieve a satisfactory outcome .
That is the first challenge .
Secondly , we witnessed major changes in Europe in 1989-90 , not to mention before and since then .
The peoples of Central Europe are anxious to join our Community of values .
To achieve this , we and those countries need to fulfil our respective obligations .
Mr President-in-Office , I ask you to give a signal in Feira so that the impetus of the accession process is not lost .
We must not create the impression that these Central European peoples are not welcome in our Community of values .
I would like to call on you personally to do everything in your power to make sure that we send a signal to the peoples of Central Europe that they are welcome to join us !
You have talked about extending the agenda for the Intergovernmental Conference .
I would like to offer you my emphatic support - be flexible !
Do not just make a list of what needs to be added , but find a formula which allows additional topics to be included over the coming months .
Commissioner Barnier has talked about majority voting .
This is the key point - using majority voting in the EU Council of Ministers as a matter of course , and at the same time extending the codecision procedure .
I am all in favour of introducing enhanced cooperation into the Treaty , but I must warn you , Mr President-in-Office , against introducing enhanced cooperation into the Treaty if this is ultimately just a token gesture and if we are not successful as far as majority voting is concerned .
We need both majority voting and enhanced cooperation !
We firmly support your presidency ' s desire to rationalise the Treaty , as will be apparent from the political groups ' motion for a resolution , so that the structure of the Treaty is revised .
Commissioner Barnier talked about a basic treaty .
It may not be possible to achieve all this in this six-month period , but we should adopt this approach of creating a basic treaty and a general treaty .
We must have more respect for the principles of subsidiarity .
My group is also in favour of our trying to clarify the respective roles of the European Union , the Member States and the regions .
We can only maintain or even regain agreement to the process of European unification at various levels if people actually know what each level is responsible for doing !
That is why it is key for us to establish our priorities here and to make a start on demarcating the various competences .
The Commissioner also spoke about the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
I support the endeavours to create a strong Europe , indeed we have always supported them , but in the framework of the Western Alliance , and not separately from our American friends , but complementing them and as partners with equal rights .
I would like to add one more thought .
I should have mentioned it just now , but I forgot .
Why do we need a flexible approach to the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference ?
Yesterday we spoke in this Chamber about a European Party Statute . You were not able to be present , and I do not intend that as a reproach .
If we want to supplement Article 191 of the Treaty , and the Commission is to present a proposal to the IGC to that effect , then it must be possible to deal with this at the IGC and ultimately to supplement the Treaty if we are to make progress on the subject of European political parties .
I would like to make one more observation , without any desire to be controversial , but quite calmly and objectively , and yet with a sense of great personal dismay .
This is about paragraph 8 of the political groups ' motion for a resolution .
We are calling on the Council presidency to assess relations between the 14 Member States and Austria , and we are also calling on the presidency to work out a procedure in conjunction with all the parties involved in the European Union with a view to finding an acceptable solution .
Mr President-in-Office , everyone will probably see this differently , but this issue is casting a shadow over the European Union .
We know that in Denmark , support for the euro in the run-up to the referendum in September is rapidly waning because of the Austrian issue , as in Denmark , this is viewed as interference in the internal affairs of the smaller states .
I would like to address this comment to you personally , and I say this not because I wish to be controversial , but because I am firmly convinced that if we do not solve this issue it will lead to major problems .
I therefore urge you to make this your business .
And I also entreat you to take the position of the European Parliament into consideration at the IGC .
We have faith in the Commission , but our faith in the presidency , in the Council , could be greater .
But we nevertheless hope you will succeed .
If you succeed , it will be a success for all of us , for the entire continent of Europe !
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it is no cliché to say that , on the eve of the European Council in Feira , this is a decisive moment for the European Union .
The proof of this is the fact that in recent months there have been an increasing number of declarations , beginning with Heads of State such as President Campi of Italy , President Rau of Germany , prominent European politicians such as Helmut Schmidt , Valery Giscard d 'Estaing , Jacques Delors and more recently , with great success , the German Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Fischer , all of whom have related the debate on the Intergovernmental Conference with a debate which is of importance to all of us , that is , ' where is Europe heading ? ' .
I think that this is healthy given that we are on the threshold of the greatest and most ambitious enlargement the European Union has ever known .
This debate reflects the political will of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , and also Parliament as a whole , who wish to achieve an ambitious agenda for the Intergovernmental Conference .
Since we have been talking about photographic technology , to use a cinematic analogy , I would say that we need to be involved in the writing of the script , we need a good ending , and we MEPs must not be cast as extras , but as lead actors .
With regard to the Intergovernmental Conference , it is important that President Herzog appears before the European Council in Feira .
I would like to point out that , when we talk about the community of values , - and there have been recent opportunities to do so , such as the formation of the new Austrian Government - we must demand that the Charter of Fundamental Rights be clearly included in the Treaty in order to fulfil the purpose of Articles 6 and 7 of that Treaty .
Furthermore , although the Treaty of the European Union recognises European citizenship , until now , economic and social , individual and collective rights have not been developed .
It is completely contradictory to have citizenship without rights .
It is therefore absolutely essential that the Charter of Fundamental Rights be incorporated into the Treaty .
In this process , the status of political parties is a means for them also to be protagonists on the European stage .
With regard to the convention , I would add one more element , and that is that , in the drawing up of the Charter , the convention is turning out to be a more transparent , democratic and open formula than the classic procedure of the Intergovernmental Conferences .
It is a formula for the future and I believe we should take it very seriously .
In this regard , I will add two decisive points .
One is , for Parliament , that decisions made by qualified majority should be accompanied by the codecision procedure , and the second point is that we must favour integration over closer cooperation , because what we are actually doing is integrating .
In the economic field , what we need is greater coordination of economic , social and employment policies .
We must implement the conclusions of the European Council in Lisbon , which are positive and have achieved a broad consensus in this Parliament as well , but this requires that we increase our capacity for economic government .
If we wish to create employment , if we wish to defend and fulfil the social agenda at a time when the European train is beginning to move faster and needs more steam , the last thing we need is for our work to be hindered by a strictly monetarist management with no economic counterbalance .
That is an absolutely decisive point for the coming months .
Lastly , Madam President , I would like to make a very brief comment : the report on the progress made with regard to enlargement has been important because it indicates how the problems are being overcome and how we have to maintain this will with the countries with whom we are negotiating .
I believe that it is also important for the Commission , with regard to the Balkans , to take account of the fact that there is a country which could become a bridge - having before been a barrier - towards the Balkans , and that is Croatia .
After the political change which has taken place , the Commission should intensify the negotiation of the association agreement with Croatia .
Finally , I would like to say a few words about the Middle East .
I have just returned from a visit to Syria and Lebanon and I welcome the fact that the President of the Commission is there at the moment .
I agree that the Israeli withdrawal from Southern Lebanon is very important and we must support Barak , but we should also intensify our partnership with Syria and Lebanon .
We must have an active policy in order to contribute towards resolving the dramatic problem of the Palestinian refugees , and we can actively offer ideas and resources in order to ensure that the Middle East peace process will make decisive progress , which would also lead to a greater opening up and intensification of the Euro-Mediterranean process .
All of these elements are on the agenda and I hope that the European Council in Feira will make progress .
Madam President , I should like , on behalf of the Liberal Democrat Group , to begin by recording our thanks to the Portuguese presidency and our appreciation of its willingness to engage constantly with this Parliament , with its committees and with its groups .
We deeply appreciate that .
It has helped us to develop and evolve a considerable appreciation of the enormous work which this presidency has put into the task .
I wish also to record our view that , subject to consolidating the path set out at Lisbon , at Feira and subsequent Council meetings , European summits and various Council meetings and in this House , we believe that Lisbon marks a major change , a milestone , in terms of the evolution of socio-economic policy reform in Europe .
It will stand the test of time as a testament to the work of this presidency .
You have remarked , Mr President-in-Office , that enlargement is the historic challenge .
We in my group very much believe that .
We believe that one of the measures of the consciousness of the depth of that historic challenge will be found in the reformist appetite of the states in the IGC .
I say on behalf of my group - and this is not the responsibility of a hard-working Portuguese presidency , but a failure of a collective will - that we regret the failure to date to make more progress on some of the basic issues .
I cite qualified majority voting as an example .
I would insist , as other speakers have , on this Parliament 's view that we also need to link changes in voting procedure to changes in legislative procedure .
The codecision question is not simply a question of giving more power to this House .
It is the question of recognising , as we step towards improving the efficiency of the institutions , especially decision-making in the Council , that it needs checks and balances , to add not just efficiency but also representative democracy .
It is an appeal , therefore , for the quality of European democracy and not simply an appeal for the interests of Members of this House .
We are prepared to engage in the debate on closer cooperation and welcome the way it has been put to us by a number of important political personalities outside this House .
But there are some caveats : we hope that speculation on long-term reform will not be the enemy of necessary radical reform in the immediate period ahead .
We believe that the Monnet method has served the Union rather well .
We would certainly wish to reflect on any attempt to radically change it .
We believe it is important not to signal to existing Member States or to candidate states that any of us would contemplate a Europe of first- and second-class citizens in terms of statehood and membership .
I should like to briefly mention the question of Austria .
My group would appreciate it if the Council at Feira would try to make an evaluation of the quality of relations between the Fourteen and Austria .
It is important that as Fifteen we find the accommodating political climate to make the necessary progress in the months ahead .
We are not prescriptive in the manner of achieving this .
I add one footnote , but an important point of principle .
President Klestil came to this House and I had the opportunity to talk with him briefly during his visit .
I asked him to send to me a copy of the list that is available of persons and agencies in civil society in Austria who have become isolated from various educational , social or cultural events in Europe .
That is intolerable .
Regardless of intergovernmental diplomacy , it is intolerable that we should isolate the common citizens of a state .
Lest this should get out of hand , my appeal would be for a calm assessment of the matter , to make an evaluation and find a way forward .
If there is any way that we in Parliament and my group can assist , we are ready to try to do so .
Madam President , a paradoxical situation awaits state leaders at Santa Maria da Feira , as we could say that there the notion of the logistics of inter-state action is being irreversibly left behind in the development of the Union .
In our opinion , this is very welcome .
We warmly welcome the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and we would like it to be vibrant in terms of its content , and to become a legally binding part of the Treaties and a vehicle for a constitutional process in which the people are a central factor .
I also believe that the way in which the Charter of Fundamental Rights is being produced is radically new , and this could also be a way to amend agreements in the future to make them genuinely constitutional .
In our opinion , public opinion is at its lowest ebb now when it comes to the formation of military institutions for the European Union .
I would like , on behalf of my Group , to complain that barely any public debate is entered into in these matters , and that changes happen so fast that sometimes it feels as if not even all our governments can fully influence this process .
Relations between the European Union and NATO are converging so quickly that the non-aligned countries are in a very precarious situation , although they want to make a full contribution to the promotion of national security .
I would like to say that the Mediterranean strategy is a very important one .
I was recently in New York at a conference on women ' s issues .
I appeal to the Commission and the Council that you make a serious bid to include the issues of women ' s rights and human rights in the Mediterranean strategy .
I also warmly welcome the concrete action programme concerning the northern dimension .
It may at last help to make a serious attempt to resolve the immense socio-economic problem that exists , for example , in north-west Russia .
In that process we have to remember the issue of nuclear safety , which is a problem that affects us all .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , a year ago , almost to the day , the European elections were marked by massive abstentions , confirming that there is a crisis of confidence amongst citizens as regards the European institutions .
When you were preparing for the Portuguese Presidency , Mr President-in-Office , I presume you were determined to send a strong message to the public .
It was undoubtedly in that spirit that you decided to make the Lisbon European Council a special employment summit .
And you effectively relaunched the idea of full employment , emphasised the importance of lifelong training , and stressed the considerable challenge represented by the information revolution .
But without specific job creation targets , verifiable timetable commitments , clear choices about finance and tangible progress on the right of the social operators to be involved , all public opinion will remember about that summit will be the Blair-Aznar trademark .
Besides , Commissioner Bolkestein , to take one example , has not hesitated to refer to what he called the ambition set at Lisbon to require postal services to be opened up to competition , even if it means a head-on clash with the unions , many Members of Parliament and several Member States .
Under such circumstances , what is left of the social message you were hoping to send to the citizens of Europe ?
I do not say that as an accusation against the Portuguese Presidency .
I think it is up to all the Member States to take up the challenge .
And what has happened to that other big idea intended to regain people ' s confidence , the affirmation of a policy department for European business , faced with the influence of mega-firms and markets ?
There was a fascinating sight for all to see at the European Business Summit in Brussels last weekend , attended by the flower of European employers present and even the Microsoft management .
And as we know , the Commission did not content itself with sending eleven commissioners to it , which is unprecedented , apparently the Commission President also came out with some original principles there , to the effect that the law is the law , but in times of change excessively precise regulations should be avoided .
What does the political authority , the Council , think of this laissez-faire philosophy ?
If voices are raised in Feira , as I hope they will be , to distance themselves from the whole engulfing tide of liberalism and advocate real social and democratic reform , then please , Mr President , open the windows and doors of your summit wide , let that dissent be heard in full transparency and clarity and let a real comparison of options , which is so lacking today , begin everywhere in the full light of day .
I think that is the best favour Europe can be done today .
Madam President , President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the Feira European Council represents a fresh opportunity for this House to express its opinion on the various political issues forming the EU agenda .
I wish to highlight four of these , not all of which were referred to by Mr Gama .
Firstly , on Austria , clearly we do not harbour any sympathies for political extremism but we must condemn the ill-timed reaction of 14 Member States to the formation of a democratically elected government before this had even had the chance to start governing .
This decision did not respect the sovereign choice of the Austrian people and has also been ineffective .
The fight against racism and xenophobia must be conducted intelligently and forcefully , not with inflammatory measures which in the end simply produce the totally unwanted effect of promoting what they are trying to fight , in addition to spreading anti-European feeling .
The Portuguese Presidency was willing to take on the role of spokesperson for the Member States last February , wrongly in our opinion , despite the issue always having been a bilateral issue , as was clearly agreed between the 14 Member States .
Although this Presidency is not formally required to solve the problem , each of the governments should be required to assume its responsibilities .
In this way we would find out who wants to continue isolating Austria and who , recognising the error , wants to re-establish normal relations with this country , thus avoiding the ' misunderstandings ' mentioned by the Secretary of State , Mr Seixas da Costa , between the Member States .
The second issue is the Intergovernmental Conference .
The distinctive act of the Portuguese Presidency should be to recognise and defend political equality between the Member States as a corollary to maintaining the balance between the large and small countries and between these and the European Union itself .
The participation of national parliaments in the institutional reform and in the conduct of European affairs should therefore be encouraged . In this way the people of each country can become involved more democratically and more directly in the process of building their Europe and in defining the Community decision-making methods .
With regard to closer cooperation , it must be emphasised that the principle of flexibility on which this is based and which we support should not prevent the guarantee that no Member State can be excluded from participating in this cooperation , except on its own initiative .
On the issues left unresolved by the Treaty of Amsterdam , the rule of one commissioner for each Member State should be enshrined , bearing in mind that the Commission has the monopoly on legislative initiative . It should be pointed out that codecision now involves a dual weighting of votes , one in the Council and the other in the European Parliament .
Instead of the intended generalisation of qualified majority voting , the retention of the unanimity rule must be defended in order to preserve the factors of political balance between the Member States regardless of their population or economic weight . These factors have been the key to the success of the cooperative , peaceful and developed Europe which we have come to know in the last fifty years .
The third issue is the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Its content is not in question .
The point is that the European Union does not need a Charter of Fundamental Rights and this is for the simplest reason of all .
The European Union does not have any significant problems with fundamental rights .
As we have said before , if there is no problem , the Charter is not a solution and if it is not the solution , then the Charter is a problem .
We hope that the Feira summit can come to the obvious conclusion . There are no differences of opinion about the definition or application of fundamental rights in the European Union which cannot be solved by the various Member States in their constitutions and in the Human Rights Convention to which all countries , and the European Union , both before and after enlargement , are bound .
The fourth and final issue is enlargement .
Despite the progress announced here today , we feel that more than ten years after the fall of the Berlin wall the European Union should be showing a more consistent political will in terms of welcoming into the European fold the people of Central and Eastern Europe who legitimately aspire to share a common future with us . This would prevent them from feeling any disappointment or even frustration .
This will should be shown through three essential aspects : firstly the defence of the major European causes of peace , freedom and economic and social development which must underlie the negotiations with the applicant countries ; secondly the promotion of the merit of each country as the only condition to be imposed on accession , and thirdly the maintenance of the economic and social cohesion of the current 15 Member States .
Austria , the Intergovernmental Conference , the Charter of Fundamental Rights and enlargement are four issues requiring four different responses .
This is what we expect from the meeting at Feira of the Heads of State and Government on the Portuguese Presidency .
Mr President , President Gama , Commissioner Barnier , in Feira , France will take over from Portugal to complete the IGC , the impossible reform of taxation on savings , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , defence policy , and sanctions against Austria .
Portugal has had a difficult presidency , with the collapse of the euro , and the collapse of the new economy , and , in Lisbon , had to deal with many problems like unemployment , the loss of Macao , the arrival of imitation port from South Africa , and even the arrival of the great criminal Rezala in your country , Mr President .
But you finished up well , 3-2 against England , which , after all , is the most important thing for the people .
Perhaps we should launch a plan for a transatlantic football cup in Feira .
It is perhaps our only chance of beating the United States .
Mr Bayrou and Mr Cohn-Bendit might have a problem deciding which team to play for , but in the end there could be a juicy transfer contract .
The broadcasting rights could be paid to Kosovo , Iraq or the victims of the construction of Europe .
Then Europe could be some use for once .
In official speeches , everyone welcomes enlargement of the EU from 15 to 30 Member States , but that objective is receding ever further , and more and more obstacles are being placed in the path of the unification of Europe ' s nation States .
The Feira Summit will give the green light particularly to close cooperation between the most developed and the most federally minded nations .
They will create a State within the State and make decisions on behalf of everyone else .
The pattern is familiar from holding companies where a small majority runs a company which , in turn , runs another company .
In the EU , there is a Franco-German axis which will set the pace for a core EU which , in turn , will make decisions in the EU as a whole , as well as dictating legislation to the candidate States and , moreover , adopting legislation right under the noses of all the other nations of Europe .
Human rights , the arts , transport and foreign and security policy could also become areas for which European bodies such as the Council of Europe and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe are responsible .
The common market could also , of course , be opened up to all European countries .
Nations such as the Baltic and Baltic Sea countries and the countries around the Mediterranean could also join together in different regional groups .
It ought to be possible for countries to remain outside those aspects of European cooperation they are better off without , as long as they do not in that way arrogate particular economic advantages to themselves .
It ought also to be possible for some countries to enter into especially close cooperation but , if this is to happen within the EU ' s institutions , everyone must be asked .
Otherwise , cooperation must take place elsewhere .
My group rejects majority decision-making on enhanced cooperation .
We are in favour of greater flexibility , but we have no use for a self-appointed avant garde to take the decisions on our behalf .
I also think that the sanctions against Austria ought to be lifted .
Mr President , dismayed as I am about the continuing prejudgement of Austria by 14 Member States , I would like to stress that the Santa Maria da Feira Summit will be vital for the further development of the European Union .
For one thing , it will determine whether the Portuguese Presidency will go down in history as the presidency which upheld the wrongful decision on the part of those 14 Member States against Austria , or , instead , as the presidency which found a way out of this unfortunate period of disregard for European solidarity and lack of respect for the democratic processes within Member States .
Through the measures they have taken , the Heads of State and Government of the Fourteen have really burdened themselves with an enormous responsibility in relation both to Austria and to the Union as a whole .
Over a year ago , it looked as if the disastrously low turnout in the European elections would at least have the helpful effect of initiating a fundamental debate about the structure of the European Union .
Since then , things have largely returned to the normal routine .
If anything , European awareness has receded even further into the distance because of the arbitrary action taken by the Fourteen against Austria .
Feira should therefore give us an opportunity to bring the EU closer to the public , either by giving the Charter of Fundamental Rights legal force , or , which would be even more meaningful , by then stating its intention to include a list of competences in the treaties .
Instead , perhaps as a token gesture , and as a result of the difficulty of solving the core problems , it appears that the topic of " enhanced cooperation " is being given a higher profile . This is despite the feeling already prevailing in the last parliamentary term , and still prevalent in this Chamber now , that this could lead to a two-speed or even multi-speed Europe , so that " enhanced cooperation " will sound the death-knell of the classic European Union .
In many respects , the Union is facing a parting of the ways , and the Feira Summit has a vital role to play here .
The programme we have heard today does not give us cause for any great hope .
Mr President , the forthcoming European Council in Feira will mark the end of the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union .
As a Portuguese national and a European , no one more than I hopes that this summit will achieve positive results which can take Europe forward and show the merit of the rotating presidency , whatever the demographic and economic weight of each country .
This is the very spirit of the European Union and it is only with this spirit that Europe will remain united .
There cannot be first or second rate countries or people . Everyone is equal in the Union , in both their rights and duties .
Therefore , as a Portuguese national and a European , I am looking very expectantly to the Feira European Council to ensure that this summit is not just an obligation in the calendar or a transition point .
I have two specific hopes , which are also requirements , obligations and duties , for the assessment to be made of the Portuguese Presidency .
Firstly , we hope that the Feira European Council can definitively end the Austrian question otherwise this issue will remain a cloud over the Portuguese Presidency .
We do not understand why the President-in-Office has allowed confusion to arise between his institutional position as President of the European Union and his role as spokesperson for the bilateral decisions of 14 Member States against one .
If there is one person responsible for this issue it is the President of the European Union who must now correct his error .
He must rectify what could have been avoided .
The Portuguese Presidency assumed a special responsibility in this issue and we hope that it will solve the problem at the Feira European Council so that this does not become a sore point within the European Union .
The longer it takes to resolve this issue , the more difficult it will become to resolve .
Secondly , we hope that the Feira European Council can produce a plan , an idea or a project for Europe for the next Intergovernmental Conference . We also hope that the Portuguese Presidency will be seen to have made a significant mark in this respect .
A report or document is not enough .
It does not take ministers to produce reports and documents summarising positions . This only needs officials to attend the meetings .
We know that the work of the IGC will be drawn to a close by the French Presidency at the end of this year but it would surely be justified for ideas and projects to already exist which had the mark of the current Presidency .
The idea that everything will be decided at the last minute seems too much a justification of a fait accompli policy and must be rejected immediately .
This is even more worrying when everything is being discussed in public , without it being apparent whether these discussions are forms of pressure or academic debate .
We therefore hope that the Feira European Council will produce not just a statement of positions but also a plan , a project or an idea on the changes to the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , we listened carefully to the speech which Mr Gama gave at the beginning of this debate . To a certain extent , this set out the points of the triangle which has formed and which continues to form the shape of the action and work of the Portuguese Presidency .
The first point of this triangle is extension and enlargement .
The second is cohesion and obtaining globalisation opportunities to strengthen the social fabric and modernise the economic fabric of the Union .
The third relates to external policy and the common European security and defence policy . On this third point we had the opportunity yesterday to debate the proposals with the Presidency and in particular the issues which will be on the agenda at Feira .
However , I cannot resist expressing our delight not only at the concrete steps taken in this area in terms of defence and security but also at the political visibility which this Presidency has had in cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Council and the Commission . It has achieved this by contributing to the resolution of regional conflicts and particularly by ensuring that there is not just one regional conflict mediator available in the world , namely the United States of America , but that Europe can also assume what is one of its main historic vocations and one of the decisive factors in the European project .
The second point of the triangle is social and economic cohesion .
We frequently take fundamental issues for granted , such as full employment , modernisation of our economic fabric , the need to create a European research area to generate creativity and the need for this creativity to be at the service of businesses , particularly new businesses in the new economy .
These points are too important to be glossed over and taken lightly .
The contribution made in this respect , with a new method of coordination and a new strategy , by the Lisbon Special European Council cannot be a priority for just one presidency but must be continued .
We are therefore reassured when we hear those who will mainly be responsible for the future French Presidency choosing the social agenda as one of the main priorities of their political action .
We must stress the need for the creation of more jobs to be a priority and an objective of the European Union .
With regard to the issues of racism and xenophobia , we must fight these at the roots and prevent them from gaining ground and being used in speeches of the extreme right which we all reject but which it seems that some only reject in speeches but not in practice .
My last point concerns the compliments already made , of which there cannot be too many given the efforts of the Portuguese Presidency in respect of the Intergovernmental Conference .
This Parliament contributed positively and constructively , as Commissioner Barnier witnessed , so that the work of the IGC could be started in February .
We all knew that this IGC would be reduced in size and even minimalist . With the exception of closer cooperation , this IGC did not perhaps need to be given eleven months to be decided .
The problem with the IGC , given the leftovers from Amsterdam , is not just in terms of the debate but also the decision .
We demand and insist that the Feira European Council produces an extended agenda which will ensure that the European project does not mobilise just those who , like us , are committed to the institutional issues but can mobilise the real citizens of Europe who should be involved in the construction of a European project .
In this respect , the inclusion of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Treaty is an example and especially an objective which must be pursued .
Mr President , the drafting of the Charter has now reached a critical phase .
We have drafted 60 clauses and provoked 1000 amendments .
Frankly the Convention is staggering and may stall completely should the Feira Council fail to bring a fresh stimulus .
We have so far tried to reach a consensus across the body .
This is now proving an improbable task .
We require a far more formal decision-making procedure of a parliamentary type .
This means voting , and voting by a qualified majority , as would be normal for the procedures within any modern European State .
Some representatives of the European Council cannot stand the prospect of being forced to vote and they disapprove of the nature of the Convention itself .
This prejudice must be suppressed by the Feira Council if the project is to succeed .
Mr President , the issues to be addressed at the forthcoming Feira Summit are predictable and have already been mentioned . However , the results which will be obtained from this summit are of doubtful and limited scope , or at least some of them are , as the respective debate has gone beyond the institutions and this presidency and all eyes are now turned to Nice .
Even so , there is every reason for concern . The enlargement process is advancing and forms a specific argument for institutional change but its effects are being ignored and the measures needed in the various policies and in the budget are being swept under the carpet .
As the debate advances within the IGC , this is taking an unacceptable shape .
In the name of efficiency , attempts are being made to impose the new model of internal power and a markedly federalist option . Due to the illusory danger of the small and medium-sized countries blocking decisions , the idea of giving the large countries a real and exclusive right of veto is gaining ground .
In the meantime , the essential need to involve the people in these debates is being forgotten , particularly those people who are most disadvantaged and distant from the decision-making centres .
In addition , closer cooperation is being gambled on heavily but it is being forgotten that this would require the establishment of a multi-speed Europe which would inevitably have a hard core and an unacceptable political directorate .
In terms of security and defence , with the fallacious argument of autonomy constantly being used and based on an effective concept of a politico-military block , dangerous routes are being taken towards the militarisation and reinforcement of the European power of NATO when this should be the time to definitively dismantle these blocks , to disarm and to cooperate in achieving lasting peace .
Strangely , this Presidency , which has allowed itself to be overtaken by events , has ended up by accepting all these concepts and , even worse , has actually applauded some of their mentors , even in the knowledge that the acceptance of their proposals and discussion methods would , taken literally , lead to the inevitable closure of the IGC itself .
The Presidency is insisting on the controversial Charter of Fundamental Rights , which it wants as a badge of achievement , but has forgotten the social issues .
Finally , this Conference is at least producing a positive result on Timor given that something clearly needs to be done to rebuild this territory and re-establish its independence .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the European Union will only be able to play its historic role if it decides to be more than the sum of its Member States .
As representatives of the European peoples without their own state , we want the European Union to be a community of citizens , on the one hand , and correspond to the reality of peoples and regions and their political entities , on the other .
This reality is not sufficiently recognised in the texts before us , if at all .
Some Member States are struggling just as hard with granting autonomy to these various cultural and political entities as with relinquishing competences to create a federal Europe .
In fact , this would mean a democratic U-turn which they do not seem to be prepared to make .
This is once again evident from the way in which the IGC is going and from the expectations which are being expressed for Feira .
In our opinion , the institutional reforms which it is hoped Feira will bring are sound but insufficient in our eyes .
We fear , for example , that the refusal to develop a true federal authority will result in a common foreign and security policy which cannot really function properly .
The establishment of a rapid reaction military force , therefore , threatens to become an expensive alibi which could only lead to the rapid militarisation of conflicts .
This would fit in perfectly with the new arms spiral which can be set in motion under the guise of the American rocket programme and with the backing of NATO and non-NATO countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Portuguese Presidency has certainly had a difficult task this semester , for it had to set in motion an Intergovernmental Conference which will finish during the term of the next Presidency and , therefore , there was every possibility that governments would be uncooperative and play for time so that the next Presidency would reap the benefits of the work carried out .
Certainly , we expected more from this first stage of the Intergovernmental Conference .
I feel that the Portuguese Presidency has done everything in its power and that all thanks are due to it for the part it has played and for organising the Lisbon Summit last March .
In any case , the Summit opened major avenues with regard to the new economy and in relation to the need to boost the European economy which is being held back by dirigisme and is still oppressed by statalism which is sending unemployment up to double the rates of other economies such as the United States .
From the point of view of the institutions , the current impasse is certainly extremely serious .
Today , the European Parliament is going to call strongly upon the Portuguese Presidency to uphold the need for integration , for political will , or the European Union crisis will become a general crisis , as Minister Joschka Fischer quite rightly pointed out yesterday .
The warning signs are starting to become apparent in the paralysis which has affected us in recent months .
Therefore : yes , we must extend the agenda of the Feira Council , and yes , we must make changes to the Conference ' s tasks , otherwise we will not achieve our objective of enlargement and we will not reach any of the objectives which the French Presidency will be expecting to achieve in Nice .
It has almost always been necessary in this House to recall the sound common sense to be found in the Norwegian fell-walkers handbook : ' In the event of a discrepancy between the map and the terrain , it is recommended that you be guided by the terrain ' .
The institutions of the European Union , and this House in particular , have still not grasped this very elementary insight .
The Union train thunders off , taking no account of the terrain .
The terrain is the people in the countries of Europe who have long since got off this Union train .
We have no confidence in the Union project .
We disassociate ourselves from the ideological agenda , which the motion for a resolution calls ambitious and which involves a disastrous undermining of democracy in the Member States .
Deeper integration , the Treaty which is to become a constitution , the extension to the military , etc .
But it does not pay to ignore the lie of the land .
On 28 September of this year , the Danish people , who have the privilege of being able to vote in referenda , will send out a decisive signal when we vote against joining the euro .
This ' no ' vote will , first of all , mean that our friends and brethren in Sweden and Great Britain will also vote against and , secondly , it will send out a crucial signal to the summits in Feira and Nice to the effect that one ought to be guided by the terrain , which is more important than the ideological map .
Mr President , in Lisbon , a common horizon was set , establishing structural reforms for the modernisation of our economy , in order to increase growth and employment .
However , our Union goes beyond the field of the economy .
It is based on fundamental principles , listed in Article 6 of the Treaty , which many of us have seen called into question in one particular Member State .
All we democrats should be delighted to see the Union immediately reacting to any apparent threat to the values on which our co-existence is based .
In the PPE we have analysed - in my humble opinion , objectively and competently - the political situation in Austria and we have agreed , within our political family , on a system of conditions and of monitoring which we pray will make a positive contribution to the resolution of this crisis .
These have been lively months internationally .
I will now focus purely on the Middle East .
Israel , Syria and the Lebanon are living through intense time in terms of national politics , as has been said this morning in this House .
I believe that these circumstances offer a new opportunity for definitive peace in the region .
Therefore , we have to demand of our Heads of Government and of the European Commission that they take the responsibility which the circumstances demand of the European Union , by increasing our joint political presence , of course , but also in the economic field , concluding the associations agreements once and for all , and implementing the Barcelona agreements more quickly .
I hope that these events will remind us of our moral , historical , political and economic commitments to our Mediterranean neighbours , which must not be passed over in favour of other geographical areas .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I think the first thing we should do in this debate is thank the Portuguese Presidency for the way it is preparing to manage the debates at the Feira European Council , dealing with the agenda for the Intergovernmental Conference .
Looking at the links between the various presidencies , that was an essential point , and the idea that ' enhanced cooperations ' will henceforth be included on the agenda for that conference seems absolutely crucial to us .
We also think it is important to mention that the conference agenda is a full one , and we are expecting a positive result from it - a result which allows the European Union to operate in its present state .
Some major issues have appeared on the scene since the conference was launched .
They are essential , but they must not disrupt the conference agenda .
We will debate those issues whatever happens .
But these are two parallel exercises .
Nothing should distract us from our real task at the Intergovernmental Conference , otherwise the Union will no longer be able to take decisions .
To be able to take decisions , we need significant progress on qualified majority voting . Enhanced cooperation cannot constitute an alternative .
It is not a case of one or the other , we need both .
The inclusion of enhanced cooperation on our Intergovernmental Conference agenda will force us to prolong the period of reflection .
How are we going to organise democratic control of these ' enhanced cooperations ' ?
I also hope the Intergovernmental Conference agenda will be flexible enough for us to be in a position to add an item or two , here or there , depending on the progress of the work .
I am thinking , of course , about the status of political parties .
I am also thinking about the reform of Article 7 .
Mr President-in-Office , as you engage in this important debate in Feira , let me tell you how concerned we are about the drafting of the Charter .
Our fellow citizens have high expectations of the content likely to emerge from the work of the convention .
In the current state of affairs , I see great division in the interpretation of the mandate given to the members of the convention by the Cologne European Council .
The debate initiated by President Herzog ' s speech must clearly highlight the European Council ' s commitment to the indivisibility of rights and the convention ' s task of drafting a Charter rich in content , which respects the full Cologne mandate , civil and political rights , but also economic and social rights .
Many of my colleagues say the Charter must be incorporated into the Treaty .
Yes , but what use will it be to incorporate a Charter if the content is disappointing ?
First we must work on the content .
That is our main task .
But for that it seems to me we also need the debate at the Feira European Council to give us a political signal .
Mr President , I would , first of all , like to thank the Portuguese Presidency for their work , also because I have just heard Mr Vedrine , the future President-in-Office , say that he considers that the Charter of Fundamental Rights should not be binding and should not be included in the Treaties .
In my opinion , this is a very difficult subject , and one over which we will lament the passing of the Portuguese Presidency , for , at least on this point , it maintained a position which , if not crystal clear , was at least less negative .
The Feira Council will be a major Council if it is ambitious enough .
The Presidency has just announced that closer cooperation will be discussed at the Intergovernmental Conference .
However , there are many different ways of defining closer cooperation and , in our opinion , certain criteria must be respected .
The first is total observance of the acquis communautaire ; the second is the abolition of the right of veto for every Member State ; the third is full respect of the roles of Parliament , the Commission and the Court of Justice in the decision-making procedures with regard to the initial introduction and implementation of closer cooperation .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights should have been included in the subjects for debate , Minister .
Let us hope that external pressure which will , I hope , increase , will be sufficient to bring it to your attention .
This Charter will only be a success if it has binding legal status - its content must , of course , be sound , but it must also have legal status - or it will serve absolutely no purpose - and if it includes other new rights such as the right to a safe environment and a number of fundamental social rights such as the right to belong to a trade union and the right to strike .
Thank you again , Portuguese Presidency .
We urge you to be present , active and vigilant in the matters which are important to you : some of them are very important to us too .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to call on the Portuguese Presidency to do anything , because that is not necessary , as they have worked to ensure effective cooperation . However , I would like to encourage you to do certain things in Feira .
By way of preparation for the decisions to be taken in December , it should once again be made clear in Feira that the enlargement process needs to be tailored to each individual country , so as to bring those countries which are best prepared into the European Union at an earlier stage .
With regard to institutional issues , it should be made clear at the summit that enhanced cooperation cannot be used as an excuse for failing to introduce proper extension of qualified majority voting .
As far as we are concerned , the extension of qualified majority voting will be a yardstick for the success of the Nice Summit , and it is linked with Parliament ' s involvement through codecision .
We need to achieve efficiency and legitimacy , that is very important .
Furthermore , we urge you to extend the mandate of the Intergovernmental Conference such that it can be concluded in Nice but also so that certain important areas can be included .
An attempt must be made to make the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding .
It needs to be made clear that we need a voice in economic and monetary policy and democratic control of economic and monetary policy .
Progress should at least be made with streamlining the treaties and demarcating competences .
At this point I would particularly like to mention the common foreign and security policy , which follows on from the implementation of the conclusions of the Helsinki and Cologne Summits , and has made good progress under the Portuguese Presidency .
We wish to encourage you to prepare the way so that we take the right decisions over the next six months .
Mr President , I would also like to draw the attention of the Portuguese Presidency to the fact that the aim of Article 8 of our resolution is , from within the European Parliament , to make a positive contribution to resolving the running conflict with Austria .
Needless to say , we are addressing you personally in your role of Portuguese Presidency .
We want at all costs to avoid this becoming an EU-wide issue or its becoming a formal item on the agenda .
But we hope that you , in a creative manner and on an informal basis , will manage to find ways to talk about this at Feira .
My group chairman has made reference to the situation in Denmark , namely the euro referendum .
Let us also look at the possible consequences if your efforts were not to lead to solutions .
In my opinion , we will need to establish in time within the European Union that Feira has been a historic opportunity to solve this issue .
I am therefore urging you to also assess the actions of the Austrian Government and to look for creative solutions in order to break the deadlock .
Mr President , many have already pointed to the need for enlargement and the fear that has swept countries in Central and Eastern Europe that , with regard to the IGC , too little progress is being made and that , along with this , the chance for rapid enlargement will pass .
I would advise you to let the political will prevail in Feira too in order to let the enlargement go ahead .
Finally , Mr President , good governance is all well and good in theory , but let us also look at what is happening in practice .
If the Kosovo agency in Thessaloniki is still caught up in so much red-tape that funding cannot be made available , then this is extremely serious .
I would also call on the Portuguese Presidency to find a solution to this .
Mr President , the forthcoming summit at Santa Maria de Feira has been preceded by an almost unprecedented number of pronouncements by key governmental figures .
German Foreign Minister , Joschka Fischer , described the federation model which could be realised in approximately thirty-five years ' time , if such a thing is desired , but not the first steps that have to be taken in its construction .
Tony Blair , whose government repeatedly prevents the taxation package from getting through , and José Maria Aznar , whose government blocks the notion of a European limited company , together declared that they approve of the economic structures of the European Union .
Jacques Chirac and Gerhard Schröder announced that their countries are prepared for deeper integration as a core group , failing , however , to illustrate its nature or extent .
I wish to present my message clearly and to a purpose .
It is : let us attend first - and also -to the basic and important matters .
From the point of view of the citizens of the Union the most important issue at the meeting in Feira , too , will be economic growth and employment in the EU area .
That will best be dealt with by removing the remaining barriers to the real Internal Market and attending to the implementation of the Lisbon decisions , with state decisions and investment in infrastructure according to the Swedish model , without simply leaving everything to market forces and sighing with relief .
We may well ask whether the new spectrum network auctions , worth hundreds of billions of euros , arranged by the states , are promoting a consumer-friendly future for networking .
In the remote regions of the Union we are still wondering , after the Volvo-Scania episode , whether the Internal Market even exists , or is it so , in terms of competition legality , that only companies in the midst of the market may take advantage of the economics of corporate growth , and the sparsely populated remote regions are the markets for these privileged few .
The candidate countries , on the other hand , must want to know what sort of Union they are joining in the ten or twenty year term .
The big visions , on the one hand , and the Austrian boycott , on the other , cannot be creating a climate of any great confidence in these countries .
Mr President , I believe that the quantity and quality of the speakers on the Charter of Fundamental Rights illustrates the importance this House attaches to it .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would urge you to see to it that the hearing you are to hold on the 19th with the President of the Convention , Mr Herzog , should not be a mere formality .
It is not simply a question of listening to the President of the Convention , but also of listening to the actual problems which are being faced by the Convention at the moment , of asking what the final objective of the Charter is and of knowing how it is going to proceed .
I believe that it would be of great help to the Convention if , in its conclusions , the European Council could make a statement on the future of the Charter , because it appears at the moment that its formulation has demonstrated that the Charter is of interest to the people .
The participation of the NGOs , the participation of ordinary people , clearly show that Europeans are interested in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The institutional questions of the Intergovernmental Conference are enormously important , but they do not reach the people .
I believe that the Charter of Fundamental Rights does reach the people .
The Charter must be the soul of the European Union and , therefore , at a time when we are discussing enlargement , I believe that the European Council - which has promoted the creation of the Charter - must send a clear political message : the Charter is going to be a very important element of the European Union . The Charter will be the soul of the European Union of the future .
Therefore , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I pray that in the Feira conclusions , which we will all read with enormous interest , the Charter will receive the boost that it deserves , so that the Convention will be able to complete its work properly .
In that way we will fulfil the mandate of Salvador de Madariaga , for whom Europe would become a reality only when it is a reality in the minds of the citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this was an important debate which has acted as a real stimulus for the Feira European Council .
I congratulate the quality of the interventions of which the Presidency will take due note as it should .
This European Council , as has been said , will have a very full agenda with the Intergovernmental Conference , the approval to include closer cooperation and other items .
We must be aware that the whole Conference is set out according to the decisions taken in Amsterdam .
This is not the definitive Intergovernmental Conference on the big reform of Europe .
It is a Conference which has a specific mandate of technical refinement , particularly in terms of the decision-making systems , in order to allow enlargement .
We also cannot allow third countries to believe that an excessive extension of the Conference is deliberately intended to guarantee an excessive delay in enlargement .
The enlargement of the EU will be broadly consolidated at the European Council .
This meeting will include a fairly positive progress report , a fundamental step forward for the Common European Security and Defence Policy , the application of the Information Technologies Programme for Europe , the adoption of the Action Plan for the Northern Dimension and the approval of the Common Strategy on the Mediterranean following the first two Association Councils with Palestine and Israel .
It will also cover the definition of the external action programme in the area of justice and internal affairs , the White Paper on food safety , the European Charter for Small Enterprises , some important resolutions on economic and financial affairs , the entry of Greece into the euro and , as we would also want , a happy resolution of the problem of income taxes .
It is a full agenda but one which shows how the European Union is advancing on all fronts .
The EU has not been paralysed .
On the contrary , it is advancing on both its internal fronts and also in external relations , which is extremely important .
The issue of the Charter of Fundamental Rights has been raised here . I must stress that the European Union has adopted a methodology for drawing up this Charter which involves a convention .
The work of this Convention has not yet been completed .
The Convention will have to complete its work and decide on many aspects which have not yet been decided . These include determining whether the Charter is just a document setting out principles or whether it is to be incorporated in the Treaties , whether or not the Charter will be one of the primary examples of closer cooperation , how this will be applied to the citizens , whether just to native Europeans or to other residents in EU countries , or to foreigners or even illegal immigrants - this is a problem which has not yet been decided - how it will be linked to the European Convention on Human Rights and how it will be linked to the national courts and to the existing or remodelled European courts .
All these points are extremely important .
I understand the appeal made in this House but must point out that this is not a direct responsibility of this European Council .
In order to take this issue forward , we have decided to invite the Chair of the Convention , Mr Herzog , to contribute to this high-level exchange of views which , I am sure , will stimulate the Convention ' s work of drawing up the Charter .
I must also say something on the Austria issue .
As you know , this is a bilateral issue between 14 countries , which are also Member States , and one country which is a Member State too .
However , this is not an EU issue or one for the EU bodies .
No decision has been taken by any EU body although , naturally , we are all Member States .
The Portuguese Presidency has always taken the precaution of making this distinction clear , that this was not an EU issue .
On one hand this was to protect the normal operation of the European Union and the achievement of the EU agenda and on the other so as not to create any obstacle for Austria with regard to its full participation in the life of the EU and its bodies .
Whenever any failure to abide by this principle has been pointed out to us , the Presidency has informed the bodies or institutions concerned to stop them acting in this way .
This has been a constant concern .
The Portuguese Prime Minister and I have been in contact with the other thirteen countries and with Austria and we are still doing this .
I have asked the Members of this Parliament who raised the issue to be aware that it is very difficult to adopt a balanced approach to this problem if an immediate solution is demanded .
I realise that the attitude adopted will have to include an element of phasing and that it is very difficult for a solution to this issue to be based on a diktat . A development may occur based on the maintenance of constant political attacks on people , political personalities and governments or even based on threats about stopping the operation and decisions of the European Union .
In order to produce a window of opportunity in this issue , the political rhetoric that has surrounded it must be curbed , toned down or put on hold for the time being .
Naturally , measures which were adopted in a diplomatic context through the consensus of the 14 Member States will only be able to change also through consensus between these 14 countries .
The conditions for this consensus need to be created and we believe that , in this respect , Austria is creating conditions in order to solve this problem .
Conditions also need to be created so that the 14 Member States can establish a new consensus .
This must be borne in mind .
I would call for your moderation and I very much respect the correct way , as Members of this Parliament , that you have raised this problem in this session and have considered it but it is also necessary to create the conditions so that there can be a window of opportunity .
The following concept must be taken into account . The Feira European Council is an EU body and no window of opportunity can be opened at this meeting because we have to deal with the agenda and the areas of action of the EU .
However , we can deal with this issue in a bilateral context before the European Council - and this is partly what we are trying to do - or after the European Council . But please do not expect the Feira European Council to deal with an item which is not on the agenda and which , if placed solely on the shoulders of the European Council , will end up prejudicing the arguments to which this problem has very rightly given rise here .
To conclude , the assessment of our Presidency will be made here next week by the Portuguese Prime Minister .
For my part I must also thank France and stress the way in which we have cooperated over the transition between presidencies . I especially thank the European Parliament , which has stimulated us in its role as a real parliamentary institution , throughout our Presidency , for all its cooperation on the European agenda and for the dynamic , lively , creative and constructive way in which , during these six months , it has carried out its duties as the parliamentary body of the Union .
Thank you , Minister .
I wish you and your government a successful conclusion to the Portuguese Presidency .
Mr President , I should just like to thank the President-in-Office for the care and attention , as a politician , that he has shown in listening to the debate and the concerns that have been raised .
Mr Cox , I think that , with your words , you are indeed voicing the feelings of many .
I now give the floor to Mr Barnier , on behalf of the European Commission , for another brief intervention .
Mr President , having listened very carefully to all the speakers , I would like to add a few words despite the very full agenda . Thank you for the quality and frankness of your speeches .
Mr Poettering and Mr Barón Crespo , I hereby confirm the commitment I made to you yesterday on behalf of the Commission on the status of European political parties .
The Commission will shoulder its responsibilities .
It will take the initiative .
And , with the support of your President , it is planning to use the next trialogue to identify the ideal approach , in agreement with the three institutions , but in the meantime we are getting the initiative ready .
I would like to say a word on Croatia to Mr Barón Crespo .
You are right to highlight the strategic nature of the country , formerly part of Yugoslavia .
Mr President , the Commission is currently preparing for negotiations which should open before the end of the year for an association and stabilisation agreement with Croatia .
In July we will have already drawn up the directives for undertaking these negotiations .
Similarly , we have already begun to negotiate an agreement with Macedonia and we are thinking about negotiating another with Albania .
Thirdly , I cannot accept the suggestion from Mr Wurtz that the Commission is somehow being swept away by some kind of liberal tide .
Mr President , the Commission is doing its duty and shouldering its responsibilities .
This is particularly true when it is faithful to the guidelines and decisions of a European Council .
That is what we are doing after Lisbon .
But we are also doing so , Mr President , by remaining faithful to the letter and the spirit of the Treaties , and especially to one article in the Treaty which I have good reason to remember , the article guaranteeing the specific nature of public service missions .
These are the two requirements we are working to , and which we have worked to in particular in drafting the directive on postal services you alluded to , where I think a good balance has been achieved .
It is more surprising that you criticised some commissioners for holding a dialogue with employers .
It seems to me that we need to have such a dialogue with employers , and with trade unionists too , and non-governmental organisations , if we are to do our work properly .
Mr Wurtz , you know very well that Brussels is not the only place , and I smile when I say this , where politicians of right or left meet employers .
Finally , I share the opinion expressed by Mr Cox and Mrs Berès on the deadlines that need to be respected in the great European debate .
I am grateful to a number of major operators in the construction of Europe - Mr Fischer recently , and before him , Mr Delors and others - for opening up the debate .
The worst things for the construction of Europe we are so committed to , ladies and gentlemen , are silence and secrecy , and in negotiating this reform with others , I have feared that silence .
Mr Fischer and others have provided oxygen , a horizon .
We need that oxygen , we need that horizon for the great European debate . But please , let us respect all the stages and work through them one by one .
The first deadline to be met , as you said , Mr President , is the reform deadline so that we are in a good position to undertake enlargement and also so that other reforms can follow .
So let us keep to those deadlines and dedicate ourselves , in the few months that lie ahead , to success in the negotiations .
I am not just saying complete them .
I am talking about success .
Success in Nice .
And , as far as I am concerned , the quality of reform is more important than the timetable .
Concluding successfully is more than simply concluding .
With the Portuguese Presidency coming to an end and the French Presidency about to begin , we must now put all our energies into achieving real reform at Nice to make enlargement possible , as well as other reforms later , if need be .
Many thanks , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Mr President , I failed to catch the President 's eye this morning .
We should not allow this plenary session to pass without paying some attention to the fact that the Nobel laureate and Sakharov Prize winner , Aung San Suu Kyi , is still denied her freedom .
It is exactly ten years since she and the National League for Democracy won that election which the dictators proceeded to completely ignore .
There has been a whole decade of dictatorship in that country .
Next Monday , Aung San Suu Kyi will be 55 years old .
It is a very poignant birthday for her .
In March , her husband died of cancer .
He asked for permission to visit her to say goodbye to his dear wife .
The military junta in Burma refused permission for him to see her .
These military dictators remain terrified of a small and gentle woman who has no malice , no uniforms or tanks to protect her .
She and the people of Burma will not give up .
What I am asking today is for the European Parliament to do what she asks .
She says : " Please use your liberty to support ours " .
I ask the President of this Parliament to write to the military junta in Burma to say : stop the human rights abuses , return to democracy and give freedom to Aung San Suu Kyi .
Mrs Kinnock , I thank you for your words .
I think that you have spoken on behalf of many .
We feel great solidarity with this Sakharov Prize winner and I will pass on your request to the President of this Parliament .
I now give the floor to Mr Lechner on a point of order .
Mr President , in connection with yesterday ' s vote in this House , I simply wanted to draw honourable Members ' attention to a press release I have just seen , according to which the Irish Attorney General , Nial Fennelly , has just called on the European Court of Justice to declare the directive banning tobacco advertising approved by a majority of this House null and void because of its inadequate legal basis .
I am saying this because my amendment and my request that the procedure and the vote should be deferred by a further four weeks were not accepted yesterday .
I think that it would have been better if the majority in this House had paid greater attention to the legal basis and had checked it more carefully , and if it had paid more attention to the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on that matter .
I would recommend that the Commission withdraw its proposal , even if it does not relate to exactly the same thing .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , we will not re-open the debate on this .
We discussed and concluded this matter yesterday .
Mr President , I can imagine that a number of MEPs who were against this directive at the time are now satisfied with it .
I think that congratulations are in order for Mr Lechner .
It is fortunate that the directive which we voted on yesterday is so different in nature that we really do not need to expect a similar kind of judgement from the Advocate-General or from the Court .
Yesterday ' s directive is based on three existing directives , two of which have already been before the Court .
I am therefore completely satisfied with the vote as it was held yesterday .
Good , we have taken note of this .
Vote
If I am taking the floor , it is because there are two serious errors in the Danish translation of point 8 concerning Austria .
The words of the English text , which I understand to be the basic text , are : " asked the Council presidency " .
In the Danish text , the words " Council presidency " have been translated by the word " Rådet " , and there is no mention of the presidency .
This is a serious political and translation error .
But , in addition , there is another error , namely that the following words have been included in the English text : " with all the parties in the EU concerned " , and those words are quite simply not included in the Danish text .
I would urge that a correct Danish translation of the text be obtained , for I find it a very serious matter that , in point 8 concerning Austria , these two mistakes have been made which , from a political point of view , completely alter the sense .
I have consulted the services involved .
They will take note of this and will make the necessary corrections .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0505 / 2000 ) by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the provision of a common European security and defence policy , with a view to the European Council of Feira
With regard to paragraph 38 :
Mr President , there is a small translation problem in paragraph 38 .
Reference is made to a ' European interparliamentary body on security and defence ' .
The word ' organe ' has been correctly used in the French version .
Initially I had proposed the term ' forum ' , but discussions in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy produced a compromise and we agreed o use an equivalent of the French ' organe ' instead .
In the English version the word should be ' body ' , and , probably , ' Gremium ' in the German .
My knowledge of the other languages is insufficient .
But I wanted to highlight that point so that the various language versions can be corrected .
Many thanks , Mrs Lalumière , we will take care of this .
We will make every effort in order to make sure that this is done .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution
on the outcome of the Special Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations entitled " Women 2000 : gender equality , development and peace for the twenty-first century " of 5-9 June 2000
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
President .
I now give the floor to Mrs McCarthy on a procedural motion .
Mr President , as a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market I object to Mr Lechner 's attempt to mislead this House on an interim court ruling that has come out of the European Court of Justice on the ban on tobacco advertising , not on health warnings , which is what we voted on yesterday .
Mr Lechner should be aware that the judgement is interim and that we will not have a final judgement until the autumn .
Furthermore , the Legal Affairs Committee ignored the advice of Parliament 's legal services that the legal base for this directive was correct .
I can understand Mr Lechner 's frustration as he and some of the members of his group worked closely with industry to try and frustrate this resolution , but we cannot have the politics of the press release overturning decisions of this House .
Thank you , Mrs McCarthy .
I have taken due note of this .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Murphy Report ( A5-0154 / 2000 )
Mr President , congratulations to Parliament for adopting this directive which compels firms which are overdue in settling their debts to add on 7 % interest .
I voted for the motion and the result is successful , but I would like to know how much longer we will have to wait before Parliament votes for interest and compensation to be paid in cases where governments delay pension payments ?
There are delays in pension payments in all 15 of the Member States .
And why should citizens who receive late payment from public bodies not also receive compensation of 7 % ?
I voted for the motion in the hope that this further step will be taken as well .
Mr President , at second reading I voted against both the reduction in the payment period from 30 to 21 days , and against the proposed interest level of 8 % .
I am still convinced that an interest rate at the 6 % level originally proposed by the Council would suit business better .
I cannot say that I am entirely in agreement with the compromise reached in the Conciliation Committee , but in view of the importance of this directive for cross-border trade and the operation of the single market , I finally voted for the version now before us .
First I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and my colleagues who participated in the conciliation meetings and had to battle hard with a Council of Ministers more than a little reluctant to progress legislation on late payment , which is an absolute scandal considering the economic problems oppressing SMEs .
It has to be recognised that late payment is the chief cause of the cases of insolvency threatening the survival of many firms , making them bankrupt , which translates into job losses .
The national regulations aimed at managing this problem differ considerably from one Member State to another .
Hence the interest in adopting legislation aimed at harmonising the provisions relating to late payment , due dates and the legal rate of interest at European level as soon as possible .
A legal framework needs to be established to discourage late payment and give creditors the right to fair compensation in case of late payment .
That is the purpose of the directive we are debating today .
The negotiations on this text were difficult .
A common position was finally adopted on 29 May last .
The European Parliament emerged from those long negotiations victorious on several crucial points .
The differences of opinion between Parliament and Council focussed around the difference in treatment between the public and private sectors , which have finally been placed on an equal footing .
As regards retention of title , Parliament fought to have this provision included in the text of the directive .
Thus , the Member States must ensure that the seller retains title in the goods until full settlement , while complying with the applicable national provisions .
As regards the anti-abuse clause , the European Parliament refused to give precedence to freedom of contract to the detriment of the creditor .
The directive therefore provides that , when an agreement mainly serves the purpose of procuring the debtor additional liquidity at the expense of the creditor or where the main contractor imposes on his suppliers and sub-contractors terms of payment which are not justified on the grounds of the terms granted to himself , such provisions may be considered to be factors constituting abuse .
As to compensation , apart from the cases where the debtor is not responsible for the delay , the creditor is entitled as a result of this agreement to claim reasonable compensation from the debtor for all recovery costs incurred .
This compensation may include the creditor ' s borrowing costs or bank overdraft , administrative recovery costs paid for by the creditor company , recovery costs of debt recovery organisations and recovery costs arising from legal action .
On interest , Parliament and the Council reached agreement on a rate of 7 % above Central European Bank rate , making a total of 10.5 % at the present time .
The European Parliament wanted to reduce the period after which interest is due for late payment to 21 days from the date of receipt of the invoice rather than 30 days as envisaged by the Council .
In the end the period of 30 days was maintained , but with the proviso that it may give rise to action for compensation if it constitutes a manifest abuse against the creditor .
To conclude , the result of the conciliation was satisfying as a number of the European Parliament ' s wishes are incorporated .
I have therefore voted in favour of this text .
- Although I am aware that what I do here is of no interest to other Members of this institution , my real audience is my own constituents .
It is to them that I wish to explain my actions .
Accordingly , I have to state for the record - for reasons I am not allowed space to expound on - that I do not believe this directive can or will address the real problems of businesses .
Mainly , however , I am against this directive because it brings to the fore the foreign nature of the system in which the UK is embroiled .
The central fact is that it was first presented to this assembly on 17 September 1998 .
That was before the last European elections .
In other words , we have a new Parliament installed by a new electorate .
But despite that , the directive goes on .
This shows the change of Parliament was cosmetic - a charade .
All the electorate has been allowed to do is shuffle the deck chairs on the deck of the Titanic .
Meanwhile , the project continues to sink into the bureaucratic bog .
I hope I am here to see it finally disappear but , in the meantime , I have voted against this measure .
- I congratulate my Labour colleague , Simon Murphy , on his recommendation to approve the agreement reached with the Council on tackling late payments in commercial transactions .
This demonstrates yet again Labour 's commitment to create an environment for entrepreneurs and businesses to flourish across Europe .
Late payment often suffocates many credible businesses , particularly small and medium-sized companies .
Consequently , many are tragically forced into receivership , through no fault of their own .
This measure , however , will help allow small businesses to fight back .
Creditors will be entitled to charge a statutory interest rate of 7 % on their debts , encouraging debtors to pay early .
Furthermore , if debts are not repaid , creditors will also be able to claim compensation form debtors for recovery costs .
By introducing greater certainty in business transactions across Europe , small companies will gain confidence in trading , not just across Britain , but right across the European Single Market .
Membership of the Single Market the largest trading bloc in the world , is crucial for jobs in the North West .
Nearly 40 % of small and medium sized enterprises in the region have trading links with other EU Member States .
As a part of the EU Single Market , they have access to over 370m potential customers - over 6 times more than in Britain alone .
In a few years ' time , following the enlargement of the European Union , they will have access to a potential 500m customers - as big as the American and Japanese markets put together .
The Labour Government is determined to make the Single Market work for British business .
By giving UK businesses the confidence to reach into these markets , this measure will contribute to this aim and will increase trade , growth and employment across both the North West and all of Britain .
Maaten Report ( A5-0160 / 2000 )
Mr President , congratulations to Parliament for also voting in favour of keeping derogations regarding the importing of alcoholic products and the continued application of excise duty payments .
I voted against this measure .
I often imagine that when the Ministers for Finance see one of us , a citizen - many of which are pensioners - drinking wine , whisky , vodka or any sort of alcohol , they say " Goody goody ! More duty .
This will be good for the balance sheet " .
But is it right that the tax systems of our States should benefit every single time we drink a glass of wine ?
I do not think so !
I therefore voted against the motion .
- ( SV ) We have voted against approving the Commission ' s and the Swedish Government ' s agreement gradually to abolish the derogations concerning the rules governing imports of alcohol and tobacco into Sweden .
The Swedish Government has caved in to the supremacy of EU bureaucracy and abandoned its previous position to the effect that questions relating to excise duties are to be decided unanimously by the Council .
Its action is also a breach of the pledge which the yes side issued before the Swedish referendum .
This pledge meant that the powerful temperance movement did not campaign against Swedish membership of the EU , which was probably the decisive factor in Sweden ' s becoming a member of the EU .
We would nonetheless welcome much of what is contained in the Maaten report , which admits clearly and unambiguously that alcohol policy is a health-related issue and not , as the Commission sees it , solely a question of the internal market and of agricultural policy .
In our view , the conclusions of the Maaten report are nonetheless contrary to the very spirit of the arguments which permeate the report .
- ( SV ) Ever since it joined the EU , Sweden has been allowed to have different quotas for imports into Sweden of alcoholic drinks and tobacco products by individuals for their private use .
As Minister for Agriculture , I was involved in negotiating this derogation from Article 26 of Directive 92 / 12 / EEC prior to Sweden ' s entry in 1994 , and this derogation has already been extended once .
I can make no other assessment than that , for Sweden , this was a fixed-term derogation which would one day come to an end in favour of current Community directives .
Through its actions , the Swedish Government has helped obscure this fact in the course of the debate of recent years .
This has also meant that , in spite of knowing the implications of the derogation , it has avoided taking those measures required for the purpose of adjusting both its domestic market and those tools which Sweden has used as part of its alcohol policy .
Following its informal promise to the Commission to approve the proposal , the Swedish Government must now appreciate the need to adjust its alcohol policy and find other methods of controlling alcohol consumption in the country and of limiting alcohol-related harm .
It is time the Government realised this .
In view of the outcome of the accession negotiations and the Social Democratic Government ' s handling of the issue , I see no reason for doing anything other than vote in favour of the report .
- ( SV ) Since Sweden ' s entry into the EU , the Swedish Christian Democrats have worked to make the Swedish derogation in Council Directive 92 / 12 / EEC , relating to the import of alcohol , permanent .
We believe that this is a prerequisite of being able to continue to pursue the successful alcohol policy which , in Sweden , has led to a lower level of harm caused by alcohol than in other EU countries and so to a good standard of public health .
Now that the Commission is rejecting Sweden ' s argument and placing the emphasis upon the operation of the internal market , we fear that alcohol policy will sustain great damage in Sweden .
There is also a lack of consistency when , on the one hand , exports of Swedish snuff to other EU countries are banned for health reasons and , on the other hand , appeal is made to the free market , and health aspects are set aside on the issue of imports of alcohol .
We think it very unfortunate that the Swedish Social Democratic Government has chosen not to pursue this issue more vigorously .
An assessment of the derogation by the courts against the background of Sweden ' s argument on public health grounds would have been an option which is not now being made use of .
Because we consider that both the Swedish Government and the European Commission have acted incorrectly on this issue , we choose to signal our rejection of their approach by abstaining in the vote on the extension to Sweden ' s derogation from the Council Directive .
Meeting of the European Council in Feira ( RC B5-0522 / 2000 )
Mr President , I would like to make it known , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , that we have abstained in the vote on the final resolution , despite the fact that we clearly support the resolution on the issues which are within the competence of the European Council in Feira , that is to say , the Intergovernmental Conference and the economic and social agenda .
With regard to the case of Austria , we understand that , firstly , the European Parliament ' s resolution , which was voted for at the time , is still in force , since no new events have occurred ; because it is not a Community issue as such , but has been raised by the fourteen Member States ; because , furthermore , my Group supported President Klestil ' s appearance and we took good note of his positive proposals , which are in fact related to issues which come within the competence of the Commission - which is not present - such as the application of Article 7 and the strengthening of our community of values .
We believe that this inclusion has not been appropriate in terms of improving the process , it is untimely , and furthermore , we believe that the best way to create new circumstances is not for one party , as Mr Galeote himself has said today , to set conditions and also demand guarantees from a party which belongs to the same group and is in the Austrian Government .
Their content has not even been considered .
Furthermore , it is not acceptable that we have to endure a campaign of provocation , threats and insults not only by members of the Austrian Government , but also by the political forces which support it .
This is not the best way to improve our relations .
For that reason - because we believe that we have to continue working for the European Union and we do not believe that the best approach is to take shortcuts with regard to such a serious issue - for that reason , we have abstained .
Mr President , there seems to be a trial of strength going on behind the scenes , during preparations for next week ' s Feira European Council , between those who want to extend the Intergovernmental Conference agenda and those who want to cut it .
That split conceals another : the first group includes the supporters of a great federalist leap forward and realists who are beginning to wonder if a totally integrated Europe - economically and politically - really amounts to the correct solution faced with enlargement and the democratic deficit .
It gives me some satisfaction to say that the second category looks like winning , which suits us fine .
The only point that needs to be added is acceptable to us , as it is about increasing the possibility of so-called ' enhanced cooperation ' .
We prefer to call it ' differentiated cooperation ' , to make it clear that this does not mean driving Europe up a one way street to federalism but instead leaving Member States free to explore , applying variable geometry , the cooperation they consider most in line with their vision of the future and their interests .
Anyway , whatever the term used - ' enhanced ' or ' differentiated ' cooperation , the main thing in our view is to take the first step and open discussions , breaking the now totally deadlock of the European system .
I would add that we think the new differentiated cooperation should be applicable to security policy so that it can be developed on a voluntary basis and in respect for national sovereignty .
Finally , if the Feira Council is going to deal with the Charter of Fundamental Rights we want it kept off the IGC agenda so that it can take the form of a statement not incorporated into the Treaty .
As I have already had occasion to say in this House and in the forum responsible for drawing up the Charter , it would certainly be useful to proclaim our common values - if it is done well - but we must not deprive our peoples of the freedom to define the rights of their own citizens themselves .
Mr President , I am sorry you are forced to stay here for a while - I know you are hungry . But - and I am speaking to you as a Vice-President - it just goes to show the extent to which this period of explanations of vote attracts Members ' attention and how appropriate it would be , in the restructuring you are currently looking at , to examine whether explanations of vote on major issues should not take place - as used to happen - before the vote and not at a time when everyone gets bored because all we can do is stay here listening to each other .
I am speaking on behalf of the Italian Radicals in this explanation of vote to justify our vote in favour , stressing that , in spite of everything , this resolution contains important points , including the need for dialogue , the need to get past the stage of pseudo-sanctions against Austria - which has not been constructive - and make sure the Minutes state that the vote also includes an important request we formulated last April and which we now reiterate : review of the seat of the institutions .
Parliament has spoken very clearly .
Yesterday we gave a practical demonstration of our position by abolishing the Friday sittings .
I think it is high time account was taken in the Treaty reforms of our determination to insist finally on a status that makes us masters of our own procedure , and masters of our own decisions as to the seat and meeting place of our institution .
That is what we said and that is why we voted in favour of it .
Mr Dell ' Alba , with regard to the first part of your intervention , we are indeed in the throes of internal reform of this House .
The debate has started and your opinion on the explanations of vote will also certainly be of value in due course .
Thank you for your reaction .
Mr President , I noted that Amendment No 11 included the proposition that the Community should take action in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity only if and insofar as the objectives of the proposed actions cannot be adequately achieved by the Member States or - and I emphasis this - their constituent states with legislative powers that have been conferred on them by national constitutional law .
I thought that part of the amendment was very valuable although there were other aspects of it which I could not support .
I regret that the topic of subsidiarity is substantially missing from the Feira resolution .
On that account I did not vote for it .
Mr President , we in the Swedish delegation of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats are working for a rapid enlargement of the Union and do not wish to delay the Intergovernmental Conference .
The intention in the resolution is that the Charter of Fundamental Rights should be incorporated into the Treaty in the course of the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference .
The Charter is required for the purpose of providing the Union ' s present and future citizens with constitutional guarantees .
There are left-wing forces which wish to introduce social objectives into the Treaty . Our view is that it may damage the Union to introduce economic and social rights which it would be difficult for the courts to guarantee and which would affect the national tax burden .
Mr President , I am speaking briefly to justify my abstention .
I am naturally in agreement with the main points in the text voted on , covering the institutions , the follow-up to the Lisbon European Council and aspects of fiscal policy and certainly food safety problems .
But , given the circumstances , I could not vote in favour of paragraph 8 on Austria .
I think the President-in-Office of the Council clarified matters greatly as to the method followed by the Fourteen , specifically asking Parliament not to consider voting to allow the contacts currently taking place between the foreign affairs ministers to achieve a result .
I am astonished at this and I agree with what Mr Dell ' Alba said , about the low regard in which Parliament holds the concept of parliamentary debate , because if it had been possible for the groups to discuss the matter and adopt a position - and there reform was important - after the speech by the President of the Council , I am certain that the vote would not have been the one we have recorded .
That is why I felt I had to abstain .
As we vote on the joint resolution on the Feira Summit , I want to pay great tribute to the importance of the work of the Portuguese Presidency , its readiness to listen , its dynamism and its approachability .
Although , unfortunately , not everything I had hoped for appears in the joint resolution - in particular , the need for a framework directive on public services - I find many of the proposals acceptable , and on all those points it is undoubtedly one of the best resolutions we have dealt with in the current political composition of the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , the right wing has introduced a paragraph concerning Austria into this resolution .
I find that quite unacceptable at a time when ' warning lights are flashing ' and there is evidence to show that the alliance with the Austrian extreme right is beginning to gain a lot of ground .
It is now more than ever essential to fight fascists , neo-fascists and their accomplices .
The very future of Europe is at stake .
And that is why , whatever the quality of a text devoted to Feira , and the work and conclusions of the Portuguese Presidency , there can be no question for me of validating , even marginally , even implicitly , a shameful alliance with implications which could prove tragic for Europe .
Hence my militant abstention on this text !
Shame on the sorcerer ' s apprentices !
Now , 60 years after the Nazi invasion of 1940 and 55 years after the end of a horrible European and world conflict , how can some people , for base electioneering purposes , have ' such short memories ' ?
- ( NL ) The Belgian Socialist MEPs have abstained from the vote on the resolution concerning the preparation of the Feira Summit .
The adoption of an appeal to the Heads of Government to review their attitude towards the Austrian Government has left the doors wide open to the extreme right wing in this government being trivialised .
This is unacceptable to us .
The Belgian MEPs of the PSE Group regret that , for these reasons , they were unable to assent to this otherwise sound resolution .
- In general the Liberals support the motion , but we would have preferred a shorter and sharper text that focused exclusively on the politics of the European Council , and had clearer messages for the heads of government .
The ELDR Group has requested split votes on various items within the Joint Motion for a Resolution , as follows : in paragraph 7 we seek to delete the second half of the sentence in order to reinforce the imperative of enlargement ; in paragraph 9 we seek to remove the last clause because we know that the Lebanese government is indeed trying to reassert control over all its territory , but is prevented from doing so by forces beyond its control ; in paragraph 14 we seek to delete the reference to Nato on the grounds that all EU member states are directly concerned with this issue ; in paragraph 19 we seek to delete the reference to the Observatory of Industrial Change ; and in paragraph 24 we seek to focus the text on the political message needed for Feira .
- This resolution contains many points that I fully support on the IGC , on the Charter of Fundamental Rights and other aspects of Community policy .
However , I find myself unable to support it because of the inclusion of paragraph 8 on Austria .
I was proud of the EU when it imposed sanctions on Austria when the new coalition formed because of the views and actions of the Freedom Party : a party whose policies have xenophobia running through them like Blackpool through rock ; a leader who has praised Hitler and the Waffen SS , refused to condemn terrorist bombings against Roma and congratulates Nazi war veterans for keeping to their principles .
Since then little has changed .
Freedom Party ministers continue to echo Nazi party slogans and rhetoric of the Thirties and Forties .
It is too soon now to allow Austria fully back into the European fold .
It will send the wrong message to the Freedom Party and their fellow travellers elsewhere in Europe .
In memory of the victims of yesterday I will vote " no " to their collaboration with the criminals of tomorrow .
. ( EL ) Workers cannot and must not be under any illusions here .
Greece ' s accession to the third phase of EMU , which is to be decided at the European Council in Feira , will only reinforce anti-labour and anti-grass roots policies , despite the Greek Government ' s attempt to portray it as a triumph for our country .
As everyone knows , Greek workers and the entire Greek population have already paid a very high price for Greece ' s full accession to EMU and , following the Feira decisions , they will continue to pay the cost of " sustainability " , i.e. staying in EMU , while large corporations and monopolies continue to step up their level of exploitation and increase their profits .
The Feira Council is being called upon to promote the interests of big business even more resolutely and to promote the speedy militarization of the European Union by creating a European army whose main mission will be to intervene militarily in third countries and lend support to capitalist forces within the Member States of the EU itself , at the expense of the grass roots movement .
This summit will strengthen measures to safeguard the " internal security " of capitalism by steering and crushing the grassroots movement when the EU Schengen Agreement is incorporated into the EU .
The new revision of the Treaties being promoted at the Intergovernmental Conference will be the main item on the agenda at the Feira Summit .
The aim is to legislate for the basic interests of monopolies , thereby making conditions even worse for workers , for the weaker sections of society and for the less " powerful " countries .
Abolishing the veto , extending qualified majority voting in decision making and , more importantly , instituting " enhanced cooperation " and " flexibility " will all serve precisely these monopolistic interests under the guise of " efficiency " , thus giving powerful countries a fast track for exploiting both countries and people .
Further dismantling of the social rights of workers , starting with the right to social security , is on the agenda of the Feira Summit .
The report by the " group of wise men " and the decisions which will be taken will aim , on the pretext of combating unemployment , to sacrifice the rights paid for by workers with blood , sweat and tears on the alter of increased profits for the monopolies and " competition " , budgetary discipline and support for the euro .
Workers will not fail to respond to these developments ; they will oppose the interests of the monopolies and they will defend their own rights .
As always , the Communist Party of Greece will be standing firmly by their side .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted neither for nor against the joint resolution concerning preparations for the European Council in Feira on 19 and 20 June 2000 .
We have done this because the opinion sends out some important political signals concerning the follow-up to the Lisbon Summit in March , namely about employment , the economy and combating social exclusion with the aid of the open coordination method , as well as about work on preventing unfair tax competition and efforts to secure safe food products .
However , the resolution also contains a long section about the current Intergovernmental Conference and , in this connection , we should like to repeat that our vote in favour of the overall resolution does not alter our basic view that extending the agenda and turning the Treaty into a constitution , with the Charter of Fundamental Rights incorporated into it with binding legal effect , will not enhance the possibility of achieving a satisfactory result in Nice in December , something which is absolutely crucial if the enlargement is to be able to go ahead once the countries concerned are ready .
We have not , therefore , been able to vote for these sections , viewed in isolation .
In paragraph 8 on Austria of the resolution approved on the Feira European Council , this House has ended up adopting a very hypocritical position which is in total contradiction of all the positions which it has previously taken on this issue .
In my opinion , it is not a question of being against the principle of returning relations with Austria to normal .
It is a question of the right opportunity and time for this political change to occur .
A resolution on the European Council should specify that it is up to the latter to take this political change in hand by taking advantage of its meeting in Feira .
However , this is not what the text does .
On the contrary , it asks the Portuguese Presidency to do this .
Clearly , at this point four days before the European Council , it is now the responsibility of this summit , as a whole and as the highest body of the Union , to take advantage of this historic opportunity to update the EU ' s policy on Austria .
Giving this task to the Portuguese Presidency is an attempt to place all the responsibility for what may happen on the shoulders of one country which cannot , at the wrong time and on its own , solve a problem which concerns us all .
This is not to mention the reasons for this approval which are difficult to understand given the basic policy .
After all , what has changed in Austria ?
Has the government fallen ?
Fortunately this small part of the text does not invalidate the rest of its content which I regard as positive .
Unfortunately it was clearly much more to serve the petty interests of the Portuguese component of the PPE that this group adopted this position than due to the belief in and usefulness of this particular vote .
- The EPLP voted for the resolution on the Santa Maria de Feira European Council on 19 and 20 June 2000 but does not support paragraph 19 .
The UK Government position , which is supported by the EPLP , is that it is better to allow this type of negotiation to be undertaken by the works councils .
It is our belief that it would be more effective to advance the status of the European Companies Statute .
I voted in favour of this resolution , but I would like to draw the European Council ' s attention to how vital the adoption and full-scale implementation of the northern dimension programme will be at the Feira Summit .
I believe that the northern dimension action programme will help to increase regional stability and security everywhere in Europe and strengthen economic and political developments in Europe ' s northern regions .
- ( SV ) I have voted against the resolution for the following reasons :
1 .
The resolution says nothing about the need to give priority to sustainable development and the integration of environmental issues into all the policy areas of the Community .
2 .
The resolution does not repudiate militarisation of the EU and does not acknowledge that every military operation must have a UN mandate .
3 .
Nor does the resolution make it clear that the Charter of Fundamental Rights must not come into conflict with other international conventions or with the International Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
4 .
The resolution does not emphasise that enlargement must be given absolute priority .
Security and defence policy ( B5-0505 / 2000 )
Mr President , Mrs Cauquil and Mrs Bordes , who are also present , join me in this explanation of vote .
We have voted against this resolution to affirm our opposition not only to a common European army but to national armies as well .
The past half-century shows that the armies of the great imperialist powers of Europe , in alliance or each on its own hunting ground , were not there to defend the people , but to carry on wars of pillage .
For example , the French army was used for the colonial wars : Madagascar , Indo-China , Algeria .
Since these colonies became independent , it has intervened to support infamous dictatorships , especially in its former African colonies .
The other former colonial powers of Europe have done the same in the same situation .
The recent intervention by European armies against Serbia and Kosovo is certainly nothing to be proud of .
The author of the report is careful not to specify which enemy the future European army is intended to fight .
So what is it for and who is it against , if not to allow the great powers of Europe to be able to continue , on behalf of the European Union as a whole , their Community political game in Africa , the West Indies or elsewhere ?
Consequently , not only do we refuse to vote in favour of any resources whatsoever , human or financial , for this army , but we protest against its very existence .
Mr President , I would like to make an explanation of vote on behalf of my delegation and say right away that we intended to vote for Amendment No 26 and paragraph 27 .
We are , of course , anxious for crises to be solved by peaceful means and for peace to be maintained .
After the terrible events over the last century none of us wants military conflicts .
Nevertheless , the crisis in the Balkans has demonstrated the shortcomings of the European Union .
We therefore support the creation of an effective common security and defence policy for the Union , with its own identity .
We need to learn from our experience with the war in the Balkans , so that a disaster of this kind cannot be repeated .
The Treaty of Amsterdam made the Petersberg tasks the responsibility of the Union .
That leaves Article 5 .
We support the idea of incorporating this article as a protocol to the EU Treaty , but we would like to emphasise that the sovereignty of the Member States must be preserved when it comes to decisions regarding participation in military interventions .
For several months , the European Union has been treading an extremely complicated path , punctuated by the Cologne , Helsinki and Lisbon Councils and tomorrow by the Feira Council , to try to put in place what is called a ' common European security and defence policy ' .
The exercise is complicated , first because it is necessary to try to clarify relations with NATO , and because the United States not to mention other countries in NATO which are not members of the European Union , like Turkey , are not making our task any easier .
Everything is also made more difficult by the determination of the Union institutions to extend the scope of this new policy , by presenting it as ' a further step towards European political integration ' , in the words of the resolution we have just voted on . In other words , it is another step towards supra-nationality .
As regards the scope of this security policy , there is deliberate ambiguity .
It would not , strictly speaking , be a matter of so-called Petersberg-style tasks ( crisis prevention and peacekeeping in third countries , excluding defence of national territory or vital external interests ) , but the European Parliament constantly insists on raising a much larger objective , a common security and defence policy in the broad sense . In fact , that is the title of the resolution voted on today .
Ambiguity is increased by the decision to implement common military resources intended to prevent crises ( for example , the European rapid reaction force , of 50 000 to 60 000 men , agreed at Helsinki ) , which means the ' integrationists ' can constantly play with words and put it about that there is some question of implementing a defence policy in the full sense of the word .
In terms of both method and objective - political integration or cooperation - we think it is counterproductive to be constantly brandishing the prospect of a unitary and integrated supranational power .
To act effectively we need to establish voluntary cooperation , with variable geometry , where Member States of the Union with an interest in this or that action would participate - and there is no reason why non-member states should not participate too , where appropriate .
To summarise , the Union for a Europe of Nations Group believes in advancing towards common security actions , provided we do not get boxed into a rigid institutional system , but instead establish flexible procedures based on voluntary input and respect for national sovereignty .
We are open to the idea of common security actions , which we believe Europe badly needs .
But at the same time we must remain very clear about the conditions for them . It is impossible to hand over power of military decision ( even if we are initially told that only Petersberg tasks will be involved ) to very imperfectly democratic European institutions - and so they will remain , to human eyes , because there is no such thing as a European people .
There are three consequences of that : the national democracies must always have the last word , so the operations concerned must remain in an inter-state context ; decisions can in no case be taken by majority on issues of principle ; the system must be based on the possibility of ' differentiated actions ' permitting each people to exercise its freedom of choice without discontinuity .
I hope the Feira Council will decide to add this issue to the Intergovernmental Conference .
- ( DA ) We are voting against the overall resolution , which emphasises the desire to develop a military dimension to EU cooperation .
We cannot support the general approach of the text , which acknowledges the need for a militarisation of the EU ' s cooperation on defence and in that way fails to respect the non-aligned countries of the Union .
Nor can we support the more concrete proposals in the resolution , which call for increased defence budgets in the individual Member States and coordination in purchasing military equipment and establishing an actual army for the Union .
We can support the need to draw up a common code of conduct for arms dealing between Member States and between Member States and third countries , but we cannot support the creation of an internal market for the armaments industry , as also proposed in the resolution .
We are against the proposal for a European army which , in the name of stability , democracy and humanitarianism , would in fact defend the EU zone of influence and protect the interests of multinationals on a global scale .
A renewed arms race at local and regional level , along with an increase in military budgets will mean a remilitarisation of the world .
Furthermore we are opposed to a ' high-tech ' army for the EU , just as we reject NATO .
Together , Europe and the United States are seeking to impose this army as the military arm of the IMF-World Bank-WTO triangle .
The peoples do not need an army ; they need a social policy which guarantees their welfare .
That will not happen without a radical break from neo-liberalism .
The military intervention in Kosovo has increased the poverty of the peoples and exacerbated xenophobia , thus proving that stability and democracy were certainly not the objectives of that war .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats support the proposal for a European defence and security policy , which is to be discussed at the Feira Summit in Portugal in June 2000 .
The proposal includes both visionary and rational proposals for a common defence and security policy .
There are , nonetheless , a couple of areas where the Danish Social Democrats believe that care ought to be exercised .
Careful consideration ought to be given to the way in which the European Parliament is to be involved in the area of defence and security policy .
We are uneasy about the European Parliament ' s influence in this area , for we believe that defence and security policy is predominantly an intergovernmental matter .
The proposal paves the way for the increased use of majority decision-making , over and above what is laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam in connection with a common defence and security policy .
We see no reason for extending majority decision-making into this area .
With regard to necessary future investments in new technology and new equipment for the military , we think that these should be made possible through changes to the order of priorities in the national defence budgets .
There is no need to increase the overall European defence budgets .
We would also refer to the Danish reservation concerning common action in the defence sphere .
- ( SV ) The main features of the text which has been debated today by the European Parliament are also to be found in a proposal which was presented by Mrs Lalumière in May to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and which was voted on in June .
In accordance with the ordinary way in which matters are debated , the issue will again come up for debate at one or other of the European Parliament ' s part-sessions this autumn .
I find this duplicated work peculiar and difficult to understand .
I have therefore chosen categorically to abstain in all votes on this subject , which is so important and fundamental to a non-aligned country like Sweden , blessed with peace since 1814 .
- ( SV ) It is extraordinary that the European Union should wish to implement a security policy designed to prevent and solve conflicts .
The European Union possesses political , economic and diplomatic resources for this purpose .
True , the resolution says it is desirable that non-military measures should be used first , but the possible use of military forces is not excluded .
I cannot support the proposal that military resources should be used to defend the European Union ' s interests .
In my opinion , it should only be possible to take military action following a decision in the United Nations ' Security Council .
It is not enough just to follow the principles of the United Nations ' Charter .
I cannot , therefore , support the resolution .
" Women 2000 " ( RC B5-0562 / 2000 )
Mr President , I would first of all like to make it clear that I am speaking on behalf of the Dutch members of the EDD Group .
We voted against the present resolution by way of expressing our dissatisfaction regarding the conduct of the European Parliament delegation during the UN General Assembly .
We received the news that Mrs Theorin , chairperson of our delegation at that assembly , campaigned formally and informally on behalf of the EP for the introduction of the right of women to free abortion in all UN countries .
On behalf of the EP no less , she is exerting pressure on other countries , including Poland , to concur with the EU opinion .
As MEPs , we disassociate ourselves from this opinion and consequently do not wish to take any responsibility in this respect .
We are of the firm opinion that unborn life , as a gift from our Creator , is worth protecting .
Moreover , the European Union has no authority at all under its treaties to force candidate countries to adopt specific legislation in this area of policy .
We would therefore make it absolutely clear that the right to free abortion cannot be presented to the candidate countries as a criterion for entry into the EU .
Meeting in plenary session in Strasbourg , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the results of the Special Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations entitled ' Women 2000 : gender equality , development and peace for the twenty-first century ' of 5-9 June 2000 held in New York and at which Astrid Lulling , Member of the European Parliament , participated .
As co-signatory to that resolution , Mrs Lulling made the following statement in Strasbourg :
' I have just had the opportunity of attending the special General Assembly of the United Nations called from 5 to 9 June 2000 in New York to evaluate progress since the last UN world conference on women , which took place in 1995 in Beijing , on the implementation of the Beijing Action Platform .
The Assembly was attended by some ten thousand women , making it the ideal meeting place for analysing the achievements of the last five years and comparing attitudes - which are very different moreover - on the need to accelerate implementation of the Beijing Platform .
Although we are not euphoric , the results of the Assembly are acceptable .
Because of certain reactions in this Parliament , both today and yesterday during the debate , from some colleagues who were not in New York - reactions obviously based on misinformation and misunderstanding - I want to make it clear that the Members of the European Parliament present in New York did not speak on behalf of this Parliament without a mandate . Actually , they were not entitled to speak , given the procedure at special General Assemblies of the UN .
It is the Presidency of the European Union that speaks on behalf of the Union at that kind of international conference .
So there are no grounds for putting words into the mouths of the Members of the European Parliament present in New York on mere intent .
Certainly we were active behind the scenes , if I can call it that , and we had informal but useful meetings with Members of Parliament from the Member States and the candidate countries for membership of the European Union attending as part of their national delegations .
For my own part , I contributed with my colleagues in the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , to dispelling an impression which prevailed notably among certain third country delegations , that , for the women of the European Union , in terms of gender equality , sexual orientation and abortion were the absolute priorities in the 21st century .
Because people were putting words into the mouths of various parties , particularly Poland ' s , I would like to specify that as regards gender equality , Poland is adopting the acquis communautaire and is not calling into question the provisions of Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam on discrimination based on gender .
But the Treaty of Amsterdam does not oblige Poland to legislate on abortion .
It can be recommended to do so , but subsidiarity applies .
I wanted to make that clear to dispel any misunderstanding about what really happened in New York .
It is true that the militants of a certain sexual orientation - which is fortunately only a problem for a tiny minority of women in Europe and the world , and which is not mine - are much more visible , even in New York , than the millions of women who , because of their economic and social situation , have other preoccupations and priorities when it comes to gender equality . '
The final document from the Beijing + 5 conference which has just ended in New York is a victory for women .
After very acrimonious negotiations , realism in appreciating the needs of women and respect for their dignity carried the day .
But there was strong political pressure from the United States , Japan and the European Union , and strong ideological pressure from feminist NGOs generously financed by the Western countries .
How , for instance , can the pressure exercised by the European Union on Nicaragua and Poland be justified ?
How can so-called ' sexual and reproductive rights ' be weighed against development aid or deadlines for joining the European Union ?
The pressure on the poorest countries was so great that dozens of members of the American Congress and national or European Members of Parliament officially dissociated themselves from their delegations , expressly condemning their positions .
Along the same lines , it is a real education to note that , although they are all officially specialised in the position of women , the NGOs with the largest financial resources for political communication systematically militate in favour of notions of ' reproductive health ' to the detriment of more serious and urgent needs , thus offering unfailing support to the European and American delegations .
In any case , if this conference was ultimately a success for women all over the world , that was mainly thanks to the realism and resistance of the poorest countries , which were able to by-pass Western ideological polemics about sexuality to promote practical measures against poverty - like ' micro-credit ' , against international trafficking in women and against lack of education and medical provision .
If the voice of the poorest countries was finally able to make itself heard last Saturday around 4 a.m. despite pressure of all kinds , we owe that to respect for essential principles , the only guarantees of realistic and moderate international policy , I mean the principles of national sovereignty and equality between States .
In this case , the UN showed renewed respect for the rules of consensus after ignoring them for such a long time , and that respect made it possible to focus the negotiations on the real needs of women .
We are glad the European Union has applauded this victory for women and respect for national sovereignty by adopting the final document .
- There will always be differing opinions , this is the essence and vitality of democracy .
The more sensitive the issue , the greater sensitivity must be shown in dealing with it .
This was obviously not the case , neither in New York during the Beijing + 5 conference , nor in our debate in this Parliament yesterday .
In the treatment of Poland and other candidate countries , fundamental principles of democracy and subsidiarity and the political values of this Parliament , as indeed of the new Europe we are in the process of creating , were not respected .
Amendments put forward by the EU delegation in New York do not and could not represent a consensus position of the Member States of the Union : on the contrary , certain of these amendments flagrantly contravened the constitution of my country of Ireland , and I have no doubt the legislative position of other countries which seek to diminish rather than promote the practice of abortion .
Regarding paragraph H of this resolution , " sexual rights " is an undefined term not included in Article 13 of the Amsterdam Treaty nor in the Beijing + 5 Platform for Action .
This new undefined term causes great difficulty for many countries including mine , as it could for example imply support for the sexual rights of paedophiles .
I will therefore abstain from voting on this resolution .
We have just celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Robert Schuman Declaration , the father of Europe .
We would surely want to uphold the spirit , the ideals , and the values which formed the foundation of our European unity .
Part of the Schuman legacy is to respect the diversity of Europe and the emerging cultures of the developing world .
Consensus should be our motif , not imposition or intimidation .
( The sitting was suspended at 2.05 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Mr President , I did not intend to interfere with the order of business , but something very serious is happening in Parliament and I feel I must make you aware of what is going on .
In the forecourt of the Parliament a shameful demonstration is - probably still - in progress . A large group of young Italians with Lega Nord flags are calling out insults to the effect that the Italian flag should be burnt and shouting " Down with the Italians ! " .
They are also shouting unrepeatable insults at the President of the European Commission .
I am under the impression that the groups of visitors who come here to Parliament and who meet with the Members do so with the intention of familiarising themselves with the European institutions , not to insult them .
I imagine that the Member who invited them did so in order to make them aware that we spend money on making the European citizens aware of the process of European integration .
I therefore feel that the President of Parliament and yourself should be informed of this matter , so that the Member who is responsible for this group will have to answer for this incident .
I do not see any Members who belong to the Forza Italia party in the Chamber .
Forza Italia is the largest political force of the Italian Freedom Alliance , which includes this party , the Lega Nord , which is now part of their coalition .
This matter must be dealt with , for it is unthinkable that we should have to put up with this type of demonstration taking place inside Parliament in the name of democracy , open doors and freedom .
Forgive me Mr President , but I feel that these matters must be dealt with while the time is ripe , for otherwise , if we do not speak out , these demonstrations will end up being perceived as the norm .
Apart from anything else , the Italian tricolour is flying up there among the flags which are part of the symbols of the European Union .
Mr President , I have asked for the floor in order to add to Mrs Napoletano ' s words . In addition to the indignation of my group and myself , as soon as I realised what was happening , I contacted the security services but they failed to respond .
This would appear quite a serious matter , for , in my opinion , there should always be security staff on duty at Parliament , and they should be able to intervene when incidents such as this demonstration take place and put a stop to them .
This is a very serious matter , Mr President , and it should be explicitly condemned , as Mrs Napoletano said - but I do not want to be drawn into a lengthy discussion here - we must find out who invited these delinquents to Parliament .
I thank the Members for their important communication .
Although I am merely the temporary President for this sitting , I have given instructions that the security services and the President of Parliament , Mrs Fontaine , be advised .
It is truly unacceptable to denigrate and insult the democratic legitimacy of any country or its institutions , or of the European institutions .
On behalf of the Presidency of Parliament , please accept this expression of regret in the face of this action against the Italian Republic , and I hope that normality will be resumed and that it will not happen again .
Naturally , those responsible will be brought to account .
Structural Funds ( 1998 )
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0138 / 2000 ) by Mr Turco , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the European Commission ' s 10th Annual Report on the Structural Funds 1998 ( COM ( 1999 ) 467 - C5-0325 / 1999 / 2211 ( COS ) )
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has examined the Commission ' s 10th annual report on the Structural Funds regarding the implementation of operations during 1998 .
As you are aware , the sound and efficient implementation of the Structural Funds is of fundamental importance for the credibility and effectiveness of the Community institutions , in particular the European Parliament , considering its monitoring functions .
Our report , which was adopted unanimously , takes note of the fact that all the resources available for 1998 were fully taken up but it also records that there are still considerable divergences in implementation between Objectives , between the Member States and between regions , and that this full take-up was only made possible by mechanisms for offsetting over- and under-implementation , which , in fact , made the implementation of the budget non-transparent .
We therefore hope that the new rules for the next programming period will make it possible to ensure transparent financial management and avoid the usual yearly liquidity bottlenecks ;
With regard to coordination , it urges the Commission and the Member States to coordinate Structural Fund policy more closely with the Cohesion Fund , the other regional development instruments and the various European Union financial instruments such as trans-European networks and the EDSP .
This is because we are convinced that we can only reduce the structural divergences between European regions and areas through coordinated action .
As regards additionality , which is one of fundamental principles underlying the Structural Funds , we call upon the Commission to find as soon as possible instruments to improve verification of compliance with additionality and more transparent procedures for assessing additionality .
We strongly urge the Member States to ensure that this principle is strictly upheld .
We consider it essential , moreover , in respecting the partnership principle , for management decentralisation to be accompanied by a clarification of the responsibilities and roles of the various partners and by a clear distinction between the functions and responsibilities .
Furthermore , we have noted that the results of the interim evaluations are frequently not comparable or quantifiable because unsuitable and inadequate indicators have been employed , which is why it is absolutely necessary for us to have objective criteria and more suitable assessment methods for assessing the results of the programmes .
We have also noted that , although there was an inexplicable and dangerous fall in the number of on-the-spot checks carried out under the regulation in 1998 compared to the previous year , they have brought to light a whole range of shortcomings , from an insufficient number of monitoring schemes in certain programmes to the co-financing of non-admissible expenditure .
As a result , we consider that the Commission ' s checks in 1998 were , unfortunately , still unsatisfactory , and that they must be sufficiently strengthened in order to guarantee proper implementation of the Structural Funds regulations .
In our report , we therefore call upon the European Commission and the Member States to adopt a number of actions as soon as possible to strengthen controls and to keep Parliament better informed of measures adopted to increase transparency and improve the implementation of the Structural Funds .
Since this 10th annual report was especially concerned with measures to promote local development , we have noted their strategic importance and emphasise their considerable contribution to local development .
Finally , Commissioner , I would like to stress that our report is consistent with the opinion you expressed on 5 June last in Brussels , when you stressed that , in the interests of transparency , even the smallest European taxpayer has to know where and how Community resources appropriated to the Structural Funds are spent .
I will leave to you the task of assessing whether a Commission report such as the 1998 report allows , I will not say the smallest , but any of the European taxpayers to satisfy their desire .
Mr President , lastly , I would like to explain my position regarding the seven amendments which will be put to the vote on Friday .
I , myself , have tabled a technical amendment , the third amendment , which corrects a transcription error likely to cause confusion and make paragraph 28 inconsistent with the rest of the report .
I also accept Amendment No 1 and Amendment No 2 , since they are in line with the report .
However , I cannot accept Amendment No 4 , Amendment No 5 , Amendment No 6 or Amendment No 7 , for I consider that they misrepresent the rest of the report .

In any case , I would like to thank Mr Nogueira and Mr Larrea , the authors of these last amendments , and publicly acknowledge that , although I do not support their approach , I do concede that their argument is valid and well structured .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I want to congratulate Mr Turco on the excellent report he has presented .
He has put his finger on the main problems encountered in implementing Structural Funds credits , and he has clearly indicated what we want to see in this area in the future .
In particular , I want to thank him for taking account of the opinion of the Committee on Industry in the final version of his report , especially as regards the issue of job creation .
For my part , Mr President , I am going to concentrate on just point : the need to coordinate Structural Fund interventions with other Community policies , an issue the rapporteur is likewise very concerned about .
The Committee on Industry believes it is particularly important to avoid conflict between competition policy on the one hand and regional policy on the other .
This is not an easy problem , and it is not a new one either .
I shall be particularly grateful to Commissioner Barnier if he can tell us whether the Commission has looked at this aspect of the problem in the context of the re-examination of competition policy , and if he could tell us where the Commission has got to in its thinking on this subject .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that my Group supports much of what is in Mr Turco 's report and is certainly wholeheartedly behind the general thrust of the report .
However , I have chosen to speak in today 's debate because some of the issues discussed in the report are at the core of what must be addressed if the European institutions themselves are to lift the cloud of mismanagement and waste which hangs over them from previous times .
The only way we can hope to change the public 's perception of what we are doing here is not only to achieve better value for money but also to be seen to be doing it .
It is only if we can clearly show that the Commission 's use of money is managed in a sound and prudent way that we can hope to win back the trust that has been lost over recent years .
The report with which we are concerned is , of course , retrospective to 1998 .
Many positive changes have taken place since that time , not least since the new Commission took over .
It is crucial , therefore , that we flag up the inadequacies that were inherent in the system and ensure that we go further in our aim to make better use of European taxpayers ' money .
This is especially so in the Structural Funds , which directly touch the lives of so many of our own citizens .
We have before us an opportunity to concentrate the minds of both the Commission and the recipients - Member States and others - of this valuable EU assistance , on the criticisms identified in the report in many areas concerning the allocation of funds and the lack of monitoring of their use .
A key remedy for addressing this very real problem is the effective use of exit strategies as a prerequisite to the awarding of funding .
None of us here would personally enter into a business or private financial agreement without being sure of how and when that obligation would come to an end .
All too often that is what has happened in the past .
Until clearly defined , planned and effective monitoring of the success or failure of a funded scheme is introduced , it remains all too easy for ill-thought-out and badly managed projects to waste precious resources , to continue to throw good money after bad .
Failure to act will result in the particular problems highlighted in this report .
It will also result in the problems we have seen over the allocation of ever-scarcer resources within the Member States .
Nowhere is this better highlighted than in the current delays , obfuscation and confusion in the United Kingdom over where to put this valuable money .
This is particularly so in my home region , the West Midlands , where this delay is causing a great deal of uncertainty to local communities and the local taxpayers , who are having to underwrite the projects to the tune of many millions of pounds , pending the resolution of the problems I have outlined .
Therefore , what is required is a simple benchmarking of projects to compare and contrast their effectiveness , to be undertaken perhaps by an independent auditor and used in conjunction with a clear and well-planned end-programme which will allow the termination of poorly operated projects and put an end to on-going waste - in essence , to introduce private-sector disciplines into this system .
Only when the European institutions and the Member States adopt ideas such as these , will we again gain the reputation for financial probity that we desire and which the public demands .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if economic and social cohesion is rightly called the core of European policy , then it is safe to say that the Structural Funds act as its pacemaker .
We are talking today about the functioning of a political instrument which we have since , with Agenda 2000 , replaced with a new and we hope better one .
Nevertheless , it is the duty and the right of this Parliament to review the Structural Funds by means of their annual reports and to derive political requirements from those reports , even if they appear to have been overtaken by events .
We believe that the rapporteur , Mr Turco , has done an excellent job on both counts in his report on the 10th Annual Report on the Structural Funds , 1998 .
The many amendments made by Members of this House have substantially enhanced the report .
I do not want to repeat here those criticisms which have been recorded and can be checked in writing .
Mr Turco and others Members have already reiterated these criticisms .
However , I would like to strengthen one demand , and that is the demand that in its next report the Commission should devote a special section to reporting on the measures which it has adopted in response to criticisms voiced by Parliament in previous years .
The 11th Annual Report should , therefore , at the same time include a progress report .
Because time is short , I only want to address four problems and approaches which we think point to the way forward .
Firstly , the period covered by the report , 1998 , was notable for the fact that it was only possible to achieve total implementation of appropriations for the entire programming period by means of last-minute measures .
Experience has shown that we need special strategies for the initial and concluding stages of programming periods and a flexibility mechanism for crisis situations like those which arose in 1997 / 98 .
Secondly , the principle of additionality is one of the main pillars of our structural policy , and I do not want to undermine it .
Nevertheless , there is a yawning gap between rhetoric and reality .
For example , in the case of Objective 1 areas , it is frequently only partly true to say that there is an independent structural policy to which the European component is added .
This is often because all the funding available in political terms has already had to be committed to guarantee adequate cofinancing , and rightly so .
However , when it comes to the principle of additionality , this means , if I may resort to a metaphor , that it is like me being given a suit by Europe to complement a tie that I can afford myself at regional level .
The forthcoming enlargement will add to this problem .
So as I see it , we need a new definition of additionality .
This might perhaps be something along the lines of additional European added value , which is already a prerequisite for the framework research programmes and for the Community INTERREG initiative , for example .
Thirdly , we believe that the principle of partnership with local and regional authorities and with the two sides of industry is heading in the right direction and should be further strengthened .
We need both more local initiatives and pacts and a regional debate about priorities for a given region .
In this way our structural policy itself will contribute to regionalisation .
Structural policy simultaneously reacts to and creates regional structures .
Fourthly , controls and assessments are the alpha and omega of any structural policy that has the noble objective of making itself superfluous as quickly as possible .
Even if there are marked structural differences between regions , this should not stop us from looking for common evaluation methods and indicators .
Only in this way can we make horizontal comparisons between strategies and projects between Member States in individual areas of activity .
The previous speaker mentioned this problem .
Benchmarking should also be possible in this policy area soon .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is a very positive Thursday for the European regions in general and for the outermost regions in particular , since this Parliament is dealing with reports as thought-provoking and important as those of Mr Turco and Mr Ripoll , which refer to the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund respectively , as well as the assessment of the transparency of their implementation .

It is therefore worth remembering that regional and structural policy in the European Union as a whole is a response to the specific disadvantages confronting certain European regions and , in particular , the outermost regions such as Madeira , the Azores , the Canary Islands and the French overseas departments .
In fact , Articles 158 and 159 of the Treaty set the objectives for economic and social cohesion , giving regional policy the task of reducing the existing differences between the less developed regions and the others .
It also leads to the special treatment of the outermost regions which is covered in Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , which will allow the Union to continue , consolidate and strengthen its action in order to achieve a specific system of measures that will take account of all the limitations suffered in those regions , whose situation is special , without damaging the coherence of Community law and the internal market .

For these reasons , Mr Turco ' s report on the 1998 annual report on such important financial instruments as the Structural Funds is also relevant , since it opens up the possibility of strengthening the effective and decentralised application of those Funds and also because it opens the way for discussion and reflects the specific situation of these outermost regions with regard to establishing criteria for admission to the Structural Funds and their inclusion in Objective 1 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been mentioned , the problem with this report is that it amounts to a retrospective review of a chapter in the history of the Structural Funds which has long since been closed , during the previous parliamentary term in fact .
This looks pretty boring , and the press have already gone home .
Nevertheless , we should not underestimate the seriousness of the issues involved , as the central point of this discussion should be to learn from the mistakes of the past .
In view of the challenge of an enlarged Union , which will in future have 28 or more Member States , we can no longer afford not to use European money for European objectives such as employment , sustainability , environmental protection and equal opportunities in an efficient way .
This was simply not the case during the last period .
I am emphasising this because I have the impression that the new programmes are once again being approved because of pressure from the Member States , although they do not provide for optimum use of funds in accordance with Europe ' s objectives .
And this Parliament has been calling for optimum use of funds for years .
We cannot afford , as we did in 1998 , to spend EUR 30.4 billion only to find that unemployment is increasing again in the poorer regions .
I would like to cite an example that underlines my doubts .
The Commission is simply not throwing its weight behind the need to make European objectives the real guiding principle of Structural Fund policy .
This House called for this report to include a chapter specifically devoted to equal opportunities .
The three sentences at the beginning are not enough , we asked for a specific chapter , so that we could monitor this area of EU policy separately and effectively .
Equality of opportunities is not just the remit of the ESF , it is the remit of all the Structural Funds .
Let me give you another example . Although unemployment is rising in Germany ' s five new Länder , money is once again being invested in roads instead of jobs in the new Community support framework .
I expect the Commission to drop its " business as usual " approach and instead to become the motor of sustainable development in Europe again .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is once again time for us to consider a Commission report on the implementation of Structural Funds appropriations , this time for 1998 , and to express the views of our group .
The rapporteur , whom I would like to thank very warmly , depicts very varied trends in expenditure under the Structural Funds . The picture is one of some positive aspects compared with previous years , combined with continuing problems .
I would like to concentrate on two issues .
The first is that EU financial resources have undeniably led to a process of recovery in the poorest regions and Member States .
Nevertheless , the gap between the least and most developed regions of the Community has scarcely decreased .
That means that disparities in regional development continue to exist , even if the overall level is higher .
This is of course totally unsatisfactory as far as I and my group are concerned .
And this dissatisfaction is all the greater when you consider that the continuing regional differences , as measured in income per capita , are particularly reflected in unemployment figures .
Even though there has been a reduction in unemployment in the EU in absolute terms in recent months , the total number of people without jobs is still far too high .
In Germany alone there are still over 3.8 million unemployed , and the employment rate is still markedly higher .
If we were to use this issue alone to gauge the success of Structural Fund policy , we would pass a devastatingly negative judgment on it .
Secondly , the problems of unemployment , which are not tackled under the Structural Funds alone , underscore the importance of efficient coordination of the implementation of funds from the various EU and national support programmes and of restructuring and allocating more money to all those funds that generate new jobs.As the rapporteur rightly emphasises , there was some progress in this area in 1998 , but it was still far from adequate .
In view of all the difficulties which undeniably exist , I regard this as a key starting point for greater effectiveness and thus more efficient use of the appropriations implemented , and I believe that this is something that people hit by unemployment in the various countries would welcome .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is important to take proper stock of the application of the Structural Funds regulations , which remain a fundamental instrument of European policy for reducing inequality .
That stocktaking can help us correct any past excesses and learn to manage present and future appropriations better .
We learn that the implementation rate for programmes in 1998 remained satisfactory , although only slightly under 90 % of total support was achieved for commitments , and 61 % for payments .
That is why we support Mr Maurice Turco ' s report , and he is to be congratulated for approaching this issue pragmatically and without complacency .
Moreover , this report reveals some mismanagement in the allocation of the Structural Funds .
Beyond the overall picture , considerable differences in implementation have persisted between the different objectives as well as between the Member States and the regions .
The difference between the budgetary appropriations and the final implementation remains a problem particularly affecting Objective 2 .
Moreover the full utilisation of the Structural Funds in 1998 , or at least in terms of the percentages mentioned earlier , has only been possible thanks to a compensation mechanism for under-implementation , such as major transfer of credits from Objective 2 to Objective 1 .
We denounce this type of practice as lacking in transparency .
Furthermore , we ask for a fairer distribution of expenditure , more transparency in the allocation and control of the funds , better eligibility criteria , a reduction in the number of priority objectives and Community initiatives .
We also think a reduction in the programmes involved would lead to greater effectiveness in their implementation and the possibility of stricter control .
To this effect , we join the rapporteur in asking the Commission to strengthen its control and inform Parliament of the results of its audits and assessments .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report which not only highlights the importance of the Structural Funds but also a series of problems .
I would firstly likely to remind you that the objective of the Funds is to strengthen economic and social cohesion in the European Union and that , while it is true that the GDP per capita in the regions with the lowest rate increased by 9 % between 1986 and 1996 , over the same period the income per capita in the four poorest countries rose by 8 % .
Nevertheless , the difference when compared to the 25 richest regions continues to be the same : two and a half times .
These figures should lead us to consider the fact that , while the level and quality of life in the poorest regions is increasing , we have not managed to reduce the disparities between the richest and the poorest regions of the European Union .
A second factor is that only 10 % of the interventions from the Funds correspond to local development measures , despite the fact that most population and poverty is found in urban centres .
To this data we must also add a factor which will distort the statistics and will change the landscape of the European Union in the next few years , i.e. the incorporation of the new Member States .
All of these issues point to the need for a series of criteria to be taken into account in the future .
Firstly , we must leave room for prioritising the interventions relating to urban development .
Secondly , we need to develop policies which will reduce the disparities between the richest countries and the poorest countries .
Thirdly , we must show greater sensitivity towards phenomena which have been ignored in the European Union , such as insularity and isolation .
Lastly , we must take account of all sections of the population with the real objective of creating ever more employment , especially in the least-favoured regions .
Mr President , Commissioner , as someone with a local government background , I should like to stress the need for local government agencies to become more involved at all levels , particularly when programmes are being formulated and implemented .
This is how the required partnership is implemented and integrated , provided of course that the Commission and the state are actively involved .
I should also like to stress the need for greater coordination between European regional policy and other Community policies and between the Structural Funds and other funding mechanisms .
I should like to use the short time available to me to stress how important it is to uphold the principle of additionality and express the view that , despite the development over time of verification methods , it is impossible to compare Member States on this issue , due to the lack of a common methodology .
Thus , we cannot logically adopt a proposal to impose sanctions in cases of non-compliance with this principle until a legal base has been adopted and a common methodology agreed .
The principle of additionality must be taken into serious account and I believe that the Member States and the Commission , in the light of forthcoming enlargement , will have to work together to draw up and adopt guidelines defining a more integrated approach to verifying the application of this principle , taking into account , of course , the particular economic situation in each Member State .
In closing , I feel I must congratulate the rapporteur on his comprehensive report and stress the fact that on the whole , the implementation of the programmes financed by the various funds was on the right track in 1998 , the year covered by the report and a good year overall , in which the relative delays of previous years were recouped .
Only when it came to monitoring interventions was 1998 a poor year .
There seems to be a problem with this generally , perhaps due to a lack of staff , and the Commission must ensure that it takes the measures needed to ensure that the implementation of European policies continues to be monitored .
Mr President , Commissioner , I especially welcome paragraph 20 on additionality and hope very much that the Commission will take particular account of the importance of transparency .
I would add that this should also relate to the question of whether the principle is being complied with , not just overall by Member States , but at regional levels within them .
I would also ask the Commission to consider introducing a little more flexibility at the stage when projects are being set up .
I am thinking of one very worthy project within my own constituency which , because of the very short timetable and a misunderstanding , did not enable contracts to be drawn up by the end of December last year .
The offer of funding was consequently withdrawn .
I do not dispute that this decision was correct and I understand the Commission 's wish to ensure that projects are completed in time .
The sad thing about this particular decision was that the project clearly would have been .
Finally , I believe that there is a great deal of merit in Amendment No 5 .
If I understand what is being asked for correctly , the practice already applies in Scotland .
Management at this level allows for a high degree of coordination and exchange of best practice between those involved .
It also encourages pioneering activities .
I offer as an example our Objective 3 partnership 's development of a tool kit for gender mainstreaming in structural funding .
I understand that serious consideration is already being given to its use in other parts of the European Union .
May I please ask the Commission to think very carefully about the merits of taking on board Amendment No 5 .
Mr President , I am very grateful to my colleague and friend Mrs Attwooll for her remarks about Amendment No 5 , which is in the name of my colleagues , Nogueira Román and Ortuondo Larrea .
I should also like to commend to the House Amendments Nos 4 , 6 and 7 , also in their names , which strengthen and underline important points in the report .
But I make no apology for coming back to Amendment No 5 in the sense in which Mrs Attwooll spoke of it .
It is vital for the concept of subsidiarity to be brought into the heart of our notion of structural funding and for the regional , local and national authorities within Member States to be fully engaged in the process of implementing the structural funds and applying them .
As paragraphs 20 and 21 say , the additionality principle has not been operating with an effective , transparent style up to now .
Several speakers in this debate have drawn attention to that .
Perhaps Commissioner Barnier will not be surprised if I bang home again on the point that whatever might have been the failures of the past , he has the opportunity to make successes in the future and to ensure that the additionality principle is not just a formal principle requiring Member States to satisfy certain budgetary conditions in a global way .
Rather it should become a substantive principle built into the idea of subsidiarity which he and President Prodi are researching so that at regional and national level within Member States we can see that the funds really are being used to enhance and improve development .
Mr President , the main conclusion to be drawn is that , in 10 years of Structural Funds , no real progress has been made in closing the huge gap between the per capita income of the richest and the poorest regions of the European Union .
Not only have we failed to achieve the main purpose of the Structural Funds , i.e. to help reduce regional disparities and achieve economic and social cohesion ; in numerous cases , the situation has worsened and the gulf between the regions lagging behind and the developed areas has widened both in rural areas , especially island and mountain regions , and also in urban areas , which are plagued by mass and long-term unemployment , poverty , and a scarcity , or in many cases , a total lack of basic infrastructures .
The report under discussion makes a number of critical observations and evaluations which are heading in the right direction and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on that .
However , the reality of the situation is even worse .
The lack of planning and transparency and the huge number of irregularities and cases of fraud in implementing the programmes , which have helped swell the coffers of parasitical undertakings , have actually widened the gap instead of fostering cohesion . In fact , the Structural Funds have , on numerous occasions , been used as a means of eroding cohesion and fostering asymmetric development .
Greece is a typical example of this : in 1996 , only two Greek regions were classified among the ten poorest regions in the European Union . However , the following year , a total of seven Greek regions were amongst the eleven poorest regions .
Epirus acquired the dubious accolade of being the poorest region in the European Union .
The scarcity of resources under the Damoclean sword of Agenda 2000 and persistent cutbacks in order to satisfy other requirements , such as enlargement , do nothing to strengthen cohesion or stabilize development levels ; on the contrary , they help set further socio-economic degeneration of the regions in motion .
President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this Sixth Periodic Report on the social and economic situation of the regions of the Union , which was adopted last year by the Commission , indicated that the 25 richest regions of the European Union still had an average GDP per head that was two and a half times higher than that in the 25 poorest regions , and my fellow Members have also reminded us of this .
The development gap between the Member States has certainly been reduced , but there are still disparities between the regions , not only with regard to the GDP per head , but also , particularly , in terms of unemployment .
Despite the economic upturn , the unemployment rate in the Union as a whole stood at around 10 % at the end of 1998 .
Moreover , the distribution of unemployment is extremely uneven .
Whereas the 25 regions least affected are experiencing a relative stabilisation of the rate at around 3 or 4 % , the trend has not been reversed in the 25 worst affected regions , with a rate which is still higher than 20 % .
In its 1998Annual Report on the Structural Funds , the Commission notes , rightly so , that high regional unemployment leads to social exclusion , hence making unemployment even more resistant to economic improvement .
An integrated strategy combining measures to boost the economic base of the regions and measures to improve access to the job market , particularly through training , is essential if this situation is to be resolved .
It therefore seems to me that structural actions must continue to step up their efficacy and impact in terms of job creation in order to sustain the current economic growth , especially in the regions most affected by unemployment .
Furthermore , the work carried out under the European Spatial Development Perspective follows the development of the organisation of the European territory from a traditional , rather centralised model , towards a polycentric model which is the only way to promote a more balanced geographical distribution of work in Europe .
The Commission has promised that the emphasis in the new programming period for the Structural Funds will be on improving transport networks , particularly in the peripheral or outermost regions , and on creating sustainable and effective transport systems that provide a balance between the different modes of transport .
I must stress particularly that the priority objective of this increased coordination should be to reduce structural divergences between the central part of the Union and the peripheral and outermost regions , as specified in one of the amendments adopted by my committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate Mr Mauro Turco on his excellent work . His report states clearly that the results of the 1994-9 Structural Funds programming period , taking into account the assessments available at the end of 1998 , have not met expectations on a number of fronts .
This is particularly true in the case of Italy .
Suffice it to say that there was a considerable delay in the use of many of the appropriations , although improvement was apparent at the end of the programming period , obtained purely by mathematical calculation through transferring Objective 2 appropriations to Objective 1 .
Suffice it to say that , as far as Objective 4 is concerned , in 1998 , Italy did not fulfil any of its undertakings and has only paid out 3 % of the funding .
The checking and assessment mechanisms have been decidedly inadequate .

There are essentially three reasons for this poor management and they were highlighted by the Court of Auditors : firstly , lack of planning and poor interaction between the measures funded and the various funding instruments , factors which prevented us achieving the expected added value ; secondly , lack of global vision which meant that the projects defined were not ambitious enough ; thirdly , delays in concluding previous projects and programmes , largely due to the absence of documents justifying the actual expenditure .

Now , considering the forthcoming 2000-2006 programming period , even though management has been simplified and the number of objectives and Community initiatives reduced , I cannot contain my concern and I sympathise with many regional council chairmen as they tackle the issue of the failure to use Community funds and the responsibilities of the Italian Government .
Months after the rejection by the European Commission of the Objective 2 area map it had put forward on the grounds that the area definition criteria did not correspond , the Italian Government had still not presented a valid , compliant proposal , and this was not for lack of good will on the part of the European Commission .
The result is certainly not outstanding .
We cannot afford to lose more time , and we cannot afford to decline ITL 10 000 billion either ; neither the Italian economic situation nor the Italian taxpayer would allow it .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Barnier .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
Topical and Urgent Debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Basic freedoms in Serbia and Kosovo
Mr President , in some language versions the motions are shown as being tabled on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists by Mr Wiersma and by a certain Mr Sumberg , who does not , however , belong to our group .
I , at any rate , have not changed my name .
I am still called Swoboda and I am also proud of this typical German name .
I would be grateful if this could be corrected where it is wrongly shown .
Thank you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have just had a chance to speak with some young lawyers from Serbia , who gave us an impressive account of the hopeless situation in their country .
So I am glad to come back to today ' s subject , the complete lack of press freedom and access to information there .
The population only gets information from the subjective viewpoint of Mr Milosevic and his wife Mrs Markovic .
Anyone who sees the facts as they are is treated as a traitor to the Serbian people and a NATO lackey .
One of the young Serbian women told me that it is extraordinarily difficult for her to explain to her grandmother why she opposes Milosevic , as her grandmother only has her own information and experiences to go by .
This means that she cannot understand why this young woman is involved in the OTPOR organisation .
We must help the independent democratic media in Serbia so that they can provide accurate information as far as possible , and so that democracy may yet blossom in Serbia .
I would also like to say , however , that we naturally expect the " opposition press " , or what remains of it , to denounce the current irregularities in political leadership in the city of Belgrade , for example , which is governed by the MRS , just as much as it justifiably criticises the Milosevic regime .
As long as it does not do this and is blind to other shortcomings , it is not an independent medium .
I would also like to draw honourable Members ' attention to the following point : given that we are now hearing suggestions that Mr Draskovic is once again on the way to collaborating with Mr Milosevic , we have to be very careful about who we give help to .
OTPOR , the real resistance group in Serbia , which grew out of the student movement , is as at present being prevented by Milosevic from registering as an organisation .
Nevertheless , this will not stop it organising demonstrations and displays of good will on the streets of Belgrade and elsewhere in Serbia .
Next weekend , our delegation will be travelling to Montenegro , and on Sunday will be holding talks with representatives of OTPOR and of the opposition .
We will , of course , take this opportunity to sound out what scope there is for supporting them .
A contributory factor to the lack of freedom in that country is the Serbian University Law promulgated in October 1998 , since when many professors have been removed from their posts .
They are forbidden to give lectures and they have been removed from their posts because of allegedly inadequate qualifications .
It is evident what is going on if I tell you that one of these allegedly unqualified professors is now a professor at the Universities of Saarbrücken and Berlin .
I find it hard to imagine that these universities would employ unqualified Serbian professors .
But , of course , they did not fit in with Milosevic ' s doctrines .
On the other hand , I have to tell you - because we here do not get to know everything that you can only find out by talking with people on the spot - that the extremist nationalist politician Selesj is currently a university professor in the law faculty .
You can imagine how they rate quality there !
Today ' s debate is , of course , first and foremost concerned with conditions in Serbian prisons .
There are over 2 000 Kosovo Albanians held in Serbian prisons , most of them since spring 1999 , that is before the NATO offensive .
The situation in these prisons is indescribable .
The people have received no legal representation .
If they are then sentenced , this happens with total disregard for the law .
Let me remind you about Flora Brovina , the doctor who did nothing more than respect her professional ethics as a doctor , by helping people regardless of their nationality .
She was sentenced to 14 years in prison in Serbia , in Nis .
The prisons are certainly not in line with any convention , and contravene the Geneva Convention .
There is horrifying torture and abuse , and the world is simply looking on .
A fortnight ago , I visited Kosovo with 12 colleagues , and that was when Kosovo Albanians gave us these 75 000 signatures .
We have brought them here because we want to demonstrate the enormity and the awfulness of the situation of people who have been trying to find out for at least one and a half years where their relatives are - their fathers , their brothers or even their children .
I do not think that we can simply file these 75 000 signatures away .
We must attempt to at least give these people some certainty about where these missing persons are , what prisons they are in or where they met their death .
That is the picture in Serbia .
In Kosovo , which we also visited , although the situation is different , there are similar problems .
We went to Kosovo last year because we wanted to help the Kosovo Albanians who for ten years have suffered under an apartheid-like regime to obtain attention .
The aim we are working towards now in Kosovo is to achieve peaceful coexistence between the majority Albanian population and minorities who are also entitled to live there , be they Serbs , Ashkali or Roma .
I believe that we should focus our attention on ensuring that coexistence is possible there .
There were many incidents during the last few days of our visit there , and these are occurring again now .
There have been murders of Serbs over the last few days .
Nobody can say who committed them , but someone is responsible for the fact that a Serb - or even several Serbs - is murdered somewhere every day .
We condemn these acts , indeed we condemned them on the spot , and have done so here on several occasions .
We call on everyone in positions of responsibility , and now above all Kosovo Albanians , to ensure that when the occasion arises their compatriots behave in a restrained manner and prevent this sort of conduct against minorities .
We did not come to the aid of the Kosovo Albanians so that they could make the life of minorities in Kosovo hell .
It also has to be said , because we do not know who the culprits are , that it cannot , of course , be ruled out some of the people responsible for these acts are possibly being infiltrated into Kosovo from Serbia as agents provocateurs , because they simply do not want peace in Kosovo .
All of us in the European Union , and also UNMIK , must take swift action in that region now .
UNMIK must ensure that there is a legal framework , so that the culprits can be caught , put behind bars and punished .
But in Kosovo there is also the problem of missing Serbs , which we are all familiar with .
We call on the Kosovo Albanians to speak now and to inform the Red Cross if they know anything about the whereabouts of these Serbs and people of other nationalities , so as to put an end to this uncertainty .
The few Serbs in Kosovo who want to work with the administration of course also have a problem .
They are viewed as traitors by some of their own compatriots .
That being the case , we must help these well intentioned Serbs to achieve some positive results , so that their cooperation is clearly of some benefit for the Serbian population .
We must try to ensure greater police protection .
That is why I appeal to all the Member States to send as many police officers as possible to Kosovo , in order to guarantee protection for minorities also .
Mr President , freedom of the media lies at the heart of democracy .
If the opposition has no opportunity to express its opinion , if a public debate about society is no longer possible , then you are looking at total dictatorship .
And I know just how painful that is from personal experience .
I also know how hard it is to act as opposition in this situation , and not to despair or give up .
The transformation of society for which we are looking to the opposition there is virtually impossible under these circumstances .
That much should be clear to us .
It is virtually impossible because people stand a good chance of ending up in prison if they act in the interests of democracy .
And it will be extremely difficult to intervene from outside , because the human right of freedom of expression is simply declared illegal .
Therefore - and I am addressing this comment to the Commission in particular - we need all our imagination , flexibility and creativity to development instruments which will nevertheless enable us to support the opposition in this situation .
It is not impossible to transform society even in these circumstances , as we saw 11 years ago .
That is what we have to concentrate on .
We should not always let bureaucratic obstacles get in the way .
We really must find out what can be done under European mechanisms .
And the answer is that they allow more to be done than has been evident up to now .
It is also important to give these signals , because otherwise the opposition feels isolated and loses all its drive .
If that happened things would be much , much more difficult and would take much longer .
Mrs Pack has made it plain that the situation in the prisons is appalling and that for the inmates every day is one day too many .
I therefore call on the Commission to take every opportunity , in all its talks with representatives of the Serbian Government or embassies , to present the list of prisoners and to request information on each prisoner .
We are talking about human beings , and it is a humanitarian act to press for these people to be released and united with their families one day .
I also wish to call on the Commission to offer indirect financial support to those organisations which are trying to draw up lists , to organise prison visits and to care for the families .
It is enormously important to provide this humanitarian support , and this will also strengthen the democratic forces in Serbia .
With regard to Kosovo , after one year that region has still not reached the position we would have liked to see .
It is a great disappointment for me that there is such great hatred that it is not possible for Serbs , Roma and other minorities to live in peace in Kosovo although they are under an international protectorate .
It is humiliating that we have not succeeded in promoting tolerance or at least cohabitation in this area .
For the sake of the credibility of the international community it is therefore a matter of urgency for us to protect the minorities and give them genuine opportunities for living and working there .
And this is also important for me because I believe that otherwise everything that happened a year ago will lose credibility .
It is therefore vital for us to do more in this area and to endeavour to make it clear in the public arena that it is unacceptable for people belonging to a different race to be driven out of Kosovo .
The Serbs , Roma and other minorities have a right to live there !
Mr President , fellow Members , this resolution deals in a meticulous way with a number of practical problems .
I shall not repeat them , as our president , Doris Pack , has explained them better than we could .
I would just like to highlight the issue of Kosovar prisoners , as did Mrs Schroedter .
This is a fundamental problem and we must persevere in our actions , even if we know that we do not have many weapons to influence the Belgrade regime .
Obviously , there is also all the repression in Serbia .
But for the first time , I will admit that I cherish a certain optimism , given the way the Belgrade regime is developing , that it will collapse in the near future .
In particular , I am thinking of the student movement , the virtually underground OTPOR movement , and on this subject , I think that the relentlessness with which it is suppressed and monitored by Milosevic ' s henchmen is a good indicator of its power .
Having said this , I think it is time for the European Parliament and also the Commission and the Council to engage in a debate - and I know that the president of our delegation does not entirely share this point of view - on the future status of Kosovo , the future status of Bosnia , and therefore also , directly , that of Serbia .
The uncertainty surrounding the definitive status of Kosovo today is a source of instability , an incentive to extremists of all types , an obstacle to development , because this situation certainly does not encourage foreign investment .
There is another fact that merits our attention : the presence , in a country with less than two million inhabitants , of over fifty thousand westerners with a standard of living 10 , 15 , 20 times higher than that of the Kosovars , cannot but present many problems in terms of discrimination and inequality , and is not without secondary effects that are not always as secondary as all that , and are in fact very serious and often very problematic , or even truly adverse .
Having said that , I am not questioning the role of the KFOR , the role of the United Nations in Kosovo , at all , but we cannot consider and plan an " occupation " of Kosovo for many years without running serious risks .
We must therefore unreservedly confront the issue of the final status of what was formerly Yugoslavia .
Six years after the signature of the Dayton agreements in 1995 , with a Bosnia that is still not a country where things run smoothly , with a Bosnia comprising two or even three entities , we must urgently put an end to all these problems and the Commission and the Council must urgently propose ways of overcoming these situations which were designed to be interim situations .
We must propose ways out of the situation in order to create a conditions which might form a basis for imagining the integration of these countries into the European Union .
In particular , I do not think we can avoid the idea of a federation between Kosovo and Albania , nor can we avoid associations between certain parts of Bosnia and Serbia .
This is the result of a policy which we , the radicals , definitely did not want , but which the international community wanted , and to which we can no longer turn a blind eye .
Mr President , a year ago , the current NATO General Secretary , George Robertson , described the task in Kosovo clearly and succinctly in the following terms : " The objective is to get the Serbs out , NATO in and the Albanians home " .
It was successful and a victory for justice and human rights .
I was there before the war began . At that time , the Serbs had already driven 200 000 to 300 000 people from their homes and had ravaged and laid waste whole areas of the country .
And I was there again a couple of weeks ago and can testify to the enormous change for the better which has occurred thanks to NATO ' s intervention .
I can also testify to the incredibly efficient work being done by KFOR , the UN mission ( UNMIK ) and the UNMIK police .
I can , unfortunately , also testify to what the debate here ought especially to be about , namely the fact that it is now the Serbs who are being persecuted by people who act with spite towards them , throw stones at them , burn their houses down and attempt to drive them from their homes .
Now , it is the Serbs who need our attention .
The police are doing everything possible , but nothing like the promised number of police has arrived .
The EU countries , in particular , have gone back on their promise . Only one fifth of the police force comes from EU countries .
That is partly why the former liberation organisation , the KLA is all too easily able to engage in anti-Serbian and criminal activities , which presumably also include murder , arson and attempts to drive people from their homes .
So , what is now needed may be expressed as succinctly as a year ago : the objective is to get the KLA out , the police in and the Serbs home to those places in which they have always lived in Kosovo .
The KLA must be disarmed and stripped of any monopoly position in the coming election campaign . They must also be divested of the special privileges they have evidently been given when it comes to recruiting for the new police force .
The KLA ' s criminal activity must be brought to an end .
The EU countries must send more police and judges .
The Serbs must be helped to return home .
Attempts must also be made to help groups of Serbs in Serbia itself . In turn , it must be absolutely clear that the election planned for October in Kosovo must be held , irrespective of whether the Kosovan Serbs boycott it , for what are especially needed are Albanians , who are accountable .
At the moment , all Albanians have been turned into clients and can blame everyone else for terrorism , street fights etc .
What we need is to arrange for the Albanian majority to be held accountable .
Mr President , one year on from the end of the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia , the situation is unstable and the opposing forces in Serbia are giving increasing cause for concern .
The daily news is witness to the oppressive actions of the Yugoslavian government .
Opposition is struck down and intimidated in the ways traditionally adopted by governments who feel insecure : newspapers and radio stations are closed down , equipment confiscated , various groups and non-governmental organisations intimidated and there are random arrests and trials with unjustified sentences such as the case of Flora Brovina .
Many of the men , women and students who are victims of oppression today are the same people who have courageously spoken up in these past years , calling for peace , freedom and respect for human rights , and who have , in reality , been abandoned even by Europe .
However , the situation in Kosovo is equally worrying , where the oppressed have become the oppressors , and this has been said by Kofi Annan , Solana and Kouchner .
In the space of a year , 240 000 Serbs , Roma , Gorancs and Jews have fled from Kosovo in terror .
And those who have remained are regularly attacked and , in many cases , killed .
The most recent UNHCR / OSCE report states clearly that , in Kosovo , minorities have no access to education , health and public services and no freedom of movement .
And it is not only the minorities who are in this situation : even the Albanian Kosovars who are openly against the vendettas or for democracy in Kosovo live under threat and in fear of their lives .
Leaders such as Rugova are familiar with the situation , but even more in touch are those women who , together with Serbian , Bosnian and European women - the ' Women in Black ' against war - have in recent years managed to maintain relations and build peaceful bridges .
Some of them have had to leave Kosovo and others have been forced to remain silent .
In Serbia , the centre of the ' Women in Black ' is currently under threat of closure .
In my opinion , Europe , and , in particular , the 19 NATO countries , should undertake a large-scale self-appraisal operation and revise its policies .
The crimes and unlawful acts committed by NATO against civilians are now universally acknowledged .
In the interests of the protection of human rights , we must not violate international regulations and we must start by observing the Geneva Convention .
At this point , let us mention fundamental freedoms : for these freedoms to be established the embargo policy must be abolished .
We must not treat civilians in this way , and the democratic Serbian opposition which is still today at the mercy of Milosevic is calling for us to change our policy .
It may be that we should be the ones to give them strong support in Serbia and Kosovo .
We owe it to ourselves , but , most of all , we owe it to a wonderful little boy from Kosovo called Felt who said to me while we were eating an ice-cream one day : ' This war has turned us all into nastier people ' .
Mr President , the situation is indeed serious in both Serbia and Kosovo but , today , I would like to concentrate on the situation in Serbia and would like to concur with what Mrs Pack , the chairperson of our delegation for the region , has said on the matter .
It is with growing frustration that we have to note that the situation in Serbia is deteriorating by the day .
Milosevic is creating dictatorial conditions , a country governed by security troops , State media and State terror .
He shies away from a democratic confrontation with the opposition .
Every day , we are confronted with examples of repression .
The independent media are thwarted .
A very negative trend is setting in .
Politicians are under threat .
There is a murderous atmosphere .
The assaults are relentless .
The student movement , OTPOR , on which the opposition is pinning all hope , is being attacked without mercy .
CCL recently branded them terrorists .
Measures are also being prepared against the universities so as to force students to keep calm .
All in all , a situation is being created in which democracy is becoming a farce and the regime is trying to keep a grip on the situation by means of totalitarian manipulation .
We are sitting on the sidelines and can do all too little to bolster the democratic powers .
We have insufficient direct influence on the situation in Serbia itself .
It is nonetheless important that we express our indignation once again today .
We need to remain involved , and it is also useful that we , as a Parliament , are here today expressing our broad consensus on the situation and on how the situation in Serbia is to be addressed .
The opposition in Serbia needs us .
A great deal of aid has been set aside for Serbia within the framework of the Stability Pact .
The money concerned cannot be spent until Belgrade makes a U-turn , but that will only happen if the opposition can express itself .
As Mrs Schroedter has already mentioned , we are asking the Commission to make a huge effort and employ a great deal of creativity in order to help the towns in Serbia which support the opposition .
But in addition to this , it must also be possible to give the independent media some backing .
Is the Commission prepared to cooperate in setting up radio and TV facilities which can reach the Serbian population from outside that country ?
In my opinion , this proposal is worth a very serious effort .
Mr President , we have heard here about the brutal and wide-scale repression of the freedom of the media in Serbia , and in fact Belgrade ' s Radio B92 was closed down during the May part-session here in Strasbourg . Since then a whole series of repressive measures has been taken against the independent media and against the student movement OTPOR , whose leaders have been unlawfully persecuted , excluded from university and taken into custody .
We are calling for their release and we are demanding freedom of the media , but we must of course do something practical .
I welcome the fact that Mr Wiersma has taken on board something which I also wanted to see in this resolution , which is that we must we must support independent broadcasting stations in the territory surrounding Serbia just as much as we support the few remaining independent media still existing within Serbia itself .
I come from Munich , and Munich has for decades been the home of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty , which have been a voice of freedom for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Following the fall of Communism , President Havel said that these stations , which now also broadcast from Prague , played a leading part in establishing freedom and the rule of law there .
But it was up to the Americans to do that - Radio Free Europe was created at the time by the Americans .
We in the European Union today have a chance to do the same for a small part of Europe as the Americans did for Central and Eastern Europe . I have in mind creating independent broadcasting stations in Hungary , Romania , Montenegro and Albania which will be an independent voice and a source of information for the Serbian people .
We must make one thing crystal clear once and for all : our criticism has never been aimed at the people of Serbia , but against those in power who are abusing the name of the Serbian people for their own criminal ends .
We must draw a distinction between the people and the regime , and we must support the people and we must give them information and an independent voice .
We have some opportunities here .
We must at the same time be very much aware that the issue of protecting minorities also affects Serbia .
Not only do people frequently forget about the minorities in Vojvodina , but there is already a stream of refugees and expellees flowing into Kosovo from the border region of Serbia which has an Albanian population .
The Albanians driven out of core Serbia scarcely get a mention in our media , yet they are significantly aggravating the situation in this region .
We are , of course , also championing all the media and supporting all the minorities in Kosovo , and Mrs Pack has already pointed out that in practice there is not only tension between Albanians and Serbs in Kosovo , but there are also Serbs persecuting other Serbs because they are regarded as collaborators since they are willing to participate in the process of reconstructing Kosovo and reconciliation between the peoples of Kosovo .
The issue of those held in prison is an important one , and I would like to add to what Olivier Dupuis said on this : there are many people in Serbia who have been carried off into custody , and about whose fate we know nothing .
I would like to mention Ukshin Hoti , whose release we have repeatedly called for in this House : we do not know if he is alive at all or if he is being detained somewhere . We are calling for him to be released as a matter of urgency .
His family hopes that he is alive and we must continue to draw attention to the fate of this famous civil rights campaigner , who for a time was the Foreign Minister of the democratic government in Kosovo .
In this context I would like to make it very clear that it is crucial for us not just to point the finger of blame at others , but also to fulfil our own obligations .
This region is , of course , marked by criminality , hatred and conflicts , but if we do not even send two-thirds of the police officers we have promised to the area , so that a whole shift is missing in this crisis region , and on top of that there is no night shift , and all this happens simply because we are not meeting our own obligations , then we can scarcely point the finger of blame at others . Instead we should now ensure that we build up this region ' s police force and administration .
Without an operational police force and at least the rudiments of the rule of law , there is no hope of peace in Kosovo between individuals and between ethnic groups .
There is also the point that Olivier Dupuis made so clearly .
There may be differences of opinion about ways and means , but we should be united on the essentials .
We can no longer dodge the vital issue , which is the very future of Kosovo !
Mr President , we find ourselves gazing with bewilderment at each new act by the Milosevic regime , acts against its own people .
Today , no one is safe from attack , whether he belongs to the majority or the minority in Yugoslavia .
That is why I think it is important to maintain constant contact with the opposition and to attempt to bring about a change in the political scene .
I also believe that it is absolutely right that the Commission also wishes to make a relatively large amount of money available if these changes should come about ; many people regard such a large amount as being quite appropriate in view of the requirements .
I hope that the Commission and Parliament will remain resolute in facing up to the Council , which is taking a rather softer line here .
I also believe that funding for increased information provision should be implemented here and now , so as to provide more objective information about the actual conditions in the Balkans .
The situation in Kosovo today is different .
Whereas before it was the majority that was in great danger , now it is the minorities who are living in difficult circumstances .
This is just as unacceptable as the previous situation was .
We are unanimous in advocating the rights of all the people living both in this region and in other regions , so that they can live their lives freely and move about at will .
Against this background , I am sceptical to say the least about the elections and their results .
At the very least we should see these for what they are - an election decided by the Albanians , that is by that predominant part of the population which can move freely within this region . This does not apply to Serbs living in Kosovo , nor indeed to those Serbs who have fled Kosovo and are now living in Yugoslavia .
However , the really critical issue - and I urge the Commission and the Council to really knuckle down to things here - is that more police and greater rule of law are needed .
We are responsible for the rule of law applying to everyone in Kosovo on a uniform basis .
Mr President , quite recently , and to mark the anniversary of the end of NATO ' s airstrikes on Yugoslavia , there has been growing public condemnation of the international community ' s intervention in Kosovo and of the tragic situation which has developed in the region .
In his annual report , the UN Secretary-General notes that , one year on from the deployment of KFOR , we face a well-developed , organised and well-orchestrated campaign against the Serbs and other ethnic groups in Kosovo , which is undermining confidence in the future and transforming Kosovo into a breeding ground for retaliation and crime .
The UN High Commissioner and the OSCE have condemned the fact that , one year on from the arrival of the KFOR forces in the area , the minorities living in Kosovo , mainly Serbs and Gypsies , are still unprotected .
Even Amnesty International , which throughout the whole of the criminal NATO bombings in the region , only saw Milosevic ' s crimes ( with or without quotation marks ) , has now discovered that NATO committed war crimes in Kosovo resulting in the mass murder of civilians .
Only the European Parliament seems incapable , including in today ' s resolution , of drawing any conclusions from the tragic situation which has arisen in this area as a result of the military incursions of NATO forces into an independent Member State of the UN , in violation of the fundamental principles of international law .
It seems that the witch hunt in which all the main political forces of the European Union have joined still continues to inspire the European Parliament , making it incapable of assuming its historical responsibility towards those who elect it for safeguarding peace and the rights of the people of the Balkans to live in peace and dignity and to uphold their right to be masters of their own destiny , not the geopolitical pawns of the new imperialist world order .
Will we , as the European Parliament , ever be able to assume our responsibilities and understand that , while we talk of rights and democracy in certain regions , while we subsidize intervention in local elections in Montenegro and while we support the embargo on Iraq , condemning hundreds of thousands of children to death , we have no credibility whatsoever ?
Will we ever be able to say , we are putting an end to the embargo ?
That is the question which at some point will need an answer .
Mr President , we have before us two resolutions on fundamental freedoms in Serbia and Kosovo .
In this respect , I much prefer the joint motion for a resolution to the proposal submitted by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
After all , the resolution speaks out unmistakably about the undemocratic nature of the Milosevic regime in Belgrade and the means it deploys in order to exercise power .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the other hand , does not seem to see any direct link between the continuous presence of Slobodan Milosevic on the political stage of the Balkans and the continuing instability in the region , one year on from the end of NATO ' s intervention against Serbia ' s ethnic cleansing which affected Kosovo on a massive scale .
I would like to illustrate this link by referring to the position of Mrs Rada Trajkovic from Grazanica .
This medical doctor forms part of the political leadership of the moderate Serbs in Kosovo .
Her now suspended cooperation with UNMIK led to anonymous threats by the Serbs , because the Milosevic arm stretches far for the time being .
At the same time , the whole of the Serbian minority in Kosovo remains just as vulnerable to acts of terrorism committed by Albanian extremists .
Both motions for a resolution therefore underline the international guarantees of this minority ' s physical safety - and rightly so .
In this connection , I would like to make a critical comment on Paragraph 14 of the joint motion for a resolution .
This clause calls for promoting reconstruction projects with EU aid , specifically in those areas of Kosovo where human rights and the rights of minorities are being fully respected and where democratic principles are guaranteed .
In my opinion , this is an impossible criterion for granting aid , given the current situation .
Remember , only one act of terrorism committed by an Albanian or Serb is all it takes to cause a setback within an entire region .
Or do those drafting the joint resolutions have specific arguments underlying this proposal in Paragraph 14 ?
Commendably enough , the joint resolution presses for actual international attempts at ethnic conciliation and cooperation within Kosovo .
How difficult this is was once again reinforced by the boos and hisses that rained down on the so-called " Mandela of Kosovo " , Adem Demaci , at the massive memorial service to commemorate NATO ' s troops entering Kosovo Polje one year ago .
Demaci spoke in the Pristina stadium : " Today , I call on all of you to fight a different battle , namely the battle for peace , for the future , for co-existence .
Do not forget the Serbian people who have stayed behind in Kosovo .
They find themselves in a difficult situation .
Even the Serbian regime would prefer it if they were not there .
Help them .
They are despondent and fearful .
It is up to you to offer them safety and freedom .
Only then will you be able to enjoy your own freedom . "
It is exactly this disposition among both the Albanians and Serbs that justifies and inspires the European efforts within the Western Balkans .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to say that the political situation in the entire region we are discussing today by no means justifies complacency or even guarded optimism .
Quite the opposite - a realistic assessment suggests that there are only a few faint glimmers of hope on a dark horizon .
We are dealing with an ever more hard-line dictatorship in Serbia .
In Bosnia , the structures of civil society are still so weak that only the presence of international troops is preventing violence from breaking out .
In Kosovo , violence is a daily event , and the democratic forces in Montenegro are at risk from threats from outside and from polarisation within .
That is the situation we are dealing with .
Let there be no mistake about this : all this is due to the disastrous actions of one man , the clique surrounding him , and his regime - Milosevic .
The entire instability of the region is due to him .
As long as this regime continues to exist , so will the instability in this region .
Therefore the foremost demand that the European Union must make , again and again , and which it must back up with all the power at its disposal , is this : Milosevic must go !
The media of course play an important role in this context .
So it is not surprising that the Milosevic regime is now taking a harder line than before against the independent media .
As I see it , this is a sign of weakness .
A time when a regime has to repress any freedom of expression is a time when it feels particularly weak and under attack .
This is normally a sign of the beginning of the end .
But in this case , unfortunately , the end could last a very long time .
That is why it is right that demands are being made here for the European Union to use its resources to bolster the independent media in Serbia .
We have been doing that for years .
It is not , for example , as if objective reporting is not penetrating into the region .
We should not always hide our light under a bushel , and we should not always talk just about American broadcasters .
I must point out that there is a whole string of outstanding and skilled stations broadcasting to foreign countries which have for many years , and to an ever greater extent , been transmitting high-quality , objective and valuable programming to these regions , and they have received European support for this .
If it is possible to do yet more in this area , then the Commission is of course willing to look into this .
We have , of course , already reacted to media repression in many cases in the past .
And in the present situation the Commission has adopted and financed a whole raft of measures which I do not wish to describe in detail now , but which always aimed to enable independent media either to continue to appear , in the case of the print media , or to broadcast , in the case of audio-visual media , or else to open up alternative channels for the media .
This is part of the overall project developed by the EU to positively influence events in Serbia and to demonstrate that democracy really does have advantages for the public and is good and right .
Let me mention the other examples from this overall project .
First , there is of course the " Energy for Democracy " programme , under which cities governed by a democratic opposition are supplied with fuel oil in the winter .
Then there is the follow-up project in the area of education , entitled " Schools for a democratic Serbia " , which is currently being completed . And we are currently also discussing programmes run by the Member States themselves with organisations in Serbia and with the Member States , for example a programme entitled " Asphalt - roads to democracy " .
I believe that it is very important to demonstrate that democratic developments in Serbia will be rewarded and will receive a positive response .
Against this background I would like to stress that we regard it as being particularly important to strengthen and stabilise the democratic developments that have already started in Croatia , as Croatia in particular is also capable of exerting a positive influence on Serbia .
With regard to Montenegro , I must say that we certainly welcome the democratic way in which the most recent municipal elections in Podgorica and Herceg Novi have been conducted .
The very fact that these elections were held in near peaceful circumstances is unusual for this region , and we have to be grateful for small mercies .
Overall , the EU is supporting the democratic reform process in Montenegro in a wide-ranging and active way .
Significant financial support has been granted to Montenegro , so that since 1998 over EUR 115 million has either been spent or committed .
I am also pleased , in view of all the laborious history of this , that the Council has now finally agreed to grant Montenegro an emergency support budget of EUR 20 million .
I am being very serious when I say that the significance of this emergency programme in terms of giving Montenegro a stable and democratic future is greater than simply the amount of money involved may suggest . I therefore hope that it will soon receive the approval of the European Parliament ' s Committee on Budgets .
That brings me to Kosovo , where ethnically motivated violence still dominates everyday life .
We must condemn ethnically motivated violence regardless of who the perpetrators and the victims are , that is regardless of who is at the receiving end of ethnic violence and who commits it .
The European Union will always condemn such violence with equal force .
The acts of violence being perpetrated against the Serbian minority and also against the Roma minorities are unacceptable in our eyes , just as the violence committed against the Kosovars just a few months ago was unacceptable .
Just as we condemn the trials against Kosovars held in custody in Serbia , we welcome the reopening of the proceedings in the case of Flora Brovina , which has previously been the subject of resolutions adopted by this House .
We call upon all parties in Kosovo to solve the vital issue of missing persons and prisoners as a matter of urgency .
We fully support KFOR ' s efforts to maintain law and order in Kosovo and to protect the public as a whole .
The Commission shares Parliament ' s view that sending an international police force is highly important .
Not only is the credibility of the policies of the European Union and its Member States at stake , it is also imperative , if we wish to achieve our objectives in Kosovo , for us to provide the minimum level of police presence required to guarantee stability .
Unless an atmosphere of stability and safety can be created , which will also make it possible for Kosovar Serbs to return , then there will be no true peace in Kosovo .
It is in everyone ' s interest to ensure cooperation between all Kosovo ' s citizens , on the basis of common institutions .
It is clear to us that a continuing substantial level of EC aid will be required .
This aid will be provided via the reconstruction agency and the fourth pillar .
Against this background , the Commission welcomes the conclusions of the most recent European Parliament mission to Kosovo .
The Commission also supports UNMIK ' s endeavours in the area of local administration by means of twinning projects and by advertising posts in UNMIK ' s civil administration and the pillars of the reconstruction programme as widely as possible in all the Member States .
I consider it extraordinarily important that the European Parliament has today once again held an in-depth debate on the resolution before us on the situation in the Western Balkans , and that this not only expresses our concern but above all demonstrates our shared determination not to leave our work in this region only half done .
We have started it and we are determined to bring it to a successful conclusion .
Mr President , we have just heard an outstanding speech by a highly qualified representative of the Commission .
We have held a high-quality debate lasting for over an hour on the most important topic in Europe today .
I would like to ask if we can guarantee that this is properly recorded by the Parliament ' s Press Service , and is not limited , as so often happens on Thursday afternoon , to just a few lines , while all the other debates are recounted in epic detail .
Mr Posselt , I will pass on your request , and I assume that I will be able to do so before the end of this sitting , so that it is taken on board .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Coup d 'état in Paraguay
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-0571 / 2000 ) by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats , on democracy in Paraguay ;
( B5-0578 / 2000 ) by Mr Nogueira Román and Mr Lipietz , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the situation in Paraguay and the Lino Oviedo case ;
( B5-0580 / 2000 ) by Mr Sakellariou , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the attempted coup d ' état in Paraguay and the arrest of General Oviedo ;
( B5-0582 / 2000 ) by Mr Marset Campos , Mr Jové Peres and Mr Di Lello Finuoli , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the attempted coup d ' état in Paraguay .
Mr President , the European Union and this Parliament have followed recent events in the Republic of Paraguay with great concern .
The first of them , the coup d ' état of 18 May , was the subject of a resolution , by the Presidency of the European Union , which roundly condemned any type of modification by force of constitutional legality in Paraguay and expressed support for the President of the Republic , Luis González Macchi , who , in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces , restored the situation to normal .
The second event which has been followed with great interest by this Parliament was the arrest on 11 June , of General Oviedo .
That arrest can be seen as a response by the Government of Brazil to the appeal from the Paraguayan Government to the neighbouring countries for cooperation , given the threats of attempts to destabilise democracy originating from outside the country .
This is a clear sign , Mr President , of cooperation amongst the countries of Mercosur , with which the European Union is negotiating a new , very advanced association agreement which is based on the fundamental principles of respect for political pluralism and the defence of democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
In this context , we in this Parliament must , in my opinion , support full democratic consolidation in the Republic of Paraguay and appeal for the correct operation of the rule of law and justice in that country .
Mr President , it seems to me to be particularly appropriate to point out that the defence of democracy and the rule of law is the cornerstone of the policy of cooperation with the countries of Latin America .
The respect for democratic values is , and must continue to be , the central pillar of political dialogue between the European Union and the countries of Mercosur , both on a regional level and on a bilateral level .
Good evidence of this can be found in the ambitious institutional support programmes which the European Union has been developing in Paraguay since 1995 .
These projects , Mr President , are fundamental in a country whose constitution only dates from 1992 , whose first elections took place in 1993 , which suffered 50 years of dictatorship and which , therefore , is very much in need of democratic stability and institutional continuity .
In this context we are concerned about the fragility and instability of the Government of National Union , headed by President González Macchi , resulting from the withdrawal of the Liberal Party from the government coalition , and the growing difficulties which this governmental coalition must face .
And , as if this situation were not ominous enough , they have to deal with a coup d ' état .
Mr President , I believe that both the European Union and the United States , which have expressed their support for the Government of Paraguay , while recognising that efforts are being made to consolidate a certain degree of democratic stability , must also remind the Paraguayan authorities of the urgent need to take measures on institutional consolidation and to begin also to resolve the great economic and social problems in that country .
Having pointed out the importance of our institutional support and cooperation in Paraguay , I do not wish to end without reminding you that the European Union still has no office in Paraguay .
I believe that a European Commission delegation in Asunción would not only aid and improve our relations , but could also contribute in a significant way to the achievement of these objectives which are so important to all those of us who believe in the democratic clause , which is the foundation of these agreements and our relations with that country .
Mr President , as has been pointed out , the influence of the European Union in Latin America is important from an economic and commercial point of view , but also from a political point of view , and this is characterised by our encouraging a type of relationship which favours egalitarian treatment - cooperation and the promotion of democracy - and this is completely opposed and different to that which has for centuries originated from Big Brother , in the north of the continent .
For this reason , we consider it appropriate and necessary to show our solidarity and support for the democratic régime in Paraguay and to reject coups d ' état and support democracy .
The prosecution of Oviedo , the perpetrator of coups d ' état , must be taken as an opportunity to make progress on the road to democracy , but we are also obliged to mention that democracy will not be consolidated in Paraguay unless social justice is improved , the eternal problems of social inequality are eliminated and the problems of unemployment and discrimination are brought to an end .
We can help considerably in this field , by appropriately implementing the contents of the European Union ' s agreements with the Mercosur countries and in particular the agreement with Paraguay , which is so necessary .
We therefore believe that our action in this area can be decisive and we would also like to express our full support for the joint resolution which we have signed .
Mr President , fellow Members , the Greens , like several other groups , had tabled a motion for a resolution on Paraguay .
As is customary in the House , we have tried to agree on a joint resolution .
Unfortunately , we cannot put our names to it as it stands .
As you are aware , the situation in Paraguay is characterised not only by a revolutionary tendency in certain sections of the army but , more generally , by very serious human rights violations and the harsh suppression of popular movements .
We have tried , in our resolution , to emphasise both these factors simultaneously .
Given the very long history of Europe itself , you will be well aware that , in countries where human rights are not observed by a government , generally republican or democratic or claiming to be republican or democratic , this government runs the risk of a military coup d ' état .
In a way , governments get the coups d ' état they deserve , and a weak democracy is vulnerable to military coups d ' état .
The resolution before us simply pays tribute to the initiative used by another Southern Cone country to arrest the leader of a military coup d ' état and extradite him to his country of origin .
We welcome this initiative on the part of Brazil , but to say that and nothing more would mean framing a resolution on Brazil , not Paraguay .
We can welcome the progress that Brazil is making on the road to democratic cooperation in the Southern Cone , but that does not make it a resolution on Paraguay .
We would have liked the issue of human rights as managed by the legally constituted government in Paraguay to be specifically taken into account .
We would have liked the European Union to exploit the methods of democratic persuasion afforded due to the aid it provides to all the Southern Cone countries in order to encourage the legitimate government in Paraguay to show greater respect for human rights .
Unfortunately , in the current wording of the resolution , this is not the case , and we consequently prefer to vote against the joint motion for a resolution and , if necessary , maintain our own motion for a resolution .
Mr President , I still remember the 1980s very well , when Latin America , including Paraguay of course , attracted enormous attention in Europe , because at that time a great many people , and above all young people , were interested in restoring democracy to Latin America .
Fortunately , by the end of the 1980s and the early 1990s nearly every Latin American state had returned to democracy .
But in several countries there are signs of a return to the old ways .
Paraguay is one of the worst examples of this .
It therefore makes sense that the European Parliament , which has always regarded itself as the patron saint of democracy in Latin America and elsewhere , should express its views on this .
The second point that I would like to mention relates to Paraguay and Brazil .
Mr Lipietz has already touched upon this , but with a somewhat different emphasis .
I regard it as being extraordinarily helpful that within Mercosur , to which both these countries belong , a code of values has now been adopted under which dictators , or attempts to establish a dictatorship , no longer have a chance of success .
Oviedo was arrested in Brazil and I hope that he will be extradited to Paraguay .
This is proof that Mercosur is more than just a free trade area - it is a political area in which democracy is protected .
By the way , I totally agree with Mr Lipietz when he says that what is at stake in Paraguay is not just General Oviedo , but human rights as a whole .
There is nothing separating us on that .
However , you cannot of course write a whole book in a short resolution .
I hope that we will be able to discus this issue at some other point , and I assume that we will also be able to reach a consensus then .
Mr President , as reflected in the resolution agreed between the four groups , we have had good news and bad news with regard to Paraguay .
Clearly , the bad news is that democracy is once again being threatened , but there has also been good news : the democratic forces have resisted and , furthermore , General Oviedo has been arrested in Brazil .
We believe that Paraguay is probably a forgotten country , which has been helped by its integration into Mercosur , and , from that point of view , it is important that our relations with Paraguay should improve the situation , and that Brussels should find a way to help that country and at the same time remind it , as we will surely do later in the case of Peru , of the democratic clause which is the inspiration for all our actions .
We also believe that it would be a positive thing for the Commission to take account of Paraguayan civil society .
Other equally positive signs are the reduction in corruption and the hope that General Oviedo , like Pinochet , will be tried .
Mr President , it is appropriate today for the European Parliament to turn its attention to Paraguay and express its solidarity with the Paraguayan people , who still face considerable difficulties and uncertainties in their effort to consolidate a democratic regime .
The history of Paraguay is one of the saddest and most unjust in Latin America .
For those of us who for many years have sided with the resistance in that country , it is painful to remember how , in the 60s and 70s , there were at least three good reasons to feel sorrow .
Paraguay was probably the only country in the world whose population had been practically exterminated during wars with its two neighbours , Argentina and Brazil .
Only women and some old men and children survived those wars .
At that time , Paraguay was the only country which had considerably more population outside its borders than inside , with exiles , outcasts and emigrants of every type .
Lastly , Paraguay held the tragic record of suffering the longest dictatorship in the whole of Latin America , headed by General Stroessner .
That dictatorship displayed the most extraordinary cruelty in its repression of any opposition , and at the same time its dictator and his entourage was enormously corrupt , with their monopoly on big business and , in particular , smuggling .
The Paraguayan people never gave in .
For decades the fight continued , embodied in the February revolution , and the so-called febrerismo , one of the brief moments of democracy and hope , which was quickly stamped out , firstly by force of arms , but then kept down at a very high cost in death , prison , exile and enormous suffering .
Despite the harshness of the repression , the internal decay of the authoritarian regime and the growing mobilisation of civil society eventually forced a transition which opened the way to progress and representative democracy .
This has been the situation over recent years , although the threat of regression and attempts at destabilisation have not disappeared .
In fact there has been constant agitation from local bosses and members of the military who are nostalgic , not so much for power , but rather for the possibility of making money which that power used to offer them .
We have therefore witnessed a constant tension between civil democratic forces and sinister personalities , the main example of which is General Lino Oviedo , consummate purveyor of repeated coups d ' états , professional destabiliser , shady businessman and even alleged promoter of assassinations such as that of the Vice-President of the Republic , Luis María Argaña .
In this context , and with Oviedo under arrest in Brazil , the resolution we are voting on in Parliament is a great opportunity .
It condemns the enemies of freedom and the destabilisers , it asks Paraguay ' s neighbours for respect and cooperation , so that the consolidation of Paraguayan democracy may become a reality and , above all , it underlines the European Union ' s commitment to the people and democratic institutions of Paraguay .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes today ' s debate , because it gives us an opportunity to voice a clear warning and to remind you of the political approach that we have adopted to Latin America .
Overall , we have witnessed an impressive success story in Latin America during the last 15 to 20 years in terms of democratisation .
That is why , in every single case where these successes are undermined , we must say , in the plainest terms , so far and no further .
Paraguay , a country which was in any case a straggler in Latin America when it came to democratisation , appears to be in jeopardy .
That is why we really must express our solidarity with the democratic forces in Paraguay , and not only in words , but also in deeds .
The European Union has already been active in Paraguay for a good many years .
Our attempts to have a concrete influence on the situation there have focused on two areas .
The first of these is to develop and strengthen democratic institutions .
I would like to send a very clear message to the current government in Paraguay that this cannot just be regarded as a job for Europeans , North Americans , or anyone else .
We can help to develop these institutions , but the political will really to establish them , to use them and take advantage of them has to come from those who are currently in power in Paraguay .
The support programme for the Paraguayan Parliament has already gone through three stages .
There is now a further project entitled " Modernising the institutions " .
Because a suspicion may arise that these funds are perhaps not entirely reaching the areas they are intended for , I would like to make it crystal clear that we have seen fit to incorporate very strict control mechanisms both for Paraguay itself and for other countries .
There is therefore no question of the funds involved being diverted through shady channels or into dark corners - we are talking about independent codirection under the direct control of the Commission .
The more important programme both in terms of funding and of its ultimate impact is perhaps the programme designed to tackle the social and regional causes of democratic instability in Paraguay . This programme deals with people ' s living conditions , especially in rural areas .
In this case a number of major programmes with significant budgets have already started . The aim of all these programmes is to improve the day-to-day living conditions of residents of rural areas , which still account for 46 % of Paraguay ' s population , and so to integrate them more securely into the country ' s political and social structures .
I would like to mention in particular that this includes a special programme supporting the indigenous population of the Chaco region .
All in all , there is no doubt that these EU activities in Paraguay are unusually far-reaching given the size of the country .
Nevertheless , it is true that we do not have a permanent representative on the spot .
However , I am pleased to inform you that consideration is currently being given within the Commission to reorganising our foreign missions , and that this involves a shift of emphasis , so that this point will be taken into account .
But as yet no decision has been taken to change the situation in Paraguay in this respect .
I would like to conclude by saying that as far as we are concerned , the key objective of our international work is to defend democracy and the rule of law throughout the world , including Latin America and also therefore in Paraguay .
I very much hope that this debate on Paraguay today in this house , here in Strasbourg , will be viewed not just as a sign of European solidarity , but also as a sign that Europe takes its responsibilities seriously !
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Peru
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-570 / 2000 ) by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats , on the presidential elections in Peru ;
( B5-0573 / 2000 ) by Mr Lipietz and Mr Nogueira Román , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the presidential elections in Peru ;
( B5-0575 / 2000 ) by Mr Di Pietro , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on Peru ;
( B5-0576 / 2000 ) by Mr Marset Campos and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the result of the elections in Peru ;
( B5-0581 / 2000 ) by Mr Medina Ortega and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the presidential elections in Peru .
Mr President , on 16 March , this Parliament adopted a resolution on the presidential and legislative elections in Peru , in which it expressed its confidence , within the context of cooperation in our relations with Peru , that the presidential and legislative elections would be held in a fair and transparent manner , in accordance with the universally held principles of democratic systems .
Parliament called for the consolidation and the deepening of the rule of law in Peru and for democratic maturity from the Peruvian institutions .
After the irregularities in the first round which took place in April , Parliament decided to send a delegation of observers from this House to the vote on 28 May .
Since the deficiencies and irregularities noted by different independent organisations , both Peruvian and international , had not been put right , and after the withdrawal of Mr Toledo , one of the two candidates for the Presidency of the Republic , the delegation from the European Parliament decided not to carry out its mission in those circumstances .
The Presidency of the European Union , in its declaration of 9 June this year , expressed its enormous concern at the irregularities and anomalies detected .
Despite the fluid relations which the European Union maintains with Peru , which are embodied in the cooperation agreement with the Andean Pact which has been in force since 1998 , we should remember once again that these very relations are based on the universally recognised principles of respect for pluralist democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
On the basis of these principles , the European Union must carefully assess the necessary response to this delicate situation resulting from the elections of 28 May .
The Council of Ministers of the European Union , in its declaration of 9 June , has decided not to adopt sanctions against Peru at the moment .
The meeting of chancellors of the Organisation of American States in Ottawa , having heard the report of the electoral mission headed by Eduardo Stein , has decided to send a new mission , which will include the Canadian Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Secretary-General of the Organisation of American States , in order to ensure that the Government of Peru is adopting the necessary measures to re-establish democratic legality .
The OAS has not adopted sanctions against Peru at the moment either .
Finally , the candidate , Mr Toledo , during his visit to various countries of the European Union and to the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( incidentally , it would have been desirable for him to have met with Members of this Parliament during his visit to Brussels ) , expressed on several occasions the importance of preserving and maintaining economic cooperation and aid from the European Union to the Peruvian people .
In this regard , and before making any decisions - and this is one of the key points of our resolution - , we should , Commissioner , send a high level European Union mission which could , after meeting with all the political forces and with representatives of civil society , make an assessment of the situation on the ground in the light of the democratic clause , which is an essential element of the agreement between the European Union and Peru .
This mission seems to me to be particularly appropriate since the European Union is the main provider of development aid and economic cooperation , and it is also the main investor in Peru .
Mr President , since you have asked us not to take up the time allotted , and in summary , I will say that one of the main contributions which the European Union could make in this difficult situation - and I believe there is good reason , as I have just pointed out , not to leave the matter exclusively in the hands of the Organisation of American States - should be , in my opinion , to promote , on the basis of a guarantee of the full exercise of all civil and political rights , a consensus amongst all the forces which would allow democracy to be recovered , strengthened and deepened in Peru .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Greens wanted the joint resolution of this House to specifically consider the illegality of the election of Mr Fujimori as President of Peru and to ask that fresh elections be organised .
The joint resolution which will be proposed to you and to which the Greens have not put their names , merely highlights the irregularities and concludes that these challenge the legitimacy of this election .
We are therefore dealing with a far weaker declaration than the one we wanted .
First , we deplore such a cautious choice of words .
Let me remind you that the conditions of this election , at least in the second round , were so disastrous that not only did the main opposition candidate withdraw , but so did all the international observers .
In these circumstances , it could be concluded , even before the election , that the election was not valid .
After the election , obviously , Mr Fujimori ' s government could argue that since their candidate Fujimori had obtained more than 51 % , it had to be concluded that even in the absence of any opposition , the vote was valid .
Having said this , the vote count in many regions showed an excess of theoretical votes in relation to the first round , which is completely impossible given that there were no longer any opposition candidates .
The excess vote was around 20 % in some places .
So not only was there no opposition , but it was even necessary to resort to fraud in order to obtain the figure of 51 % .
These observations should lead the European Parliament to proclaim the illegality of the election of Mr Fujimori and call for more elections , rather than being content with merely questioning its legitimacy .
Unlike the case of Paraguay , we are not going to see this as a reason for voting against the resolution .
We are prepared to put our names to the joint resolution of the other groups , provided , however , that two points are introduced .
We agree with what Mr Salafranca said about making European Union aid conditional on sending a European Parliament delegation on current human rights to Peru .
However , we think this insufficient as , at this very moment , since the election in fact , military demonstrations and intimidation are being used against those members of the population who show their fury at this election , which is invalid in their eyes .
We therefore ask that a tiny amendment be added , condemning the use of intimidation against the Peruvian population .
This condemnation is not accompanied by any particular threat , and with regard to the conditionality of European Union aid , we gladly support the wording put forward by Mr Salafranca .
The second amendment we are proposing , on the other hand , is a sort of catching-up on the matter of legality .
You know that the Organisation of American States goes further than the European Parliament ' s joint proposal apparently does , as this organisation is actually volunteering to suggest a democratic way out of the political crisis which Peru is stuck in over this matter .
We are simply suggesting that the Parliament should approve the current efforts of the Organisation of American States to find a legal , peaceful way out of the crisis .
These are the two amendments that would enable us simply to support the joint motion for a resolution .
Mr President , it is clear that President Fujimori has challenged the international community and , in particular , the Organisation of American States and also the European Union .
Therefore , from our point of view , as well as lamenting the situation and supporting the democratic forces , it is still absolutely essential that , as we did in the previous case of Paraguay , we remind Peru of the need for any relations with the European Union to be maintained in compliance with the democratic clause .
Secondly , only by sending observers will we be able to assess the true situation and find a way to act appropriately .
Therefore , since two recent days , 9 April and 28 May , have caused us great concern , it is clear that we will only be able to act appropriately if we send observers , which we hope will be possible , and who we hope will be able to act effectively .
Mr President , the serious anomalies which have led to the withdrawal of one of the candidates , Mr Toledo , from the second round of the presidential elections , demonstrate that the Fujimori régime lacks any democratic safeguards , and there has been a dramatic deterioration in the living conditions of Peruvian society which should be resolved by democratic means .
Fujimori ' s failure to take account of the condemnations of the OAS , and the warning of the European Union and other international bodies in relation to these elections , condemns that country to a form of isolation which will be to the detriment of the Peruvian people and will increase social and political tension .
For this reason , the European Union must firmly denounce these proceedings and , having recognised the extent to which democracy has deteriorated , promote a series of measures which will help to overcome the current situation and lead to the repetition of the elections with full safeguards in place .
This is the best way to help Peru and , therefore , the European Union must make an effort so that its influence in Latin America may counteract so many years of anomalies and suffering and favour harmonious economic development , democracy and the consolidation of human rights .
Mr President , I shall be brief , because almost everything has been said already , while I was waiting my turn .
The situation in Peru , like the situation in Paraguay , gives cause for concern .
Nevertheless , I must say that what we have witnessed in Peru is nothing new .
The President of Peru has for years been failing to play by the rules that we expect in a democracy .
So I would not just send a delegation of observers to Peru , but I would also recommend that the European Union , the Council and also this Parliament should pay more attention to the whole region . We need more than just a resolution every now and again , we need to be constantly alert and critical , so that the people who are working for democracy are aware of our support .
Furthermore , I would like to point out that is not just the OAS , important as it is for Latin America , that has supported democracy in Latin America . The European Union and this Parliament have in fact also played a key role here .
We have spent a great deal of money in this region and it would be gratifying if now and again people talked about the European Union ' s contribution in Latin America , and not just about North America ' s role .
This is not intended to be a chauvinistic remark , I am just making it so that justice is done towards us .
I hope that the European Parliament ' s views on Peru will not go unheard in that country .
I know that a great many people set a lot of store by what this Parliament says .
Lastly , I would also like to mention that the longest standing relationship between the European Parliament and another parliament is with the Latin American Parliament - to which Peru also belongs - and that involves certain obligations .
I accordingly hope that we will obtain a large majority in favour of this resolution .
Mr President , the situation in Peru worries us .
President Fujimori took power with dangerous plans : to give absolute priority to supposed economic efficiency , claiming that a strong hold on power was required to manage it , and to overcome what he called ' party-ocracy ' , subliminally blaming all the previous problems on the institutions of the democratic state .
Our fears were confirmed throughout Fujimori ' s terms in office , and clear signs of authoritarianism were observed , which saw outrageous propaganda and systematic manipulation of the media .
Furthermore , the President ' s disregard for the rule of law became evident .
It was under those circumstances that the elections of April and May were held and , as we feared , they turned out to be a farce , and were recognised and denounced as such by anyone looking on .
In summary , that is what our resolution says , and it is good and appropriate that the European Parliament ' s voice should be heard in this respect , for our own dignity , and in order to demonstrate our interest in the democratic process in Latin America , but also in order to demonstrate our support , which the Peruvian democrats need and deserve .
While we are voting in favour of the resolution in question , I would like to point out two issues relating to its text .
Firstly , not just the mere fact that one of the candidates decided not to stand in the second round of the elections , but rather that that candidate was Alejandro Toledo , who is supported by all the opposition , and who in free elections would stand an extremely good chance of toppling Fujimori .
My second point is that I regret the fact that the resolution does not refer to the disappointing role played by the Organisation of American States throughout this process .
In fact , having denounced the irregularities of the campaign , demanded the postponement of the second round and withdrawn its observers , it does not seem consistent that it should remain silent with no further reaction or sanctions , contenting itself in reality with merely condemning the situation .
By taking this attitude , I believe that the OAS has discredited itself considerably .
I will end by expressing our solidarity with Alejandro Toledo , with the democrats and people of Peru , denouncing Fujimori as a sinister and autocratic personality , rejecting the position of those people who have reacted with silence and even at times with a certain complacency - which has been well publicised by the President to justify his tattered legitimacy - and reaffirming our commitment to rejecting this farce and to closely monitoring the events in Peru for the sake of the respect for democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has of course followed the whole election process in Peru , and with mounting concern .
In view of the numerous irregularities and technical problems , and the adherence to the date for the second ballot , the European Union decided to recall its observers from Peru .
As has already been mentioned , a similar decision was taken by the Organisation of American States .
In taking this step , the EU wished to express its conviction that the Peruvian election could not have the democratic legitimacy that it would have had in normal circumstances , and which this country urgently needed .
We must not simply express our regret about this step , we also need to consider what we can do to strengthen Peru ' s democratic institutions .
The Commission considers that it needs to be made clear to Peru , and as forcefully as possible , that we insist on strict observance of the principles of democracy and of the rule of law , and that this applies all the more so at a time and in circumstances when the democratic systems of other countries in the region are also being weakened .
For example , we were discussing Paraguay just a few minutes ago .
In its statement of 9 June , the European Union stressed that it would support the OAS mission to Peru .
We expect this mission to express its findings in the clearest terms and to come up with unequivocal results .
We will be following the situation in Peru with the greatest vigilance and are prepared to rethink our relations with Peru against this background .
At the same time , the Commission attaches great importance to taking concrete measures to reinforce Peru ' s democratic institutions and to promote political pluralism in that country , and will make proposals to that effect .
The debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance is closed .
As planned , Mr Turco ' s report , which we debated this afternoon , will be put to the vote during voting time which begins in a few moments .
Mr President , looking around the Chamber at this moment I think it is obvious that after yesterday 's vote when we abolished Fridays , the abolition of Thursday has already begun .
I hope colleagues will take note of this and try to revise that unwise decision as soon as possible .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to support the sentiments of the previous speaker , and also to suggest that votes taken on Thursday evenings should be taken into account when calculating the daily attendance allowance .
President , I would just like to tell my fellow Member that he might just as well have voted for the abolition of Thursday too .
I would simply like to thank all the honourable Members for providing such a clear demonstration on the subject of Friday ' s vote of " whittling away " .
Mr President , it is a bit odd in such a small gathering to want to return to the decisions which were taken in an undemocratic manner yesterday .
In my opinion , it would be preferable if those who are now vigorously protesting against the absence of fellow Members were to do what is necessary to get these delegates to attend .
I can indeed see it happening that , if we do not have a quorum on Thursdays , we will need to discontinue the sittings on Thursdays .
If we want to deal with a serious agenda , then we need to attend .
Spread the word to your fellow delegates , persuade them to attend without biting their heads off .
If you do not mind , ladies and gentlemen , I shall interrupt this fascinating debate to move on to something which is equally fascinating , the vote on topical and urgent subjects .
Vote ( continuation )
Mr President , first of all , this technical amendment has been voted upon , and I do not see why we have to come back to it .
Let me point out that the rapporteur belongs to the TDI group and that consequently the honourable Member cannot complain .
That is exactly what was on my list .
The amendment has been voted upon as I announced it .
We now come to the final vote .
Mr President , I am merely trying to clarify - and this does not have to be done now , it can be done later - whether the amendment was tabled by the Technical Group of Independent Members or by the rapporteur .
This makes a difference and affects the way we vote .
I would be grateful if this could be clarified afterwards , because we voted on the assumption that this was not a TDI amendment , but an amendment tabled by the rapporteur .
I would like to make it quite clear that this amendment was tabled by the TDI group , and was voted by plenary .
Mr President , I would just like to say that , in my opinion , amendments should be accepted or rejected on the basis of their content and not on the basis of who has put their name to them .
They have already been voted upon .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , on a point of order .
It is ridiculous for Members to say after the vote that they would not have voted in favour of an amendment because a particular group tabled that amendment .
Whether you agree with an amendment or not should be the basis of the decision .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Tunisia ( B5-0508 / 2000 )
Mr President , I abstained from the vote on the report on Tunisia because I do not feel that this type of document serves much purpose .
Since we are discussing the protection of freedom and human rights , I would like to take this opportunity to say that a serious violation , or rather an attempt at violation of the right to freedom of speech took place today in the Parliament forecourt .
The victims were a group of young people with banners and flags who were demonstrating against globalisation and genetically modified organisms .
Water was thrown out of one of the Parliament offices - I do not know whether it was in a bucket or another container - by , it appears , a Member of Parliament , who then protested in the Chamber against the demonstration . I repeat that this demonstration is a free expression of thought , even though I may not agree with the tone or expressions used .
This incident was recorded on film and I would ask the Presidency to watch it and adopt any necessary measures .
. ( FR ) We voted for the joint motion for a resolution despite the fact that we neither approved of a number of the terms used , nor the silence pertaining to the French government ' s responsibility with regard to the situation in Tunisia .
This is because this is the only means given us by parliamentary procedure through which we are able to express our protest against the dictatorship in Tunisia .
By protesting at this dictatorship , however , we are looking to denounce the support that it has been given by the French Government , just as many other dictatorships do and have done in the past , in the former colonial empire representing French imperialism in Africa .
We note the Jesuitism of the parties that have succeeded one another in government in France , which are voting here for a resolution to demand rights and freedoms in Tunisia .
When they are in power and when they have , therefore , the means to apply considerable pressure on the Tunisian regime , they do nothing , since , in fact , they do not give a hoot about the rights and liberties in this country , from the moment that its leaders secure order and , above all , from the moment that economic relations become smooth and profitable for France .
Marset Campos Report ( A5-0133 / 2000 )
Bordes ( GUE / NGL ) .
( FR ) Mr President , we are not against the planned aid for the poor countries of Central America , and that is why we have voted for the report , despite the inadequacy of the proposals .
We are , however , convinced that this aid will benefit the population only to a very limited extent , as there are no plans to control the allocation of these sums and consequently , there is nothing to guarantee that they are not , at least partly , misappropriated by the government , or even directly by the wealthy classes .
Furthermore , all aid , even the best controlled , will be absolutely no use at all as long as these countries continue to be plundered and their populations exploited by large western cartels .
Mr President , I voted for the Marset Campos report and I will tell you why , although I would first like to express my support for Mr Speroni ' s speech .
If what he said is true , as I am sure it is since he is a truthful man , then I consider that this is a very serious incident .
With regard to my explanation of vote , I have to say that I am certainly in favour of assisting anyone who is in difficulty such as the population of Central America , but I wonder and I would ask you , Mr President , how it can be that the world ' s poorest countries have to wait for a hurricane before they receive any assistance for their economy or their daily lives .
In my opinion , the European Parliament should ensure that aid is always available for the communities who need it , wherever their location in the world .
Schmitt Report ( A5-0123 )
Berthu ( UEN ) .
( FR ) President , the Commission working document ' Towards common standards on asylum procedures ' is a short , fairly general text which , according to the introduction , is designed to launch a discussion following the adoption of the Amsterdam Treaty which , in its new Article 63 , once again provides for the adoption of a whole series of joint European standards applicable to refugees and displaced persons .
We have good reason to be surprised at this introduction to the subject .
Why launch a discussion ?
We had thought , quite logically , that all the discussions had taken place before the Treaty of Amsterdam was adopted and that the federalists knew where they were going .
In fact , on reading the Commission document and the report by the European Parliament , we see that this was not the case .
Yes , the need to harmonise asylum standards is broadly recommended by these texts .
But , first and foremost , the reasoning seems weak .
For example , it condemns the disparities in the way refugees are treated from one country to the next but does not provide examples .
There may be perfectly legitimate reasons for these disparities , relating to the special features of a country , its culture or its links with former colonies .
In reality , on closer inspection , there is only one serious reason - at least so it seems - for harmonising asylum standards : because abolishing internal border controls under the Treaty of Amsterdam , and that includes as far as third country nationals are concerned , demolishes the whole delicate legal balance and risks causing entirely uncontrolled secondary movements of refugees .
So , in fact , we are currently trying to solve a problem largely created by the Treaty of Amsterdam itself and , what is more , we are going to solve it to our disadvantage as it is clear that asylum standards cannot be harmonised from the bottom up - for who would dare ? - but rather towards the top with all the in-draughts normally caused by this type of policy .
We risk being caught up in the system .
In order to escape , we can only invite the governments to exercise the utmost caution , retain as much power as possible , and interpret Article 63 of the Treaty of Amsterdam narrowly .
Mr President , this explanation of vote is also shared by Arlette Laguiller and Armonie Bordes .
The rapporteur ' s succinct justification of his report expresses his misgivings on harmonisation with the fairly lax standards characterising the laws and common practice in some States , clearly showing the author ' s desire to harmonise the right of asylum in the various countries of the European Union , but from the top .
All the more so , given that a number of passages attack asylum abuses , even though governments in almost every country in Europe restrict this right , sometimes excessively stringently .
This means that although , in some European countries , the application of this text could in theory improve the situation of asylum seekers , it would make it worse in others .
Consequently , we have abstained from voting on this report , but we did vote in favour of the few articles , and especially the amendments , that at least express the idea that the right of asylum should be extended , and we denounce the scandalous nature of the policies of most European States , in particular France , which refuse to recognise this right , especially in the case of refugees from Algeria given the abuses by fundamentalists and the army .
Mr President , here , at last , is a measure - fortunately not the only one - which is a credit to the European Union .
I am totally in favour of this measure , for it is a precise declaration to the Commission that the burden of providing asylum for those who are forced to abandon their own territory , their home , family , friends and all they have in the world must be shared equally between all 15 Member States of the European Union .
This is a completely new principle , a fact - and we hope that a directive will be produced to enshrine that principle - which makes of the European Union something tangible , something real .
This is a decisive factor and it particularly influenced my decision to vote for the motion .
Furthermore , I consider that it would be appropriate for the Commission to apply this decision retroactively and share the burden borne by those who accepted Kosovar refugees between the Member States of the European Union .
Mr President , I abstained in the vote because I do not consider that these texts serve much purpose .
However , I would like to take this opportunity to say that there may be somebody who is attempting to turn someone else into a refugee this year as well , some intolerant person who is convinced that his ideas should prevail .
We are against a Communist , dictatorial Europe which eradicates the identity of peoples by eliminating the differences between them .
Communism is not a question of the poor fighting against rich capitalists : it means achieving equality by means of blanket standardisation , dictating how things should be instead of establishing genuine equality , which is based on the diversity of individuals and peoples .
Communism and Europe in its current state represent equality expressed as the mobility of the power of society , which means that no changes need to be made to the current situation .
We , on the other hand , consider that there is a need for a great deal of change and that the Europe of peoples should mean freedom for all peoples , including the people of the Po Valley , and that those young people from the Po Valley also have the right to demonstrate without fear of insult or intimidation , because we want our flags to fly as well as the red flag .
The asylum issue is a major political issue concerning fundamental democratic rights , the safeguarding of the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual and the preservation of human dignity .
The problem of political asylum seekers must be examined in this light alone and efforts to harmonize asylum policy come what may and turn it into a means of chipping away at fundamental human rights , reinforcing suppressive , policing measures and rebuilding fortress Europe must be blocked .
It must not be used as a pretext for intensifying and strengthening the electronic filing systems created under Europol and Schengen , which target not only refugees but also the fundamental individual freedoms of the citizens of the EU themselves .
We must take all the legislative and other measures needed to respect the rights of asylum seekers , by strictly applying the provisions of the Geneva Convention .
We must respect and strengthen all the provisions on protecting and granting asylum to individuals or groups being persecuted in their countries by government , quasi-government or other groups on ideological , philosophical , political , religious , racial , cultural or other grounds by giving them guarantees and a dignified reception and living conditions .
Asylum seekers in the Member States of the EU must be treated in a dignified and humane manner .
We must also take proper account of all the parameters and peculiarities of their situation and of the dangers which threaten them should they return to their countries by introducing any protective measures required , even for those who do not satisfy the formal criteria for obtaining asylum , which criteria must be clearly defined in accordance with the principles of international law and fundamental human rights .
Arbitrary and violent deportation is a common occurrence because of the applicant ' s difficulty in resorting to the judicial authorities for protection , and the phenomenon of group deportations is intolerable and violates conventions on and the principles of human rights .
We would like to highlight and draw attention to the fact that formulating even more harmonized criteria for granting asylum by gradually and effectively moving away from those laid down in the Geneva Convention and essentially replacing them with regulations such as those mentioned in the report , may have a negative and repressive impact .
In this sense , we deplore the so-called " policy of burden sharing " which conceals a blatant attempt to relieve certain powerful states in the EU from the " burden " of receiving large numbers of refugees and relocating them to other countries .
Finally , we firmly believe that the best and most fundamental way to address the refugee issue is to maintain the right conditions for peace and the social , economic and democratic development in every country in the world .
Until these conditions are guaranteed and while they are being undermined by major economic and military interests which destroy the structures , societies , rights and dignity of the people as they please and for their own benefit , then there will continue to be an ever rising tide of uprooted and persecuted individuals .
. ( FR ) Although the number of asylum applications fell from 660 000 in 1993 to 227 000 in 1997 , this is not because persecution has decreased but because it is more difficult to apply for a visa .
The Dublin Convention allows asylum applications to be made only in the first State entered by the refugee .
The aim of the Schmitt report is clear : " To re-enhance the reputation and substance of the right of asylum , the qualification procedure should be tightened up , and abuses resolutely curbed " .
Moreover , the States on the edges of the Schengen zone are considered to be " secure " .
They therefore become the border guards of fortress Europe .
How can we consider countries that carry out serious discrimination against gypsies ( Romania and Slovakia ) as sufficiently safe for Belgium to send anyone it judges undesirable en masse there .
Finally , the current concept of the refugee is far short of that stipulated by the Geneva Convention of 1951 , " A refugee is any person who , owing to fear of being persecuted , is unable to avail himself of the protection of that country . "
In fact , nowadays refugees have to provide more and more proof that their lives are under threat , which obviously is difficult , if not impossible .
For the European Union to finally apply the right of asylum , it would have to break with the obsessive practice of immigration control .
The more we respect freedom of movement , the more Europe will be worthy of those who seek refuge here .
. ( FR ) The statistics concerning the exponential rise in asylum applications currently submitted every year in the European Union and the real situation are an unfortunate and tragic illustration of the importance of political asylum for each Member State of the European Union .
In its desire to " Communitise " and standardise refugee reception procedures , subject areas which are , by their very essence , matters of national sovereignty , Europe is dragging us along in its policy of small steps towards an area of social inequality , positive discrimination in favour of foreigners and high insecurity , where drugs , illegal immigrants , bogus asylum seekers entering the territory of a Member State for strictly economical reasons , terrorism and crime are free to move where they will .
For serious matters that affect the exercise of justice , the management of immigration into a country , public order or public freedom , the actions of the European Union can only and must merely be subsidiary and only concern truly transnational phenomena of criminality or public order problems .
Finally , this report , just like many others relating to immigration management , is unrealistic and highly populist .
Because in fact , wanting to systematically favour foreign nationals over national citizens , whatever the cost , by means of many and varied forms of aid , particularly regarding proof , accommodation , keeping families together or even financial , medical and educational aid , will only lead to rejection by the population of the receiving country .
This is why the Members of the National Front and I myself will vote against this report which jeopardises people ' s rights and security and also democracy .
The creation of a legal penal system cannot be achieved in haste .
" Communitising " procedures for asylum , justice and internal public order within the Member States cannot be achieved without first consulting all the citizens concerned .
I bet that if they were to be consulted , our Eurocrats , those advocates of a centralised federal super-Europe would have to review their plans out of increased respect for democracy in the construction of Europe .
. ( FR ) In any civilisation , asylum is a concrete example of charity towards those who , for many reasons , find themselves in difficulty , and nobody is contesting the validity of giving aid to those who are victims .
Reading Mr Schmitt ' s report makes me think we are not talking about the same thing .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs appears to believe that the disparities in the laws of the Member States actually conceal asylum rights that are non-existent or not often applied , as if we were living under totalitarian regimes and our nations had not been providing asylum for centuries .
This same committee discovers the laws of democracy when it suggests that the discrepancies from one country to the next are linked to the political context as much as to the content of the applications .
It is clear that , for a European Union that is naturally and deliberately cut off from everyday reality , the political will expressed by the citizens during elections is of no great interest , unless it conforms to Community doctrine .
This House does not want to improve the situation for asylum seekers .
The political will of this House is , in this field as in any other , to extend the scope of Community power to the detriment of the Member States , who are apparently unworthy of such power .
If the German people and their government wish to be the European Union country most welcoming to refugees , they are to be congratulated .
If the other countries do not match this , often because they simply do not wish to , then it is nothing to do with the European Parliament and the Commission .
Even the Socialist French Government " prefers " - and I quote - " a flexible approach enabling national characteristics of asylum procedure to be observed " .
So what about the recurring proposal that costs should be shared ?
Either the Member States have their own policy , for which they are responsible and which they therefore finance , or the European Union " Communitises " this field and includes the costs in its budget .
If such and such a country finds its policy too expensive , let it change the policy .
We do not want a Community policy in the hands of the Commission , nor do we want the policy of another government : we want our people and their elected representatives to retain control over their own decisions and destiny .
Respect for human rights should be maintained internationally .
If people ' s rights are infringed , it is the responsibility of surrounding countries to offer asylum to those who request protection from persecution .
The nations of the world have a shared responsibility for ensuring that all refugees receive a welcome fit for human beings .
No countries can argue their way out of responsibility when refugees seek asylum on their territory .
Practice in granting asylum varies from one EU country to another . In general , however , policy on refugees has been tightened up throughout Europe in recent years .
Coordination of the Member States ' responsibilities is necessary if countries are in practice to be able to pursue generous policies on refugees .
We therefore welcome the Commission ' s working document in principle , together with Ingo Schmitt ' s report on the drawing up of a common policy on asylum and refugees , but we emphasise that it ought not to be the least generous countries which set the standards .
We want to see a European policy on refugees which is better at distributing the overall burden between the countries of Europe on condition that the European , as well as the Swedish , policy on refugees will in future be more humane than they are at present .
Nor must we forget that refugees and immigrants have a positive influence on the Member States .
They often have experience and knowledge to contribute to society .
Moreover , immigration is especially important now , given the shortage of labour which is beginning to make itself ever more felt in the Member States .
With regard to Ingo Schmitt ' s report , we want to emphasise that asylum applications ought always to be examined individually in the light of the individual applicant ' s merits , as should also be the norm in the case of mass migrations .
What is more , it is important that refugees should in principle be entitled to the same social benefits as other people resident in the particular country dealing with the application for asylum .
This basic principle is established in the Geneva Convention and must be given due attention and complied with .
We also think it important that the current definition of refugee and asylum in the Geneva Convention be reviewed and extended so that they also include people who seek asylum on the grounds of gender and sexual orientation .
- ( DE ) In 1993 the Federal Republic of Germany watered down the right to political asylum in its constitution , thus sealing its borders against immigration by asylum-seekers .
Germany has virtually ceased to grant asylum .
Refugees are socially and legally marginalised or driven into the world of illegal immigrants .
The aim of the Schmitt report is to extend this degrading and inhumane system to the entire European Union .
It is precisely this system that is to serve as the basis for the " common standards on asylum procedures " .
The problems of asylum legislation are not addressed in the Schmitt report .
There is not a single word about inhumane pre-expulsion detention centres .
Nor is there a word of criticism about social discrimination against refugees , which in Germany takes place under the Law on Benefits for Asylum-Seekers .
Mr Schmitt ' s report omits to mention that refugees suffer from discrimination in the job market .
In Germany , they are categorically forbidden to work .
The rapporteur does not even mention the invasions of personal privacy or violations of data protection rights that are part of daily life for asylum-seekers .
Thanks to " Eurodac " and the " Schengen Information System " , no other group of people is as closely monitored as refugees .
They have become the first " transparent people " .
Mr Schmitt ' s report does not offer any potential solutions to all these problems .
Instead , the rapporteur complains that people " wrongfully lay claim " to the right of asylum in Europe .
Since the change in the right to asylum , many refugees no longer have any legal claim to asylum . It was , and remains , totally legitimate to want to live somewhere other than your place of birth .
Framing this right and creating optimum conditions for it should be a key priority for this Parliament !
Instead , the statements in the report help to discredit and criminalise asylum-seekers .
With regard to accepting asylum-seekers , the Schmitt report demands " burden sharing " within the EU .
Asylum-seekers are accordingly denigrated as being a burden .
How can a humane asylum and refugee policy which meets the needs of refugees be based on a fundamental assumption of this kind ?
Furthermore , the Schmitt report welcomes agreements whereby third countries would promise to readmit rejected asylum-seekers .
These are an instrument of a fortress Europe policy which has nothing in common with a humane refugee policy .
Such readmission agreements can lead to people seeking protection being pushed back to their countries of origin , and make it easier for EU Member States to refuse asylum .
Mr Schmitt ' s report also supports the concepts of " safe third countries " and " safe countries of origin " .
These concepts are responsible for victims of political persecution failing to obtain asylum in Germany , that is to say whenever they enter via " safe third countries " or come from a " safe country of origin " .
These instruments obstruct fair and equitable asylum procedures , and they should therefore be rejected and abolished as quickly as possible .
The European Parliament must make proposals that take account of the interests of refugees and asylum-seekers in the European Union .
We must press for an end to the policy of " fortress Europe " , of the weakening of the right of asylum and of undermining the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees .
Everyone seeking refuge in the EU must have access to a just and fair reception procedure .
Unfortunately , Mr Schmitt ' s report goes in the opposite direction .
It reinforces the fortress Europe policy and advocates further restrictions on long-term protection of refugees and asylum-seekers .
I reject the extension of a fortress Europe and I accordingly reject the resolution on " common standards on asylum procedures " .
. ( FR ) It should not be forgotten that certain Members of this House , within their own families , may have known asylum seekers .
Only sixty years ago , Italians , Spaniards , Germans , Austrians and others , persecuted by their fascist or Nazi governments , were able to benefit from the right of asylum .
It was our pride and our duty .
In France , our most famous asylum seeker was General de Gaulle , who was able to benefit from the right of asylum in England in order to prepare the resistance .
The main value of this report is that it wishes to unify the laws of the Member States on asylum procedure .
Laws and procedures should be harmonised before the Dublin Convention and the Eurodac system are implemented .
It would be unfair to authorise only a single asylum request for the countries of the European Union , given that it does not have the same chance of success from one State to another .
In my opinion , the standards set by the report are too low .
There are omissions and certain points are still unclear .
Persecution is not just political or caused by the States .
Thus , persecuted Afghan women who are stoned for not wearing the chador , should without exception benefit from the right of asylum .
Similarly , an Algerian journalist threatened with death by fundamentalists should be able to benefit from the right of asylum .
Certain States that persecute dissidents are considered to be great democracies .
This is why requests from Chechnya are not examined .
In order to grant the right of asylum , the States require proof of persecution .
But this is often difficult to provide , due to the persecution itself .
The report remains vague on this subject .
Finally , the procedure should take account of family ties , language , cultural affinity and the colonial history of asylum seekers ' country of origin , in order to help them to cope with exile .
If there is abuse or people are turned away , it is because of the lack of coherent rules .
It would be unacceptable to be suspicious and restrict this great achievement in the history of humanity , which remains the only lifeline for freedom fighters worldwide .
I abstained on Amendment No 14 .
The aim of this amendment is to " request that in every application of the Eurodac system , emphasis be strongly placed on data protection in order to protect asylum seekers from any abuse of the information gathered " .
This amendment admittedly aims to protect data on the information gathered .
But I am against the actual idea of systematically collecting information , as by Eurodac , as I am against the very idea of accelerated procedures , which can give rise to many forms of abuse .
Report Sörensen ( A5-0126 / 2000 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I welcome the Commission ' s decision to adopt rules on compensating victims of crimes in the European Union .
As representative of the Pensioners ' Party which sent me to Parliament , I would point out that the majority of victims of crime are elderly .
In Europe , it is no longer possible for the elderly to set foot out of doors , not only at night but during the day as well in some areas .
For this reason I am satisfied by this European Union initiative .
Moreover , it should be stressed that the State must pay victims compensation on behalf of those responsible and then claim damages directly from the criminals .
. The UK Conservatives have always believed that more emphasis should be placed within the criminal law system on looking towards supporting the needs of victims of crime .
We therefore applaud those sentiments in the Sörensen report which support our view .
However , because the report also suggests changes in the structures of the voting procedure in the European institutions , and has serious resource implications , we cannot give it our overall support .
- ( FR ) Congratulations !
Once again , Europe has shown its great sense of responsibility in taking an interest in crime victims .
As highlighted in the report , the number of crime victims is constantly increasing .
What is the solution ?
As far as the European Parliament is concerned , it is material , legal , medical , psychological and social assistance for crime victims .
For us , the Members of the National Front , it is different .
It is not the symptoms of the problem that must be treated , but the cause .
Giving support in this area is absolutely no use at all and merely enables the European governing bodies to ease their conscience .
The very origins of crime in Europe must be tackled at source , because then , and only then , will the number of victims be reduced and will we be able to carry out our duty to help them to the full .
However , we only need to make a simple observation to see that , throughout Europe , crime is increasing , people in urban and rural areas feel less and less safe , international terrorism , paedophilia , sex tourism , enforced prostitution and trafficking in women , money laundering , drug trafficking , illegal immigration and cross-border organised crime are ever increasing .
In the name of the sacrosanct principle of the freedom of movement of people , these are the people who are drugged , attacked or killed .
Your unrestricted freedom of movement within your unachievable area of freedom , justice and security , is neither necessary nor unavoidable .
On the contrary , it is by re-establishing our borders and refusing to grant the tenants of the ivory towers in Strasbourg and Brussels any power in the field of policing , justice or immigration , that the security of European citizens may be preserved and guaranteed .
So wake up and take responsibility !
Weeping over and counting crime victims in Europe will not save them or bring them back : what we need to do is make sure that people do not become victims , and to achieve that , we must find ways of ensuring our security , which you are incapable of doing .
First of all , learn to take responsibility , learn to govern .
Report Turco ( A5-0138 / 2000 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the Turco report although I would have preferred to vote against it for it resembles a final balance sheet and is , above all , a very tedious report on the allocation and use of the Structural Funds in 1998 .
Personally , I am convinced that the European Union must completely change the way it allocates aid to those in need of its support .
In my view , the system of programmes and grids which has been used for twenty years to create new items in the outgoings section of the European Union balance sheet , needs to be completely revamped .
There is too much wastage and the desired objectives are not being achieved .
I feel that it is time to change the European Union ' s system of expenditure .
. ( IT ) The Union for a Europe of Nations Group agrees with Mr Turco ' s report .
What is more , it is important to look more closely at certain aspects of the report which , although they are more concerned with the last period of aid programmes than with providing an analysis after the event , are just as important for the current period .
I therefore call for greater and more meaningful coordination between the Structural Fund initiatives , with particular reference to the ESF , and more tangible compatibility not only with the longstanding annual horizontal themes - for example the SMEs - but also with new solutions .
Furthermore , since employment is one of the three governing motifs of the new programming period , Parliament should be kept regularly informed of the quality and quantity of available jobs by means of the Commission reports on the use of the funds in question .
The information should include a balance sheet as well as forecasts .
One further aspect concerns another governing motif for the current period : regional and local development and related issues .
New actions based on local initiatives carried out in a partnership framework have recently been introduced to boost the profile of this motif .
It therefore becomes important not only to learn how to be efficient in implementing these guidelines but also to be aware of potential obstacles to their implementation , and always proceed in the knowledge that the Community also has an objective in terms of employment .
It will be important from this as well as other points of view to verify that these objectives and guidelines are consistent with those of the Member States , starting with their national annual employment plans .
The final point has to be the detection of fraud .
The Commission mentions this in its report but provides an overview , confining itself to general aspects and not providing a detailed evaluation , so to speak , of the frauds , still less revealing the means used to combat fraud in the past or those to be used in the future .
This last aspect is , in fact , an unambiguous indication of commitment and political determination .
Mr President , I would also like to speak for personal reasons in order to clear up some of the confusion .
First of all , I did not invite the group , and I have already told the press that I do not agree with all that the group said .
However , after the manner of Voltaire , I consider that anybody should be free to demonstrate his own ideas , especially in a place which represents the sovereignty of the people .
I realise that some language can be offensive , but when one is on the receiving end of a bucket of water one is quite likely to be somewhat free in one ' s response .
I would stress that the incident was recorded on film , and it is clear from this film that the bad language aimed at the person who threw the water was delivered after the water had been thrown .
Furthermore , I am sure that we have all witnessed demonstrations , including demonstrations by other members of the party of the Member who has just spoken .
When , for example , his fellow party members demonstrated in front of Fiat against the owner of the firm , the language used certainly did not lack force , but nobody dared to suggest that the language used during a demonstration had to be suitable for a court reception .
I therefore maintain that it should be possible to express one ' s opinions freely , even if this means giving offence .
Should the need arise , the offended party can always take the necessary action through the appropriate channels .
But freedom of speech must be upheld !
Allow me to point out that the President ' s private office has been informed of these events and will , I can assure you , take all the necessary measures .
Mr President , I fail to understand why , at the start of the sitting , Mrs Napoletano referred to my party , Forza Italia , in connection with the incident which occurred in the Chamber .
I would like her to clarify her remarks because not only did we vote for President Prodi but we have neither agreed in the past nor agree now with the insults delivered in the forecourt in front of the Parliament building .
I fail to understand why Mrs Napoletano involved my party in the matter .
I am genuinely perplexed .
Please would she explain her reasons , for it is not our job to create bad feeling or pass judgement .
We are judging the behaviour of these young people because of the things they said , but I would like to know whether what Mr Speroni said is true , for if it is true that a Member of Parliament threw water over these people , the behaviour of the Member of Parliament is also reprehensible .
I therefore feel that it is for the Presidency to clarify the sequence of events .
Of course the language used is to be condemned , but we must make sure that we ascertain all the facts .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is neither the time nor the place to start this debate .
As I told you , the President has been informed of this matter and will take the necessary action .
I personally cannot give you any explanation at present .
Cohesion Fund ( 1998 )
The next item is the report by Mr Ripoll y Martinez de Bedoya ( A5-0140 / 2000 ) - Cohesion Fund ( 1998 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Commission ' s Annual Report on the Cohesion Fund 1998 ( COM ( 1999 ) 483 - C5-0326 / 1999 - 1999 / 2212 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as you all know , the objective of the Cohesion Fund is to contribute to economic and social cohesion and at the same time reduce regional and social disparities , through solidarity amongst the Member States .
Thanks to this fund , numerous countries of the European Union have had the opportunity to try to lessen the distance between themselves and the wealthier countries , and the results have been spectacular but insufficient .
The income per capita has increased from two thirds to three quarters of the Community average and the participation of the European funds in the growth of each of these four countries stood at an average of 0.5 % per year .
However , we should point out two problems for the future .
Firstly , the incorporation of new countries , which means that the countries which currently benefit from the Cohesion Fund may find that they will no longer be in receipt of those Funds before they have achieved the objectives of real convergence .
In this respect , we should consider a series of programmes for the future which will allow the new Members to achieve convergence with the European Union while , at the same time , the four countries which receive Cohesion funds should continue to receive them so that they can achieve the true objectives of convergence , growth and the generation of full employment .
Secondly , another problem is the temptation of some wealthier countries to penalise those countries which , since they receive Cohesion Funds , have achieved nominal convergence on the basis of serious , responsible , sympathetic and rigorous structural and economic policies , but clearly still without achieving true convergence , by eliminating them , in this case , from the Cohesion Fund , which could give rise to two possible situations .
Firstly , they may opt for less rigorous and more inflationist policies in order not to lose those funds .
Secondly , growth and convergence with the other countries of the European Union may come to a halt in some countries .
It would therefore be good to distinguish , Commissioner , between true convergence and nominal convergence .
Lastly , I would like to take up a series of recommendations regarding the Cohesion Fund .
Firstly , we should make greater investment in the railways , ports and maritime transport .
Secondly , transport aimed at the integration of peripheral regions , islands and outlying areas should become a priority .
Thirdly , we should pay greater attention to sustainable means of transport .
Fourthly , we need to take more action in the field of reforestation and land reclamation .
Fifthly , we must tackle the problem of the treatment of residues and solid waste .
Lastly , as we pointed out previously , we need more investment in urban centres .
I would also like to point out that , tomorrow , four amendments will be presented , two of them approved in committee as well as two new ones which are before the House .
My position - the reasons for which I have explained in committee - is not to accept them , since in general terms they simply propose new criteria .
We are talking about the Cohesion Fund and the 1998 audit , on which there is a regulation and criteria which have already been approved for 2000-2006 and we do not believe that this is the moment to change the criteria with regard to eligibility and the distribution of those funds .
Mr President , honourable Members , Commissioner , today , eight years on from Maastricht , the Cohesion Fund has , without a shadow of doubt , made a positive contribution towards promoting the economic and social cohesion of the regions of the EU and has had clear results in tackling social and regional disparities .
Since I live in an area which benefits from the Fund , I can assure you that every one of my fellow countrymen is also aware of and acknowledges these results , not only because of the information and publicity campaigns , but mainly because the projects which have received funding belong to basic sectors which affect his quality of life , which he can see is improving .
We would therefore like to commend the Commission for its actions so far in implementing the objectives of the fund and we urge it to continue its efforts to ensure that the Fund is used properly and helps improve its efficiency in the new programme period still further .
We must , of course , stress that the environmental aid granted continues to concentrate on the water sector , despite the need in many other cases for other measures to preserve , protect and improve the quality of the environment and the rational utilization of natural resources as laid down in Article 174 of the Treaty , which refers to reafforestation , land reclamation , etc .
Considerable investment is still required in order to deal with the serious problem of treating solid waste and refuse , although we still need to adopt incentives for using the most modern , environmentally-friendly and efficient technology .
It is also worth our supporting the promotion of further investment in environmentally-friendly transport infrastructures and we insist on the need to continue developing joint transport systems .
In view of forthcoming enlargement , which presents a great challenge , I consider it essential that we take prompt action to ensure that funding under the Cohesion Fund continues , given that it intervenes in two sectors which are very important in helping to achieve the objective of economic and social cohesion in the European Union , which is the Fund ' s very raison d ' être .
The fact that it has so far worked highly effectively should be enough to convince us of the need to continue funding to recipient countries , provided they need continuing support and depending , aside from the nominal convergence of the economies of Member States , on real convergence of both the incomes and , more generally , the quality of life of European citizens in their regions .
I should like to close by thanking the rapporteur for his sterling work and his willingness to cooperate during the procedure to examine and supplement his report in committee and I should like to pass on to you this succinct and , to my mind , rather dramatic appeal by a farmer in my region .
As he said so very simply yet so very forcefully on hearing of the achievements of our Union : " Europe yes , but a Europe for all the Europeans of the Union " .
Mr President , I want to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on my own behalf and on behalf of the Greens , for this report provides a very good overview of how the Cohesion Fund has operated and of the work that was done in the course of 1998 .
I am particularly pleased with developments , which tend towards increased investment in the railway sector , ports and marine transport .
Unfortunately , there is still quite a large imbalance in relation to the roads sector .
We have therefore tabled an amendment to the effect that investment in the roads sector should not represent more than a quarter of all investments in transport sector infrastructure so that it will be possible to comply with the guidelines for budget item B5-7 , which deals with trans-European networks .
This is something which , in our view , is very important .
We should like , on the whole , to see a more balanced investment policy , aimed at increasing diversification and investment in the environment and , at the same time , reducing investment in the roads sector .
We also welcome the fact that the Committee accepted our proposal , which is now point 9 , requiring that it should also be possible to use resources available for environmental projects for financing projects designed both to preserve and to carry out assessments of biological diversity .
Investment in methods of dealing with waste in as environmentally friendly ways as possible is discussed well enough in point 8 .
We would nonetheless add something in the form of Amendment 3 , which makes it clear that priority ought to be given to efforts to promote recycling and re-use .
Naturally , the amount of waste ought also to be reduced .
In addition to these environment-related amendments , we also have an amendment about the need to comply with the additionality principle .
We would ask the Commission to submit a report on the extent to which the additionality principle is respected when resources are obtained from the Cohesion Fund .
Mr President , I must congratulate the rapporteur and the Commission on their evaluation of the implementation of the Cohesion Fund in 1998 . The report now before us reveals some very positive results .
There is a clear trend towards real convergence without this having adversely affected the rigour of the budget policy . Even when measured strictly the Cohesion Fund has clearly played an important socio ­ economic role in infrastructures with development potential .
We therefore expect a more refined evaluation by the Commission of the application of the funds .
We are delighted to note the increase in employment , the absence of fraud , the greatly increased monitoring and the proper implementation of the programmes . However , certain issues must be raised .
I would draw the Commissioner ' s attention to the need for greater coordination of European funds with the objectives of sustainable development within the EU and real balance between the regions . These objectives require the promotion , as already mentioned , of alternative means of transport such as the railways , the sea and cabotage which will reduce congestion on the roads and stimulate the ports .
These objectives also require the role played by the Cohesion Fund to be integrated into a regional development strategy which aims to establish industries in small and medium-sized towns and in the rural areas which form four-fifths of the EU . They also require integrated support from the Structural and Cohesion Funds for structures allowing technology to be distributed democratically , particularly by following the process decided in Lisbon and promoting investment leading to new businesses and jobs .
Finally , these objectives also require a civil and social dialogue and the participation of research bodies subordinated to this strategy .
The principle of cohesion considered in the Treaty must not come under threat during enlargement .
The Cohesion Fund must be reworked bearing in mind the positive results with the new socio-economic indicators which are expected to ensure that this experience of the cohesion countries is not lost either for current beneficiaries or for future ones .
I would ask the Commissioner to give his opinion in this respect .
Mr President , thank you for allowing me to speak , as I wanted to say a few words on this report , which is extremely important .
It concerns a subject which is of great interest to me personally , given the commitment of the European Union in favour of the countries which are furthest behind in development and which are catching up with the support of European solidarity .
Today , four countries are directly concerned by the objective of cohesion .
We are talking about a budget of almost EUR 17 billion for the period now beginning , 2000 ­ 2006 .
But if we look back over the last ten years , including the year cited in this report , 1998 , I would say to the Members here and to all those listening to us that the four countries that were the furthest behind , Ireland , Greece , Spain and Portugal , have gained ten points in ten years in relation to the Community average gross domestic product .
If there is one policy - and fortunately there are others - whose efficacy can be shown , it is the cohesion policy .
I would like to say this at a time when citizens and taxpayers sometimes wonder about the importance and usefulness or efficacy of the European Funds .
So the subject dealt with by Mr Ripoll y Martinez de Bedoya in his report is an extremely important one .
I would like to thank him for his clear-sightedness , precision and competence .
Furthermore , several speakers from all parties have thanked him .
The form of the report is just as important as its content .
With regard to content , ladies and gentlemen , on the subject of the investment allocated to transport , your rapporteur argues for a better balance in favour of sustainable transport , in particular in favour of railways .
He may be sure that the Commissioner for Regional Policy , who was once Minister for the Environment in his own country , is extremely supportive of this move and will oversee it personally , particularly in the programming of the Cohesion Fund for the next six years .
I share this concern .
It has also been highlighted by Mrs Schörling and Mrs Damião , and you may rest assured that I will endeavour to increase the tendency towards sustainable transport , in particular railways , that has been noted over the past few years .
But this tendency is not enough : I want to emphasise it further over the next six years .
With regard to the other investments that can contribute to the objective of sustainable transport , I am referring to ports and airports , the Commission - let me be frank - wants to see a certain amount of caution concerning air transport and certain forms of maritime transport .
In any case , we want to look into matters in detail and modify the rate of cofinancing to take account of the commercial nature of the activities and revenue generated , which is the least we can do .
Having said this , the tendency in favour of sustainable transport is one that the Commission will support with all its might .
With regard to the environmental aspect , your rapporteur highlights the need - as Mr Mastorakis also said so emphatically - to pay more attention to the serious problem of the treatment of solid waste and household refuse .
To date , the Fund has focused on three sectors which are the subject of Community directives : the treatment of drinking water , the treatment of waste water and the treatment of solid waste .
The priority was to allow the Member States to respect the deadlines set in implementation of the directive on waste water , and we are well aware that the problems that I have just mentioned , in particular the matter of waste or water treatment , are problematic in the countries concerned .
I have been able to see this personally in the Azores and I know that the situation is the same in the Greek islands , to use these two examples : these problems are particularly difficult in the case of remote , outermost or isolated island regions .
Also , with regard to the specific problems concerning the environment and thinking of islands in particular , I would like to express my wish to support investment in favour of renewable energy , and I have made this known to the Member States .
More specifically with regard to solid waste , 14 % of the total budget appropriation was earmarked for its processing , which represents a significant increase in relation to the 1993-1997 period .
However , I share your rapporteur ' s wish to use the most modern environmentally-friendly technologies for this purpose .
Earlier today , Mrs Schörling expressed the satisfaction of the Group of the Greens that an amendment to paragraph 9 proposed by her group had been approved .
This was not by chance , Mrs Schörling .
I deliberately wanted to record the Commission ' s agreement to using the Cohesion Fund in favour of biodiversity and protecting nature , not just anyhow or for just anything .
This tendency has been realised in the approval of this amendment .
You will also see my continuing desire , under Objectives 1 and 2 and the Cohesion Fund , for part of the loans to be used to benefit biodiversity .
Having talked about content , I would like to say a word or two about form , and first of all reply to the comments of your rapporteur on the study on the socio-economic effects of the Cohesion Fund ordered by the Commission .
It seems to me that these comments are based on a misunderstanding , which I would like to clarify .
The five years cited by your rapporteur refer to the period between the commencement of the projects evaluated and the final evaluation .
The consultants chosen by the Commission first of all developed an evaluation methodology and then evaluated the projects concerned .
It is not unusual for a large project and the ex-post evaluation of its results to take five years to complete .
The Commission , which has just received this study , is currently analysing it , and in any case , it will be sent to you as soon as possible .
I would now like to bring up the issue of consistency between the Cohesion Fund and the Structural Funds as raised by your rapporteur .
I am particularly interested in this issue .
This is why the Structural Funds programmes currently being negotiated by the Commission with the Member States of cohesion include indicative sums for both Cohesion Fund aid and European Investment Bank aid .
The information requested by Parliament is available in the individual programming documents .
In addition , I would like to emphasise that the recent restructuring of the Directorate-General for Regional Policy brings together the geographical teams and power within the same units for Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund , so that Cohesion Countries , which are eligible for Structural Funds in most cases , will have the same contacts within this Directorate-General .
This seems to me to be a more consistent approach for these countries .
But consistency between the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund also means observing the specificity of these two instruments , in accordance , moreover , with the general regulation on the Structural Funds .
It would in fact be inappropriate to use the Cohesion Fund for the same purposes and in the same way as the Structural Funds .
From the point of view of financial management , it is not the right time to abandon the specificity of each instrument .
In any case , I am not in a position to alter the scope of the Cohesion Fund , which stems directly from the Treaty .
Mrs Schörling , you spoke of the matter of additionality .
Allow me , so as not to waste your time , to refer back to what I said earlier on the subject of Mr Turco ' s report .
I clearly expressed my wish to verify additionality and what is true for Mr Turco ' s report is also true for the Cohesion Fund .
I even said that the reality of this additionality would be one of the points which would enable me to validate or approve programmes and projects .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasise that the annual report is a particularly useful tool for the analysis , assessment and reflection that regularly takes place on the implementation of regional policy .
This report is even more useful in that it is comprehensive .
As I agree that there are advantages in releasing the annual report as soon as possible , I can assure you that my staff will do their best to speed up publication as much as possible in future .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that our reflection is not only linked to these annual reports .
I can also assure you that beyond our regular meetings , the report on cohesion that I shall present to you at the end of this year will respond to a lot of the questions , criticisms and proposals raised by your rapporteur with regard to the pursuit of solidarity regarding countries benefiting from the Cohesion Fund , particularly in view of the perspective that concerns us all : enlargement .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Integrated control system for Community aid schemes
The next item is the report by Mr Casaca ( A5-0137 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a Council regulation on amending Regulation ( EEC ) 3508 / 1992 establishing an integrated administration and control system for certain Community aid schemes [ ( COM ( 1999 ) 517 - C5-0317 / 1999 - 1999 / 0207 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal before us represents a revolution in control systems and provides the technical bases for a revolution in the method of managing the common agricultural policy .
The proposed method is based on a modern geographic information system in which the cartographic information on holdings is digitised and integrated with the alphanumeric information needed to describe the holding and the aid received .
In terms of control , this method has enormous advantages and significantly reduces the possibility of fraud or any other irregularities .
In terms of managing the CAP , this will finally create a management infrastructure with the technical basis to transform a policy which until now has irrationally subsidised the richest countries , regions and farmers and encouraged surpluses and environmental damage . The new system is geographically oriented , it will encourage sustainable agriculture and it will assist the regions and rural communities which are most in need .
This shows that there is the political will and discernment needed from the European institutions to put a new policy into practice .
In my opinion , the integration into the system of virtually all the sectors financed by the CAP should be sought .
The recent Court of Auditors report on classical swine fever shows that , even in areas where the geographic information initially seems less important , this is actually decisive and may form a fundamental instrument in rationalising the common agricultural policy .
It seems to me that there is therefore every advantage in immediately integrating into the system three sectors which are not included in the Commission proposal .
These are oil , flax and hemp and tobacco . For the first , this involves integrating the existing specific geographic information system into the general system .
For the second , we know that the Commission has already proposed the integration of this sector into arable crops but we do not know when and if the Commission proposal will be approved .
As for the third , its integration is the most necessary and urgent . The fact that tobacco is not at the moment subsidised per hectare but by quantity produced in no way affects the possibility of this being immediately integrated into the system and even less so the advantages which this offers .
The application of a geographic control system will ensure that subsidised tobacco is actually produced on the holdings for which the aid is claimed .
Furthermore , it would be absurd for the extensive information which the Commission requires from each holding in order to clear the accounts not to be integrated into the new system .
In this respect , the Commission should reduce its requirements to what is necessary and reasonable .
It must realise firstly that the CAP is placing an increasing and hidden administrative burden on national and regional authorities .
Secondly , farmers should not be required to spend more time filling in forms than milking cows or tilling the earth .
We do not want to turn farmers into bureaucrats .
Although it is necessary to fight fraud , we must also prevent the complexity of the system causing a multiplication of minor formal irregularities and farmers being unfairly penalised .
The simplification of the legislation applying the CAP is an absolute priority .
Finally , our expectations of the Commission are as follows .
It is incomprehensible that a project of this size and scope should not culminate in the processing at European level of all the information gathered .
It is unthinkable that a common policy such as the CAP should be handled like a collection of fifteen national policies or , even worse , like a pile of unconnected invoices from 80 or 90 national payment authorities .
The Commission must process all the geographic information now required from the fifteen Member States in a coordinated manner .
However , it is also vital that this precious resource is used to further the policy of economic and social cohesion , environmental protection and even regional development .
Mr President , as well as congratulating Mr Casaca on his excellent work , I must thank him for his support for the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture .
This opinion has tried to correct the Commission ' s approach , which ignores most of the essential elements , not only for control , but also for administration .
This source of information is found in the administrative information resulting from the payments of the EAGGF .
Regulation ( EC ) No 2390 / 1999 demands that the Member States provide the Commission with the data on the payments of the EAGGF-Guarantee .
Nevertheless , it only demands that that information is communicated to them on request and exclusively for the preparation of verifications in situ in the process of the settlement of accounts .
This situation creates various control limits .
Effective administration must be able to provide the institutions responsible with the elements for analysis and decision and amongst these elements is the cost-efficiency index .
This approach must be applied systematically and must be based on the analysis of the payments corresponding to each regulation .
The fact that this information can only be requested for the preparation of verifications in situ in the process of the settlement of accounts sets a time limit on the availability of the fundamental information for administration and control .
Once the process of the settlement of accounts is over , it is no longer possible to make any analysis of administration or control activities .
However , as well as these verifications relating to the settlement of accounts , effective control requires other instruments such as , for example , the cross-checking of the different information available .
In order to reduce these deficiencies , it has been proposed to use the information available within the framework of the above-mentioned Regulation ( EC ) No 2390 / 1999 in the integrated administration system , which Mr Casaca spoke about earlier in this magnificent report .
Therefore , in the first stage of the establishment of this integrated administration and control system , it would be sufficient to regulate the conditions for delivering the information mentioned and the need for the Commission to store it .
Mr President , we welcome this proposal by the Commission to improve the system of control and I should like to thank Mr Casaca for his report .
This is a very technical subject and indeed to comprehend it one needs an understanding of almost all the details of the entire common agricultural policy .
Mr Casaca has made a very good effort to explain it to Parliament .
I should also like to thank the Commission for its continuing efforts to tidy up the whole business of accounting in the area of agriculture .
It is extremely important .
We have recently been talking about regional funds and cohesion funds but the common agricultural policy is extremely important .
It is the greatest instrument we have for cohesion since it is the only rural policy which the Community has and it brings immense benefits to peripheral areas and to people who are in businesses that are not otherwise viable .
The policy was given a bad name in the past when most of the funds were channelled to the agricultural industry through the processors and exporters .
We had the possibility for large amounts of fraud and racketeering through the payment of monetary compensatory amounts .
With the reorganisation of the policy we have a new situation .
It is fair to point out that the most recent report by the Court of Auditors for the year 1998 has not drawn attention to any single major failure of the Commission in this entire area .
There have been problems but they were isolated , small offences , relating to areas of aid and also to premiums and the failure of national governments to understand the details of European law .
But we have to recognise that for the most part the Commission was given a clean bill of health for 1998 which is the most recent report we have and it is to be congratulated on that .
Considering that this is something like 48 % of the entire budget - EUR 38 or 39 billion - it is quite an achievement , spent over fifteen countries , that the budget was within two and a half per cent of estimate and that waste and the possibility for loss were lower than the average for the budget .
The changes to the whole system have made it easier to control .
The fact that more money is now going directly to farmers makes it easier to understand exactly what is happening .
The proposed changes will readjust our system of accounting to the new policies that have been devised .
It is reasonable to expect Member States to produce the sort of detail that is necessary for the European Commission both from the management point of view as well as that of accounting , to have exact details of where and to whom the money is going , down to the last recipient .
This is welcome .
In relation to the amendments proposed by Mr Casaca , we can support all of them .
We have received complaints from some people about the proposal to introduce tobacco .
Maybe , as things stand at the moment , because the money goes to processors there is some point in saying that it should not be extended .
But we spend EUR 1 000 million on the tobacco regime .
There are about 135 000 farmers , about 135 000 hectares .
That means approximately EUR 7 600 per hectare , approximately EUR 7 600 per farmer .
That is a lot of money .
It is only reasonable that we should seek to establish that this money goes to the farmers and applies to the hectares , as Mr Casaca has suggested .
My group is asking for a divided vote to enable those who do not like the tobacco regime to vote against it but , on the other hand , our amendment is a message to the Commission that we really think this should be clarified so that the money will go exactly where it is supposed to : to rural areas and to farmers .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Casaca on his excellent report .
My group will of course support it .
The integrated administration and control system is actually the central plank of our present agriculture policy .
We need reliable information on final beneficiaries , the number of animals kept and the surface area being cultivated .
This is a difficult task which is only possible at all by virtue of technological progress .
Mr Casaca ' s report covers this to a considerable extent .
Welcome as this is , we should nevertheless not lose sight of the fact that this will involve changeover problems .
We learnt that when the present system was introduced under the 1992 regulation .
Today , eight years later , two Member States have not yet implemented the system at all or only in part .
We cannot allow delays of this kind to occur again .
This subject was addressed at the time of the 1998 final discharge .
The Commission informed us that the advance payments for these two countries , Greece and Portugal , had been reduced .
That alone is not enough .
In such cases there must be tangible sanctions that really bite , linked to the process of clearing the accounts .
In connection with the final discharge , the Commission also presented the 1998 monitoring statistics to us .
I do not want to burden you with figures here , but I will perhaps give you a short extract .
In 1998 in the 15 Community Member States there were more than 3 million applications for " area " aid .
Of these , some 12 % were checked , partly on the spot and partly by satellite .
Of those applications checked , over 40 % were inaccurate .
We should not of course immediately assume that deception was intended in every case .
In some cases , there were technical oversights , in others misunderstandings about interpreting the rules , and so on .
Nevertheless , these amounts add up to millions of course .
These figures therefore demonstrate just how urgently a properly functioning control system is required .
As the European Parliament rapporteur responsible for anti-fraud measures , I would like to bring a serious problem in this area to your attention .
All the Member States report any irregularities to the Commission , but only a few Member States tell the Commission which of these cases are classified as fraudulent .
For example , according to the statistics , in the United Kingdom there were 4 995 cases of over-declaration , 971 cases of duplicate applications and 52 cases of " false " applications .
But not one of these cases was classified in the statistics as being fraudulent or as giving rise to suspicions of " serious negligence " .
Finland , Austria , Portugal and Sweden do not report any such cases either .
So is there a kind of fraud-free zone in the EU ?
I very much doubt it .
The problem we have here also occurs in other budget areas .
The administrative controls more or less work , but we do not have a reliable overview of criminal aspects .
This problem needs to be solved as a matter of urgency if we really want effective deterrence in order to combat fraud .
The ideal way of achieving this is to set up a European public prosecutor ' s office for financial matters , which this House has repeatedly called for .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , expenditure within the framework of the EAGGF , Guarantee section , forms the largest entry in the whole of EU expenditure , and this year amounts to over EUR 41 billion .
The far-reaching management and control measures which the Commission proposes are therefore very appropriate indeed .
It is a matter of great urgency that such a large part of the EU ' s expenditure should be used correctly and efficiently .
I do , however , wonder whether the proposed measures are the most effective .
In this respect , I would refer to the useful input from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in this report .
The Committee claims that , when data is collected , the existing databases are ignored , would you believe !
This is how useful information for managing Community aid falls by the wayside .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is right in saying that the Commission is acting in an absurd manner .
Data on payments or revenue in respect of the EAGGF , Guarantee section , can only be used at the request of the Commission for closing accounts .
But surely this is no reason to ignore this information .
The existence of this wealth of information should have been a reason for the European Commission to adapt Regulation 2390 / 99 .
We at the European Parliament can still rectify this mistake made by the Commission by including an amendment to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development ' s recommendation , which unlocks this source of information for the management of Community aid .
If the regulation has been amended to this effect , we will back it without hesitation .
Mr President , I would also like to support the report presented by Mr Casaca on the European Commission proposal on the Integrated administration and control system for Community aid schemes , which was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
In my opinion , the reservations expressed by the Executive , particularly the Commission ' s position on Article 1 of the proposal , are unfounded .
The products which the rapporteur intends to add to the list all fall within sectors of considerable financial consequence whose control mechanisms have proved to be insufficient .
In fact , these products have all been subject to fraud and irregularity in the past .
Moreover , the extension of this system to a greater number of products would facilitate sound , effective management , which would lead to simpler procedures for both the Executive and farmers .
It is , in effect , necessary to harmonise the excessive number of different regulations which are currently in force , for the purposes of containing costs as well .
On the basis of the above considerations , I therefore call upon the Commission and the Council to incorporate the position of the Committee on Budgetary Control and , in particular , Amendment No 1 and Amendment No 2 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I too would like to warmly thank the rapporteur , Mr Casaca , and the Committees on Budgetary Control and on Agriculture and Rural Development for their proposals in the form of amendments and above all for the constructive debate on this proposal .
I am particularly grateful for their support for the basic principles underlying the Commission proposal , on which we are in agreement .
Although I cannot agree to all the amendments tabled by the committees , I would like to make it clear that the Commission supports the committees ' basic view that the integrated administration and control system needs to be further strengthened .
With regard to Amendment No 1 , the Commission ' s main motivation in presenting this proposal was firstly to adjust the integrated control system to the new legislative situation arising from Agenda 2000 , secondly , to introduce the geographic information systems designed to improve the identification of agricultural areas and , thirdly , to stipulate compatibility between IACS and administration and control systems for other Community aid systems .
Also on amendments , I would like to make the following point : in the case of Amendment No 1 , I agree with the criticism raised earlier in the debate that not all Member States have yet made sufficient progress in establishing IACS .
However , it was not because of the transposal situation that the Commission presented its proposal for an amended regulation , but rather to introduce the new geographic information systems available .
As has also been explained , we have already taken advantage of the charging procedure , by setting a charge for those Member States lagging behind in that context also .
Amendment No 2 suggests that various other aid systems should be brought under IACS , with those for olive oil , tobacco , flax and hemp being mentioned in particular .
There is one particular point that must be borne in mind here : these schemes are not exclusively " area " aid schemes , so they cannot be wholly brought under IACS .
However , IACS will , of course , be applied as far as possible in these cases .
In particular , if flax and hemp are now to be integrated into the arable support system , IACS will then be fully applied .
But IACS or the geographic information system will also be used for determining areas and for drawing up the olive sector register .
With regard to Amendment No 3 , the Commission is opposed to automatic exemption from the requirement to submit an area aid application for applying aid under a scheme not directly linked to agricultural areaThe Commission has in any case already granted an exemption of this kind for special cases , and it should retain the option of first being able to check whether such an exemption is sensible .
The Commission is in full agreement with Amendment No 4 to the extent that it refers to Article 10 , which is to be deleted .
However , it is not possible totally to delete the provision affected in the way proposed .
The Commission must also retain the right to carry out checks in relation to IACS .
I shall now turn to the other points raised in the debate .
It has been proposed that payments should be centralised and that all data should be centralised . We believe that the effect of this would be exactly the opposite of what we wish to achieve .
What we are looking for here is subsidiarity .
We cannot carry out all the checks from Brussels .
We know that there are millions of applications , and that means that it is only possible to check and control applications for compliance with the rules through decentralisation .
If we need information , we can in any case always access case-by-case details via national IACS operations and through national payment agencies .
There is no problem there .
But for the same reason , it would not only be organisationally counterproductive in terms of modern management but also highly costly to automatically send all data to Brussels and store it centrally there .
Mr Bösch pointed out that of all applications checked with regard to area , 40 % were inaccurate .
However , we need to clarify what we mean by inaccurate applications , and above all just what the defects are .
For example , if you look at the European Court of Auditors ' Statement of Assurance and in particular at the representative spot checks carried out by the Court of Auditors for 1998 , the following facts emerged with regard to the support system for producers of arable crops : out of the entire random sample taken , a total of 16 substantial errors were found in relation to area .
The deviations in these 16 incorrect applications were in ten cases between 0 % and 3 % , in four cases between 3 % and 5 % and for only two applications in the entire random sample for the whole Community was the deviation over 5 % .
The other point that Mr Bösch raised , and which I also consider to be important , is the question of possible criminal aspects .
The issue here is to what extent actual incidences of fraud are not subject of adequate prosecutions .
You all know that under present legislation and also in accordance with the current contractual arrangements , all matters relating to criminal law are the responsibility of the Member States .
If cases of fraud or suspected fraud should actually arise in this area , then the national public prosecutor ' s office should automatically be involved .
The extent to which it would make sense to set up some kind of European public prosecutor ' s office for financial matters or to introduce some kind of European financial prosecution procedure is an issue which ultimately has to be discussed in the framework of the Intergovernmental Conference , because it would imply a treaty amendment .
Just one brief observation , Commissioner .
Your institution is calling for a public prosecutor ' s office for financial matters in connection with the Intergovernmental Conference .
I hope that there will be no further need for negotiations and clarification within the Commission .
We will be glad to support you on this .
I would like to make it clear that I did not say that we require anything to be clarified .
I simply said that any decision would have to be taken in the framework of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Nuts and locust beans
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission ( B5-0491 / 2000 ) by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on support measures for nuts and locust beans .
Mr President , in the absence of Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , and on his request , I will speak on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture .
The majority of nut production in the European Union takes place in arid areas and on steep slopes in drought conditions .
These crops offer protection against erosion and desertification and play the role of firebreaks .
They are of fundamental importance as a source of supplementary income , which is essential to the maintenance of a large number of rural operations in the least-favoured areas .
Furthermore , this production is the basis of a significant primary and secondary processing industry , the key to economic diversification in rural areas which suffer very difficult conditions .
The Community ' s level of self-sufficiency in this area is between 50 and 60 % .
Community production must endure competition from third country producers whose costs are much lower and who are subject to greatly reduced tariff protection .
For example , in the case of hazelnuts , the costs of production in the European Union are three times greater than those in Turkey as a result of the differences in labour costs .
In the case of almonds , the cost difference is a result of the fact that in the European Union they are produced in very difficult climate and soil conditions .
Tariff protection is very low and is being progressively dismantled following the negotiations within the World Trade Organisation and other preferential agreements .
The Commission clearly cannot ignore the fact that , when it holds commercial negotiations , its concessions have effects which sometimes turn out to be negative .
For this reason , it must become customary to assess the consequences and automatically establish measures to lessen the negative effects of commercial concessions granted by the Commission .
Despite the fact that the measures laid down in Regulation ( EEC ) No 789 / 89 have had positive results , they have not managed to balance the cost of production with prices on a market dominated by the enormous pressure of imports at low prices .
The problem is that the support which this production has relied on is coming to an end , while the severe production conditions have not changed , and the competition from third country production has become tougher .
In fact , the tariffs applicable to almonds , for example , are going to be reduced further next month from 4.1 to 3.5 % and there is a quota of 90 000 tonnes at 2 % .
Furthermore , American exports to certain third countries enjoy preferential agreements which the European Union does not have .
In fact , over the last ten years the price has remained the same .
The tariff for hazelnuts stands at 3.3 % .
Nevertheless , a lower rate of 3 % is applied for products from Turkey .
The pressure of imports is such that there is less and less difference in prices between the select varieties and the common varieties , which has a devastating effect .
The difficult growing conditions in the European Union prevent competition with third countries and it is not possible to improve competitivity unless we abandon the current production areas and move production to other regions .
This would cause serious environmental damage , serious risks of depopulation and serious problems in terms of land management .
For these reasons , Commissioner , the Committee on Agriculture presented the oral question which has led to this debate .
The diagnosis of the problems involved in the needs of Community nut production is well known . This is demonstrated by the fact that all the political groups in this House have agreed on the presentation of a resolution .
The pressure of imports and the difficult climate and soil conditions demand , therefore , support for Community nut production .
The Committee on Agriculture , in the resolutions presented unanimously by the political groups , is responding to the conclusions of the recent appearance of the nut sector before the Committee on Agriculture and , to a certain extent , takes up the requests of the sector , which , as the Commissioner knows , is enormously worried and concerned .
These concerns , demands and requests of the Committee on Agriculture and the political groups in Parliament are aimed at seeking a solution which involves the granting of direct aid to the income of producers which , by maintaining that cultivation , will lead to the prevention of environmental damage and depopulation and maintain certain primary and secondary processing industries in the least-favoured areas .
However , on the other hand - and this is the aspect which has led to the anguish and concern in the sector today - given that the measures aimed at this sector are coming to an end , it is essential that they be extended until a new support system has been put in place .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Jové Peres , may I remind you that the Commission itself discovered many years ago that growing nuts in the European Union involves certain difficulties !
Part of the reason for this , and you are right in saying this , is undoubtedly the keen international competition which exists , but the main reason is that there are various structural deficiencies in the main nut-growing areas .
We unfortunately discovered that these structural deficiencies above all result in low productivity and high production costs .
In view of these difficulties , a support system was introduced back in 1989 .
But even at that time it was limited to 10 years , and its objective was to improve the nut quality and marketing .
This system involved a significant financial commitment .
Between 1990 and 1999 , this system led to expenditure totalling EUR 725 million .
And as the contractual obligations are still in force , and run up to 2006 , this year and in the coming years a further EUR 250 million will be paid out .
In addition , a separate flat-rate aid for hazelnuts was introduced in 1997 .
However , as I have already said , it has been clear from the outset , as everyone affected knows , that there is a time limit on the measures to promote sales and that the objective is to facilitate the adjustments necessary to increase competitiveness .
In view of the fact that the programmes will in part be continuing up to 2006 , no further measures are planned under this budget heading .
However , I would like to point out that a different form of support for nuts that did not exist previously has now become available .
Above all , the general aid scheme for fruit and vegetable growers under the " operational fund " also provides for measures of this kind , and of course additional , non-market-specific measures are also possible under the rural development programmes which had to be submitted this year .
However , none of the programmes submitted to us by the Member States , including those Member States with substantial agricultural areas , contains any proposals for measures of this kind , so that no such need was evidently identified when drawing up the programmes .
That is the present situation , and that also sets out what the Commission is in a position to do in this field so as to counter negative trends .
But the Commission should not be attacked if it was agreed beforehand that rural development was to be the responsibility of Member States and included in their programmes , and if at all possible at regional level within the Member States .
So that is where priorities for supporting rural development need to be set .
Mr President , I must thank the Commissioner for being present in this almost deserted chamber on a Thursday evening .
This House will end up as barren as the programme which you are presenting us with for nuts .
I would also like to thank all of you who are here to debate the future of nuts in the European Union .
I had my speech prepared , but having heard the reply which the Commissioner has just given us and the words of Mr Jové in his presentation , I believe that I am going to forget my notes and try to improvise in reply to the Commissioner ' s response .

The Commissioner is aware of the problems of nuts in the European Union and he is aware that we are dependent on a single supplier in many cases : the United States , on the one hand , in the case of almonds , and Turkey , in the case of hazelnuts .
The Commissioner is also aware of the benefits - as Mr Jové has stressed - for the arid areas where all these crops are cultivated , and this cultivation is not improvised from year to year , since it takes a long time to grow an almond tree or a walnut tree .
Therefore , Commissioner , I believe that we are facing a very extensive problem .
When you tell us that there are structural problems of low productivity and high production costs in the European Union , we must ask ourselves whether we want a nut sector or whether we want to be totally dependent on outside sources ?
We only provide 50 % of the supply , for the rest we depend on other countries .
At this rate , we will end up with nothing .
You tell us that there have had to be negotiations and that there is already aid from the COM in fruit and also within the framework of the rural development projects .
Therefore , I would like to say that , in the COM in fruits , the operational funds are intended for those crops - for those fruits - for which there is large-scale production .
In those cases , the operational funds - which are a very small percentage of this global production per hectare , some 1.5 or 2 % - are a reasonable amount to work with .
In the case of production per hectare which amounts to little more than ESP 100 000 , I believe that the operational funds of the COM in fruits have very little significance and offer very little in terms of resolving the problem of nuts .
With regard to the framework of the rural development projects , the Commissioner knows much better than I do that , in rural development , the second pillar of the CAP - which we all view with great hope and we congratulate him for having brought it up and united it in one budgetary line - , in the regions where these fruits are grown - which are basically Objective 1 regions in some cases , and Objective 2 regions in others- , the programmes developed there are LEADER programmes .
In these LEADER programmes , and PRODER programmes in the case of Spain , where there are national programmes , which are organised from the bottom up , it will be difficult to consider a specific cultivation as being of strategic interest and as a strategic sector , when these programmes normally deal with problems of general interest .
However , Commissioner , what we are proposing to you , and I believe that all the political groups are in agreement on this , is the partial continuation , not continuation sine die , but continuation until a certain date , Commissioner , of improvement funds and plans , because in some cases they have still not ended , and in other cases their objectives have still not been fulfilled .
However , these funds are absolutely essential to the maintenance of the crop , as long as nuts are subject to differentiated treatment within the coming reform of the COM in fruits and vegetables .
Commissioner , I believe that we are talking about a sum of money which is not especially large and which can be covered within the miserly budgets which , according to what your department tells us , are available for allocation .
Therefore , Commissioner , the extension of these improvement plans , as long as they are organised , used , and allocated according to a differentiated treatment in the coming reform of fruits , which will happen shortly , I believe that this will resolve and calm the fears which Mr Jové has expressed , which are shared by all the nut producers in the European Union , as they communicated to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , where they received our political support .
Since these producers have the political support of this House , I believe that it would not be justifiable to deny them a few pesetas of economic support .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I wish to reject the words of Mr Fischler - and his proposals - and I wish to support the motion for a resolution presented by various parliamentary groups , which has the practically unanimous support of this House .
Mr Fischler , the European Commission must not continue to ignore the requests of the sectors affected .
You cannot continue to insist that you alone are right and that we are all mistaken .
You cannot ignore the fact that , if we do not adopt support measures for nuts and locust beans , many crops will eventually be abandoned .
There will be irreparable consequences for many areas of the Union , from both socio-economic and environmental points of view .
It must be said that both specific measures for nuts and locust beans , as well as the lump sum aid for hazelnuts , were in fact transitional measures aimed at the conversion of the crops , but there is no reason why they cannot be extended .
Commissioner , a conversion in the agricultural sector cannot be treated as if it were a conversion in the industrial sector .
In industry , one can modernise plants and improve productivity , but in the case of certain crops , however much investment is made , however many changes are made in terms of marketing , we cannot alter the fact that certain areas are arid or semi-arid .
We cannot imagine that this problem can be resolved through the scant funds available in the rural development programmes .
That is not the place to find a solution for these areas , as the Commissioner and the whole of the Commission seems to think .
Furthermore , it does not appear that an extension of this aid until the adoption of the measures proposed in the resolution , nor even until the definitive measures themselves are adopted , will cause problems within the conversations in the World Trade Organisation .
The sector produces a surplus and Community protection is minimal .
If the quantities requested are not great , if there are no further problems , if this is the only way to maintain standards of living in certain areas , Commissioner , this aid must be retained .

Mr President , having heard the interventions of Mr Jové and Mr Fischler , I believe I should change the form of my intervention and go straight to what I believe is the crux of the matter .
The Commission ' s main argument is that which was agreed ten years ago .
That is to say , ten years ago there were certain conditions , we established a programme and it has come to an end .
I believe that it is precisely the change in conditions compared to ten years ago which weakens the Commission ' s position , and it is therefore important for them to be sensitive to an agreement which originates from the action of certain MEPs from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the European Parliament at the moment .
In my opinion , there have been three changes .
Firstly , the competition conditions have changed . They are not the same as ten years ago .
Secondly , according to the assessment of the agricultural sector , and this one in particular , it should be pointed out that there is much greater sensitivity towards environmental responsibility than there was ten years ago .
It is an economic sector , I agree , but it has much greater environmental responsibility than it did ten years ago .
Thirdly , if this aid is removed today , the loss of the land recovered over these ten years would be irreversible .
I therefore sincerely believe that there is no margin , either within the framework of rural development or in other areas , because we are not talking about vegetables , we are not talking about any other type of product , we are talking about a very specific product , with very specific circumstances , which were analysed ten years ago and which must be analysed today once again .
For this reason , I believe that it makes absolute sense to carry out a study of a new framework of aid and , in any event , there should be an extension with immediate effect .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , there are not many of us , just the little Mediterranean family , trying to defend the crops that Brussels does not like .
We have had the honey problem - Mr Fischler , you refused a few handfuls of euros for hive subsidies - the olive oil problem , and now it is the turn of walnuts , almonds and hazelnuts .
Brussels does not want to be involved .
We are told : there was the 1989 regulation , but it was provisional .
The fixed aid for hazelnuts in 1996 was temporary .
These measures have run their course and must come to an end .
But to put an end to Community funding is to spoil what has been achieved .
In the name of the principle of continuity , coherence and protecting the financial interests of the European Union , the aid that has already been committed must not be ended , especially since another aberration may be added to this one , the fact that we are in deficit .
We are importing .
And if that is making profits for Turkey , then fair enough , but making profits for California !
You tell us that it is expensive , but you are not telling the whole truth . It costs EUR 250 million , but that is for years to come .
You are avoiding giving the annual figure , which would represent 0.0 something percent , a tiny fraction of the European budget .
In other words , Commissioner , action must be taken , first in the name of quality , in the name of seasonal employment , but also in the name of common sense , rurality , the environment , beauty .
I do not know whether you have seen an almond tree in February , well it is truly a thing of beauty !
And as we have told you , we are dealing with regions in Spain , in my native Languedoc-Roussillon , in Greece , where the land is arid .
We must prevent a rural exodus .
As a minimum , since extending the COM for fruit and vegetables is not a solution , we must set aside a few euros from the European budget to finance this activity .
But on top of that , Commissioner - you and I were both in Seattle - there is the problem of Community preference .
Our honey over Chinese , Canadian or Mexican honey .
Our olives instead of North African olives and our Spanish , Italian , Portuguese , Greek , Languedoc-Roussillon and French Mediterranean before Anatolia and California , Commissioner .
Not for a fistful of dollars , but for a fistful of euros .
Commissioner , in your speech you told us how you viewed the situation , but I can assure you that the industry does not see it in the same way .
It is true that aid was adopted in the past to tackle great difficulties facing the industry , but the problem is that today , ten years later and through no fault of the producers , the circumstances that led to the approval of that aid have not changed .
As has been pointed out , our tariffs continue to be very low , European products are still unable to compete with those originating above all from Turkey and the United States , as a result of social and labour costs or because the crops , in the case of the United States , are in irrigable areas and are mechanisable while those in the European Union are in drought areas which are not easily accessible , where there is little chance of mechanisation , and it is therefore true that they are less competitive .
However , this does not make the production in the European Union any less important .
Furthermore , despite the importance of this production , we still have a deficit , and the disappearance of this crop - which may occur if the aid to the industry is not continued - would put the consumer in the hands of Turkey and the United States , who would set our prices from their position as a true monopoly .
We should also remember , Commissioner , that there is practically no alternative to the cultivation of nuts because of the places in which they are produced .
For all these reasons , it is not surprising that there is enormous concern in the sector at the possibility that aid may be withdrawn , since without it - and we must recognise this - , given that the future of these operations , as a result of the competition from third countries , is in jeopardy and the investment made in the modernisation of the production systems - which has taken place on a significant scale - will have been pointless .
I would therefore also like to ask you , Commissioner , on behalf of the producers in the sector and especially on behalf of the producers in Catalonia , for the specific aid to this sector to be continued in the way that has been pointed out here and along the lines of the motion for a resolution which I hope will receive the support of this House .
This aid only represents 0.18 % of the total budget of the EAGGF-Guarantee and 0.16 % of the total agricultural budget , for which , furthermore , it has been pointed out that there is a sufficient financial margin .
Any other type of aid such as those you have mentioned , above all rural development aid , may be positive in other sectors , it is true , but in this case , given the specific nature of the sector , they are totally insufficient to guarantee the competitiveness , and therefore the survival , of these operations , whose interests the Commission - you , Commissioner - can in no way ignore .
Mr President , here again , I would simply like to draw attention to the fact that , in this crop that I know so well , the return on investment is long term .
Moreover , the producers have worked towards obtaining certification on irrigation , selecting plants , precisely organising the crops , and this work would be completely ruined if the aid that had been given up until now was not maintained at least long enough for the return on investment to take place .
For walnut trees , for example , the return on investment is around 18 years , and consequently , I believe that economic and financial logic and coherence , and also political coherence , require that for these crops , the Commission should show continuity , logic and common sense .
Mr President , I would just like to respond , very briefly , to the most important arguments raised .
First of all I would like to make it as clear as possible that the Commission is definitely against production aids .
Even the aids that we had in the past were intended to support improvements in structure and quality - they were not intended to be permanent production aids .
In addition , I have to say that any such purely production-related aid would violate all the WTO rules .
It has been argued that we are talking about a long-term investment here .
That is quite right .
But every farmer who has made an investment in this area signed a contract at the outset before he made that investment , so that he knew for exactly how many years he would be receiving investment aid .
So it is not as if the Commission can now be accused of some kind of cynicism because it is withdrawing support in a way that the farmers affected were not expecting .
Every farmer knew for exactly how many years he would be receiving support .
We need to be very clear about that here .
I have explained that there are new options .
If a case is being made that this type of farming is absolutely essential for maintaining the landscape and preserving the environment , particularly in these dry areas , then this is an ideal case for environmental measures .
It was precisely for this purpose that , amongst other things , we topped up the funding for environmental measures in the context of agricultural development .
You cannot be right on both counts .
You cannot argue that this is an important form of agriculture if it is obviously not important enough for the regional authorities to give it priority and grant support for it .
You cannot have it both ways !
It has been said that this is all too little and that more money is needed , and it has been argued that this is only nought point something of the total agricultural budget .
I am sorry , but the proportion of the budget the Commissioner can spend as he likes is 0.0 % , so that if you want aid , you must at least play fair and say who you want to take the money away from !
Because the room for manoeuvre is precisely zero , there is no leeway in the budget as has been suggested in this Chamber !
In accordance with Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received two motions for resolutions to end the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.15 p.m. )
Mr President , on a point of order .
I understand that the first point of order ever raised in the directly-elected Parliament in 1979 was by the Reverend Doctor Ian Paisley and his point was that the British flag was flying upside-down .
Twenty-one years later I have to tell you that yesterday evening in the forecourt in front of the Tower building , where the motorcyclists were collecting , there were sixteen flags flying .
Fifteen of them were the right way up but the Union flag was upside-down .
To fly the Union flag upside-down is an internationally recognised distress signal and to fly it upside-down when it is not a distress signal is a gross affront to the flag , the British people and the British nation .
I have corresponded with the President of our Parliament on this issue and she has written to me assuring me that this matter would be corrected and that the British flag would be flown the right way up .
Can I now call upon you first of all to ensure that the flag is immediately placed the right way up and also to take measures to ensure that in future it is always displayed correctly .
I can assure you , Mr Helmer , that everything will be done to ensure that the prestige of your flag is restored .
Mr President , I have news for Mr Helmer , which should encourage him .
He should be grateful that we see our Union flag up at all .
I am advised that it is the most popular flag to be stolen in this place .
Mr President , last year , the majority of MEPs in this House voted in favour of Friday morning sittings .
Recently , however , a certain number of MEPs have , here in Strasbourg , attempted to prevent other MEPs from working during these sittings : I denounce this very undemocratic attitude , especially as those who did not want others to work were still receiving their per diem .
I should also like to say this . We have recently taken a further decision and , from next year , there will no longer be a sitting on Friday mornings .
I have received an e-mail from a Dutch MEP , however , saying the following , in English , and I quote ,
" If these amendments " , that is to say , for there not to be a sitting on a Friday , " are adopted and under the existing rules Members who cannot travel back to their home country on Thursday evening will still be able to sign the attendance register on Friday " .
( FR ) Mr President , I think it is scandalous that MEPs are encouraged to stay here on Friday mornings anyway , in order to sign the register and to accept payment without doing any work , and I hope Parliament will have the courage to alter the existing rules .
( Applause )
Mr Goebbels , I would ask you not to reopen the debate and to go easy on me , since I am myself an endangered species in my capacity as President of the Friday morning session in Strasbourg .
Mr President , I should like to return once again to the fax , which Mr Van Hulten made available to all of us before the vote , and which concerns the issue of whether sittings should continue to be held on Fridays .
This is not just about participating in plenary sittings ; there are other tasks which need to be dealt with in this regard as well .
We will now have to deal with these matters at home .
There are , however , no attendance allowances for working at home .
But since we have been promised these allowances in Mr Van Hulten ' s letter , in the coming year I will be claiming the lost allowances from him .
I call on all colleagues to do likewise .
Mr Van Hulten had better start saving up now !
( Applause )
Mr President , in its wisdom , the House has made a decision on Friday sittings .
I should like to suggest that those responsible ensure that , even if no sittings are held on a Friday , official cars are still made available , because there will be many Members who will , in any case , wish to make full use of the Thursday here and who will need to have some way of reaching the airport or the railway station on the Friday .
We will certainly note your suggestion .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , with your permission , I should like to draw your attention to an inconsistency between the Minutes and the lists of roll-call votes .
Yesterday , we voted on the resolution on the Feira Summit and many colleagues will recall that - to laughter from many in this House - the Austrian Members of Haider ' s party voted in favour of two amendments which were very critical of Austria and then , some time later , took the floor and said that they had made a mistake and wanted their votes to be registered as votes against .
This correction - that is , that they voted against - is accurately reflected in the Minutes but , obviously in part thanks to their party headquarters ' intervening , the names of these Members do not appear anywhere in the record of the roll-call vote taken on Amendment No 4 .
I would therefore request that the lists of roll-call votes be corrected so that they correspond to the events which we all witnessed here .
The Minutes are correct in this respect .
It would also be desirable to clarify how many corrections to the corrections we Members are entitled to submit .
I take note of your comment , Mrs Berger .
Mr President , during the debate on common security and defence policy there was a roll call vote on Amendment No 36 .
However , yesterday 's Minutes refers to the wrong paragraph and thus the vote does not reflect what actually took place in this Chamber .
I have not had a chance to look in detail at this voting list , but that is one mistake I have spotted already .
I should like to draw that to your attention .
Thank you for bringing this to our attention .
We shall verify this and rectify it , if necessary .
( The Minutes were approved )
Vote
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal ) - Proposal for a Council Directive amending Council Directive 1103 / 97EC on certain provisions relating to the introduction of the euro ( COM ( 2000 ) 346 - C5-0292 / 2000 - 2000 / 0134 ( CNS ) ) ( Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Report ( A5-0137 / 2000 ) by Mr Casaca , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a Council regulation on amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 3508 / 1992 establishing an integrated administration and control system for certain Community aid schemes ( COM ( 1999 ) 517 - C5-0317 / 1999 - 1999 / 0207 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0140 / 2000 ) by Mr Ripoll y Martínez de Bedoya , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Commission ' s Annual Report 1998 on the Cohesion Fund ( COM ( 1999 ) 483 - C5-0326 / 1999 - 1999 / 2212 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0566 / 2000 ) on aid for nuts and locust beans
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) Explanation of vote
Ripoll y Martinez de Bedoya report ( A5-0140 / 2000 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , never was there more need for an explanation of vote , for I made a mistake and voted against the Bedoya report instead of for it .
I am therefore using the time available to me to make this statement .
Of course I voted for the report .
How could I not approve of the Cohesion Fund being used to assist Spain , Portugal , Greece and Ireland ?
However , I would draw the attention of the House to the fact that it would be appropriate to grant this aid for as long as it takes for the States ' gross domestic product to reach the European Union average in full , for otherwise I can imagine a situation where , as the gross domestic product of each State approaches the average , the relevant Minister for Finance and the Budget says , ' Put the brakes on or we will lose our European Union aid ! '
Casaca report ( A5-0137 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted against the Casaca report , not because I am against monitoring European Union expenditure , but because I consider that this is the moment to start changing the agricultural subsidy system .
We can all see that the European Union Agriculture ship leaks like a sieve .
I believe that , if we want to subsidise agricultural products and farmers in their activities , we must change our procedure completely .
I propose that , instead of granting farmers financial aid , we should grant them tax reductions and reductions in their social service and pension contributions relating to their activities .
These expenses would otherwise be borne by the States and therefore , to a lesser extent , by the European Union .
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0147 / 2000 by Mr Sousa Pinto , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Regulation completing Regulation ( EEC ) No 302 / 93 establishing a European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( OEDT ) ( COM ( 1999 ) 430 - C5-0304 / 1999 - 1999 / 0187 ( CNS ) )
( A5-0157 / 2000 ) by Mr Turco , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of an agreement between the European Community and the Kingdom of Norway on the participation of Norway in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( COM ( 1999 ) 496 - C5-0054 / 2000 - 1999 / 0203 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Article 13 of the Regulation establishing the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction allows third countries who share the interests of the Community and its States to participate in the Centre ' s work .
Following a request for participation by Norway , the Commission submitted to the European Parliament a draft agreement between the European Monitoring Centre and Norway authorising Norway to participate in the REITOX network and to be represented on the Management Board of the European Monitoring Centre as well as on its scientific committee .
In this regard , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs unanimously adopted 8 amendments which give a favourable opinion with reservations .
In particular , our opinion was influenced by the EMCDDA evaluation report which the Committee had asked independent external consultants to prepare .
The evaluation reveals poor coordination and poor communication between the different departments within the EMCDDA .
Decisions are far too centralised .
The REITOX network is more a virtual network than an operational one .
The National Focal Points are under-used and they could make a far greater contribution to the EMCDDA ' s work .
The role of the scientific committee is still poorly defined and its work is not a central part of the programme .
The Management Board is ineffective in achieving its goals and its meetings are often held without a pre-established agenda and do not involve genuine discussion of strategies .
There is no dissemination strategy for the results the Board produces and , therefore , only a small proportion of the information produced by the EMCDDA is published and disseminated .
With regard to work scheduling , there is insufficient coordination of the management tasks of the director and the heads of department . The administrative procedures are burdensome and inappropriate for such a small organisation and this generates manifest problems in terms of administration , management , planning assessment , development , recruitment and training .
The current accounting system will have to be revamped so that the real costs of activities can be traced .
Too many staff and too great a proportion of funds are dedicated to the purely administrative function of the EMCDDA .
These are the conclusions of the evaluation carried out independently by an external consultancy firm commissioned by the European Commission .
On the basis of this evaluation , we must now decide whether to allow Norway to participate in the work or not , taking into consideration the fact that the work is completely inconsistent with the mandate and far from exploits the Centre ' s potential .
Having said this , our committee unanimously considered that the draft agreement between Norway and the Centre , together with the proposal for a Council Regulation aimed at adapting the regulation governing the Centre with a view to the participation of candidate countries in its work , is therefore an opportunity to stress the need for a comprehensive overhaul of the regulation governing the Centre in order to ensure its effectiveness and reliability .
I urge the Commission to give us a tangible response regarding the amendments adopted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
Mr President , Mr Turco ' s report , which recommends that Parliament accepts the proposal for an agreement between the European Union and the Kingdom of Norway on the participation of Norway in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , was discussed at length and then unanimously adopted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
The amendments made by the Committee in agreement with the rapporteur , which have been incorporated into the proposal , are intended to exploit the opportunity presented by this agreement with Norway to give fresh impetus to the Centre ' s work .
The committee took into particular consideration the 1999 report on the Centre ' s work and the difficulties encountered , and the outcome of the interinstitutional conference on drugs which took place in Brussels late last February .
These sources showed that some of the constraints on the activities hitherto carried out by the Centre , which also restrict Union activity in this field , are caused by the wide range of differing information gathered by the various national centres linked to the Centre , with the result that it is difficult to draw conclusions from this information which would be useful in terms of prevention or damage limitation measures and operations to fight illegal trafficking .
The various amendments , including those dealing with the Centre ' s Management Board , are therefore intended to ensure that the Board uses genuinely effective data-gathering methods which are capable of interpreting the data in the light of unit criteria and provide useful indications regarding the efficiency of the various national anti-drugs policies .
Indeed , it appeared to many members of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs that both the annual reports of the Centre and those tabled and adopted by Parliament fail to take into due account the analysis of the results obtained in the various countries , whose anti-drugs policies differ , moreover .
The European Union needs to decide on its policies and recommendations to the governments of the Member States by means of a comprehensive assessment - which is not , as all too often happens , purely moralist - of the various strategies being followed in the various countries , especially with regard to prevention , damage limitation and consumer safety in the face of the constant emergence of new synthetic drugs .
We believe that the agreement on the participation of Norway in the work of the Centre , which , we hope , will pave the way for other enlargement initiatives , provides a major opportunity to revitalise the activity of this technical and scientific body , for the EMCDDA must become an increasingly important reference point in the development of a European policy to fight the illegal sale and distribution of drugs which are harmful to the health of the citizens of our countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when expressions like ' bringing the European Union closer to its citizens ' and ' good governance ' are on everyone ' s lips , an examination of the way the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction works , and of its scientific output , proves quite astonishing , as its conclusions are virtually non-existent .
Like the increasing number of centres that are being set up in order to conceal our differences , this one , in its five years of existence , has done nothing to justify the millions of euros that are pumped into it each year .
If you compare the amount of money which it is allocated with that available to national bodies , one would expect to see in-depth studies leading , as stipulated in the definition of its aims in Article 2 , to the provision of objective , reliable and comparable information concerning drugs and drug addiction .
This Centre ought to be in a position to establish definitions and uniform indicators with a view to carrying out an evaluation of the various anti-drugs policies implemented in the Member States , from both a health and socio-economic as well as a law-and-order perspective .
When will we get to know , for example , what the consequences have been of the prohibitionist policy adopted in France or of the regulatory one adopted in the Netherlands ?
The independent assessment of the activities of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , the conclusions of which were published in March 2000 , is very specific regarding the serious mismanagement of the board of directors and of the REITOX network , which gathers information on drugs and drug addiction .
The reports that we are looking at today are about expanding the Centre to Norway and to the 13 candidate countries .
On this issue we must agree , but would it not be better to reform this body beforehand , so that it might finally serve a useful purpose ?
New members should certainly be welcomed , but with what in mind ?
Is the idea to reproduce the failure we have witnessed over the past few years , but on an even larger scale ?
To add to the length of the beautifully presented annual reports which achieve precisely nothing ?
It is high time that the European Union became aware that , a long way from the Centre ' s magnificent premises in Lisbon , thousands of people are directly faced with the health and social difficulties engendered by drug dependence .
We are not asking it to deal with such problems , we are simply asking that it should analyse them .
Hundreds of varying initiatives are being implemented in Europe by both institutions and associations , which focus either on criminalisation or risk reduction .
What is the Centre waiting for to evaluate these strategies ?
How is it that Member States are being so reluctant to cooperate in evaluation ?
Is it possible that there is a fear that the results may not be that great politically ?
I therefore join the rapporteur in arguing in favour of the idea of a real reform of the Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , in respect both of the way it functions and of expanding its activities .
This , moreover , is a necessary precondition to taking on new members .
Mr President , as other colleagues have mentioned , the rapporteurs hope that amendments to this regulation will facilitate the Kingdom of Norway ' s participation in the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction and , in each of the amendments tabled , they have highlighted the action plans , Parliamentary resolutions and the annual evaluation of the Centre . They are also seeking to relaunch the Centre ' s work , change the guidelines for action of the Management Board and - it must be pointed out - ensure that Member States cooperate with the Centre as required .
We are all responsible for achieving this ; the Monitoring Centre , our national public institutions and the Member States themselves .
The only way to improve the Centre ' s work is by ensuring that the information provided by Member States and the regulations governing the Centre are ever more thorough and reliable .
Failure to do so would make it impossible to put an end to an evil that particularly affects the youth of Europe .
I also believe that if we fail to take this opportunity to amend the regulation with a view to relaunching the Centre ' s work , we run the risk of creating further problems when it comes to incorporating the applicant countries in this work .
In the short term , I think that this is one of the key issues to be tackled , which is why we fully agree with the rapporteur and why I believe the report will be adopted unanimously .
Each institution must fulfil their respective obligations and urge Member States to gather reliable information by working clearly and effectively together . What is more , they need to draw up specific action plans to tackle a problem that particularly affects the youth in our countries and implement them more rigorously and with greater enthusiasm .
Mr President , we are examining two proposals for partial revision of the working procedures and methods of the Lisbon Drugs Monitoring Centre , in particular two proposals on relations with the candidate countries and Norway .
This is therefore our chance - for the contents of these proposals are not in themselves revolutionary for the Centre - to discuss the role and usefulness of the Centre in terms of its function , which should also be our function , of providing political indications and assessments and adopting decisions and initiatives on drugs , although the European Union ' s powers in this area are severely limited .
I would argue that this type of discussion can only be based on an evaluation carried out by an independent body .
A number of speakers , including , in particular , the rapporteur , Mr Turco , have stressed that from very many perspectives , such as strategy , functionality and the poor capacity to integrate scientific work , this Centre ' s contribution to political decision-making is totally inadequate .
However , at this point I feel that it is necessary for the Commission to assume the responsibility of presenting a proposal for reform to Parliament as soon as possible , for we cannot record each year , if not the uselessness , the lack of usefulness of the Centre in terms of political decisions , and then each year , year after year , leave aside the debate and postpone it until the next year .
The Commission must present a proposal for reforming the procedures which are described as bureaucratic and tedious and , above all , failing to focus on the scientific function of the Centre .
Another important point : each year , the Centre and the Commission tell us that there is a data harmonisation problem because the data-gathering criteria differ from country to country .
This is a political issue .
At this point , the Commission must table a proposal on how the data can be harmonised , or the whole exercise will be completely pointless .
The Centre does not in itself have this authority , but it must provide the Commission with recommendations for data harmonisation and table a proposal - maybe a proposal for a directive - on the subject , because this is a political issue .
At the beginning of the 1990s , there was a great scandal in Italy because a leak from the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Health revealed that they were hiding the real overdose mortality rate .
Obviously , it is more convenient for politicians and governments to say that a young man has died in the street from a heart attack than to acknowledge that his death was caused by an overdose , and the same applies to policy-making .
An official DG XIV document on alcohol consumption states that the Swedish authorities talk of there being 2000 deaths per year due to alcohol abuse in Sweden , while the real figure is between 6 000 and 7 000 deaths a year , but these figures serve to cover up the failure of their anti-drugs policy .
The data problem is therefore a political issue which must be resolved politically , by means of Commission proposals which Parliament may accept or reject .
Mr President , as one of the longest-serving Members in the House my memory goes back right to the first committee of inquiry into drugs in the Community on which I had the honour to serve .
I also have memories of other Community institutions .
We have happily set up over the years several semi-European institutions in different Member States .
Some of them have matured and grown and become quite effective .
But if they do not do that they become flaccid , rot and become totally useless - just another expensive quango , not actually achieving any great results .
It is appropriate that at the moment we are assessing the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
We all too often have a tendency in Parliament , I am afraid , when we cannot to do anything more concrete , to set up another institution .
That makes us feel good but does not actually change anything .
So it is appropriate that we look at the work of this observatory in Lisbon at this stage .
We should not kill it off until we are sure it is not being effective .
But we have to accept that none of our countries are going to come up with a harmonised approach to dealing with the tragedy of increasing drug addiction and the murders , deaths and all that surrounds this dreadful trade .
I take this opportunity to say to my dear colleagues from all parties in the Netherlands : your policies have tended to become like a honeypot for the criminal element in many of the accession countries .
In the last month alone five young Irish drug dealers - and I admit they should not have been doing it - moved to the Netherlands because it was more comfortable for them to be there .
They have all been quite horribly murdered by people coming from some of the accession states to the Community .
So it is important that we include them in the work of this observatory .
It is very important that we take a very serious look at the policies within Turkey , an accession state , in relation to the provision of drugs and to the criminal activities surrounding it .
The observatory in Lisbon cannot work effectively without very close relationships with the Europol agency in The Hague .
I would like to thank both the rapporteurs .
They have done a good , serious job .
They have asked very serious questions .
The point was made that three years is far too long between assessments .
I would like us to have another debate like this next year to really assess how effective the observatory is and how effectively it is using its very considerable budget in this work .

Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Turco and my colleague Mr Sousa Pinto for their important reports which show the essential work the agencies are doing through their investigations into how drugs actually function , their effect , the impact on society and which describe what help and improvements can be made .
This is especially important and significant when we look at the whole question of enlargement .
A previous speaker spoke very eloquently about the evil of drugs , and Mr Beysen referred to the tobacco vote a couple of days ago .
There is an element of hypocrisy here , because half the House voted against having stronger measures on tobacco advertising and - I choose my words carefully - there are many Members in this House who are regular users , to different degrees , of alcohol , which is a very powerful drug .
I am not teetotal , nor do I wish to be sanctimonious about this , but we have to be realistic about the situation that exists in Europe today .
That must be our starting-point .
We also have to be realistic about what we want from the Centre .
I take issue with Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and Mr Cappato on some of their remarks about the Centre as it functions at the moment .
For the work of the Monitoring Centre in Lisbon to be effective , Member States have to cooperate fully .
As Mrs Banotti has just said , the agencies have to be involved .
The Lisbon Centre has to have reliable , accurate information and be able to monitor and involve all the different agencies in as many countries as possible .
Mr Blokland said that we should not include Turkey .
If you look at the whole question of drugs and the issues of enlargement of the European Union , Turkey is an intrinsic part of the supply routes for drugs coming into Europe .
I know the Turkish authorities are looking at ways of improving the situation and so are the applicant countries and those which would like to be applicant countries .
They want to address this problem .
In many cases they do not have the civic structures and other organisations in place to properly enforce some of the regulations we would like and some of the monitoring that would take place .
So we cannot exclude one country because we do not like it very much : we have to open our doors to as many countries as we can and encourage the work that is being done .
Of course , there is not enough being done .
There needs to be more progress .
But if we just sit back and say that everything is fine or just say " no " to drugs and that people should not use them , we are not accepting the situation as it is ; we are not giving the tools to those people who want to improve the position .
I look forward to another debate , as Mrs Banotti has said - perhaps in a year 's time - when we can actually start to pinpoint some of the progress that is being made .
I congratulate Mr Sousa Pinto and Mr Turco .

Mr President , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament ' s proposed amendments on the Drugs Monitoring Centre seek to fundamentally change the remit of the original Centre .
As a result , the consensus enjoyed hitherto will be abandoned .
The purely information-gathering centre is to be converted into a drugs-combating centre .
It cannot be right to bring in the Swedish method through the back door , because this implies working towards the goal of a drug-free society across Europe .
But there never will be a drug-free society .
Or are cigarettes and alcohol going to be banned too ?
Despite this restrictive policy being pursued with greater vigour , the number of drug-related deaths has not fallen .
Last year in Germany alone , there were over 1 800 .
A drugs policy of abstinence has led neither to fewer addicts nor to less crime ; neither has it led to less drug-related prostitution nor reduced so-called organised crime .
European drugs policy therefore needs a new guiding principle .
This principle is called damage limitation .
Damage limitation is pragmatic and based on reality , whereas abstinence is a moral programme which does not work .
Instead of solutions being sought , however , the mandate of the originally neutral information-gathering centre is now to be extended to cover criminal prosecution .
At the same time , in the Commission it is intended that , from now on , the issue of prevention should only play a minor role as a small part of health policy .
In addition , the Commission is making life difficult for NGOs working on drugs .
For example , their prevention projects are being hindered by the Commission ' s disbursing the approved funds several months late .
Is it the aim of European drugs policy to place more emphasis on criminal prosecution and to cut back on prevention ?
As far as I am concerned , this is the wrong way forward .
That is why I shall be voting against this amendment to integrate criminal prosecution into an extended remit of the Drugs Monitoring Centre .
All those colleagues who are interested in having a drugs policy based on people ' s needs will , I hope , do likewise .
Mr President , the scourge of drugs and the action taken to combat it know no geographical , social or national boundaries .
Consequently , any attempt to study this phenomenon must not be contained within the geographical borders of the Member States or even the candidate countries , but must be based on information from as many countries as possible , if it is to help prevent and combat the problem more efficiently .
We need to study in depth why and how more and more young people are turning to escapism and drugs at ever younger ages .
Collating , substantiating and evaluating information from a number of countries will only help us carry out an integrated study and find basic answers if we collate and exchange data from as wide an area as possible on a comparable basis .
For example , in Greece , most of the information obtained so far has been from treatment centres , leaving sources of information from other agencies which might contribute towards a more integrated evaluation of the dimensions of the problem unexplored .
The treatment centres house young people who are able to access them because they are helped either by their family or by the wider social environment .
But what happens to the large section of the population which has no such access , such as economic migrants ?
According to information from the Greek Addiction Treatment Centre , 97 % of the people using these centres are Greek citizens .
However , according to prison statistics , the majority of drug users in prison are economic migrants who , either because they do not speak the language or because of a lack of information and social exclusion , have never set foot in such a centre .
Consequently , according to the data collated and evaluated by the Treatment Centre , this category of users is almost non-existent .
In my opinion , every user should have the opportunity to go to a detoxification centre without being obliged to give his or her full personal details .
We all know that using drugs leads to crime , not only because drugs per se are illegal , but because the high cost of drugs set by the huge financial rings which supply them , inevitably forces all users into crime .
Mr President , in company with most of the Members who have spoken before me , I can only say that these reports leave us two essential lines of thought to follow .
Firstly , this is a positive evaluation which is consistent with the Commission ' s proposal .
There are no borders when it comes to subjects such as our present concern of drug addiction and the trafficking of narcotics , and so it is certainly a useful , sustainable initiative to set objectives which include countries which are not currently Members of the European Union but which are in the pre-accession phase , countries taking part in the PHARE programme or Norway , in their prevention or suppression strategies , for this will help us to broaden the scope of our anti-drugs strategy .
On the other hand , however , both the rapporteur and the Members have stressed that this occasion calls for reflection upon the way in which the Centre operates and upon the results it has produced in recent years , and I feel that we cannot say we are satisfied with its performance up until now .
And quite apart from our own reservations , there is also an independent report , which has just been referred to , which outlines all the limits and shortcomings of this action .
My fellow Member said that these changes will transform the Centre from a statistics office into a drugs monitoring centre .
I wish it could be so but I cannot share her optimism .
On the contrary , I fear that many proposals and concerns , including those voiced by other Members , will only serve the purpose of rationalising data and making it compatible .
I was even somewhat surprised to hear Mrs Ghilardotti mention consumer safety .
I would not like the Monitoring Centre for Drug Addiction to be likened to the Monitoring Centre for Food Quality and Safety !
Let us be careful , for this is an extremely serious phenomenon which is damaging the whole of our society and destroying entire generations . We must fight against it .
So , the efforts to make data from the different countries compatible and the call for efficient dissemination of the data are all very well , but if we think we can achieve these objectives , even our information objective , without taking into consideration the contributions made by the individuals concerned , Non-Governmental Organisations , voluntary associations and rehabilitation communities in the different countries , then we are living in a fantasy world .
We must involve them , and then the Centre will be able to perform a genuinely effective and productive part - and we must monitor this - in the fight against drugs .
Mr President , unfortunately , the drugs problem is likely to remain on the international community 's agenda for several decades to come .
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , established 7 years ago , is an important tool for collating comparable data from the Member States .
It is used to monitor this serious phenomenon and determine the approach to be taken in a multidimensional policy at national and European level .
At least two main criteria must be met if we are to achieve this objective : first , we need reliable assessments of the measures taken and , if they are efficient , we need to implement them , not only in the Member States , but also in the candidate countries , the rest of central and eastern Europe and in any third country with the right legal framework under relevant agreements .
Permit me to say that the fight against drugs is a prime example , perhaps the only example of an issue which calls for globalized measures and decisions and where globalized measures and decisions will only have positive repercussions .
The second main criterion which I should like to mention is the need to provide the Monitoring Centre in Lisbon with the necessary economic and administrative resources in order to facilitate its difficult and ambitious objectives .
It is clear from how it has operated to date , as documented in the recent experts ' report , that we do not need simply to supplement Regulation 302 / 93 , as suggested by the Commission . We need to amend it as described in the amendments tabled by the European Parliament .
These amendments refer mainly to the modus operandi of the board of directors , the provision of technical assistance by the Centre to the aforementioned countries and the Centre 's help with evaluation procedures at national , European and international level .
I am certain that this will guarantee better operating conditions for the European Monitoring Centre and increase the potential for taking integrated and efficient decisions .
Finally , I should like to thank the two rapporteurs for their thorough work .
Mr President , whenever reference is made to a particular undertaking , it seems only sensible to assess the way it operates so that improvements may be made on the basis of the culture of quality and continual improvement .
This is why we agree with those who assert that the European Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction has not performed satisfactorily and therefore why we , like others , are critical of it .
We endorse the amendments and reforms aimed at enhancing the objectivity , reliability and comparability of the information provided , given that quality information is essential if related policies are to be improved upon .
As a group , we should like to see the proposal taken a stage further in order to encompass damage-reduction programmes . Lastly , I should like to stress that , as this issue clearly has pan-European public health and socio-economic implications , it requires a strategy at European level .
Whether we like it or not , Europe is not confined to the European Union , which is why we must support moves to broaden the scope of this proposal to incorporate countries that do not form part of the European Union and those who at present have the status of candidate countries .
As the issue of hypocrisy is so often raised in relation to the tobacco and drugs debate , would it not be appropriate here to mention other forms of hypocrisy , such as those tax havens in which drugs money takes refuge ?
Mr President , in the previous Parliament , many Members , especially from Southern Europe , were in favour of free trade in milder drugs .
In the North , it is generally believed that any free trade in milder drugs lowers the threshold that makes it possible to move on to using hard drugs .
It is important that the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , in the context of the positive climate that exists in Parliament with regard to drugs , also acquires sufficient resources for its anti-drugs activities outside the European Union .
It would appear that this is not the case , however .
The Centre is being given new tasks without the corresponding resources to carry them out , and the amendments , by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance in particular , tend in that direction .
Resources must be increased via the PHARE and TACIS programmes .
The most important drug routes to the European Union area will , in the future , be Afghanistan , Russia , Chechnya and Turkey as well as Kosovo and the other former Yugoslavian regions .
All the PHARE countries have to be made to go the way of Norway .
And they must be given the technical assistance to do so .
Estonia is one of the biggest drugs routes from Russia to Finland , and from Finland to the common markets of the EU .
All countries that receive financial aid must be made to go the way of Norway .
There are , at present , no conditions set for EU aid . By way of example , Montenegro receives financial and political aid from the EU to pay its police force , but not for the fight against smuggling and drugs , but for its struggle against Milosevic .
No such conditions are imposed on the aid by the World Bank or the IMF .
The EU should , however , impose conditions for the aid it gives .
Mr President , the fight against drugs is one of the most important tasks we have as citizens and politicians .
That applies both to citizens down on the floor of the House and to those up in the gallery .
Drugs breed crime and social destitution and tear many people ' s lives apart .
It is therefore a positive sign that we can now see both the candidate countries and Norway involved in the cooperation we already have .
In order to be able to carry out a credible assessment and produce reliable statistics , we must however have a strategy concerning what information the Member States are to send in to the Centre .
Otherwise , the statistical basis will be fairly meagre and not serve any larger purpose .
However , it is not only the Centre ' s responsibility , but also that of the respective Member States to ensure that the information sent in is also relevant and can be used for some purpose .
Responsibility for taking measures to combat drug abuse now lies , in the first place , with the Member States .
This ought not , however , to stop us trying to devise common assignments and strategies for preventive work , which is perhaps the most important foundation stone in the fight against drugs .
It ought , moreover , to be possible for the Union and the Centre to have a role in supervising the domestic production of drugs , as one of the previous speakers mentioned , for we cannot get away from the fact that many of the drugs that are in circulation today , and which young people encounter on the streets , are synthetic drugs , produced in the Union and nowhere else .
In view of the open borders we now have , it is a problem if more drugs than we would wish are being produced in a particular place .
I should like to say that the definition of a drugs-free society is a good one .
It is a goal or vision , just like every other vision the Union has when it comes to social destitution and other phenomena we wish to combat .
It is an aggressive approach I should like to see maintained .
Mr President , I want to begin by thanking the rapporteurs , Mr Sousa Pinto and Mr Turco , for their excellent reports .
The fight against drug abuse and the drug trade is important .
This report has been produced to complement the current regulation concerning the Monitoring Centre .
Moreover , it is intended that the candidate countries should be involved in the work .
Let me comment on that first of all .
It is , in fact , important that the candidate countries be involved .
I myself come from Sweden .
In recent years , we have developed cooperation with the Baltic countries and with Poland in order to end the drugs trade and prevent drug abuse .
The drug trade is not confined by national borders . We must therefore have cross-border cooperation to prevent the trade from developing .
The same applies to cooperation with Norway .
Norway participates in the internal market and is to become a member of Schengen .
Norway has much the same problems as Sweden when it comes to drugs crossing the border .
It is therefore important that we cooperate and gather information from these neighbouring countries , as well as study how they conduct their policies .
The rapporteur also deals with how the Centre operates at present .
I think he draws an important distinction , for the Centre should not be dabbling in politics .
Instead , it is we who should be engaged in politics here in political assemblies , as well as in the Member States - in fact , mainly in the Member States , when it comes to drugs policy .
However , the Centre should create a basis for political decisions .
In this regard , there are at present deficiencies when it comes to collecting statistics .
We must obtain relevant and reliable information which can be compared .
What is more , the Centre can carry out analyses and assess the objectives which we in the political assemblies establish , so that we might revise policy accordingly .
The Centre must become significantly better in this area than it is at present .
Analyses must be carried out of the policies which are applied - different types of policy are pursued in , for example , the Netherlands and Sweden .
I think it is important for us to analyse what these differences , in the guise of policy , in fact look like when it comes to problems such as drug abuse by young people .
The joint debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Report ( A5-0147 / 2000 )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0157 / 2000 )
Following the vote on the Commission proposal .
Mr President , I would like to intervene on a point of order pursuant to Rule 69 .
It was not clear from the Commissioner ' s speech whether the Commission accepts the amendments that Parliament has just adopted .
In particular , I did not understand whether Norway will start to participate in the work of the EMCDDA after it has been reformed , that is , whether it is the Commission ' s intention that Norway should be allowed to participate in the work of the EMCDDA immediately or whether it should wait until September , when the reform is scheduled to take place , when the Management Board will issue its recommendations . This would allow Norway to join an existing body rather than something which , according to the independent consultancy firm ' s report , is currently ineffective , inadequate , extremely expensive and altogether useless .
Mr President , the Commission intends Norway to become a member of the Monitoring Centre we were discussing this morning , as soon as possible .
As I mentioned earlier - and I was also speaking for my colleague Mr Vitorino - we see eye to eye on many of the concerns raised by a number of Members of this House this morning , but this is not an opportune moment to raise the issue of the functioning of the Monitoring Centre itself .
This morning ' s debate was about adding Norway , and the countries of Eastern Europe of course , to the centre ' s list of members , or that is how the Commission saw it at any rate .
Mr President , the Commissioner ' s words on the report on the participation of Norway are not satisfactory , in the sense that Parliament once again unanimously considers that Norway should certainly start to participate in the work of the EMCDDA as soon as possible .
The problem is now that the EMCDDA is not in a fit condition for Norway to join .
I therefore call upon Parliament to postpone the vote .
In accordance with Rule 69 , the rapporteur can ask , if Parliament so decides , to postpone the vote and the matter will be deemed to be referred back to the committee responsible for reconsideration .
I see that our co-rapporteur is also requesting the floor .
I would point out to you that Article 69 stipulates that this procedure takes place without debate .
I would therefore ask you not to start the debate again , but I give you the floor as co-rapporteur .
Thank you , Mr President , for allowing me , as rapporteur , to say that the debate we have engaged in this morning is the first opportunity since 1993 , when the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction was opened , to make a statement on the fundamental issue of changing its regulations .
I think that Parliament would have seriously failed in its most basic political responsibilities if it had not undertaken a thorough review of the Monitoring Centre ' s duties and tabled a set of proposals that represents a thorough overhaul of its operations . We believe that the Drugs Monitoring Centre is crucial , much needed and has a useful role to play in the future of the European Union , but not by means of this report , with which , in essence , the Commission apparently agrees .
The regulation now requires me to submit the request submitted by Mr Turco to postpone the vote to the House .
( Parliament rejected the request ) ( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Community design
The next item is the report ( A5-0150 / 2000 ) by Mr Ferri , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on a proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) on Community design ( COM ( 1999 ) 310 - C5-0129 / 1999 - 1993 / 0463 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , having seen Directive 98 / 71 / EC on the legal protection of designs , we are now being called upon to assess the proposed regulation and to decide whether to adopt it . Of course , the regulation follows the same line as the directive , and it therefore contains all the same strengths and weaknesses as the directive on such a contentious , competitive issue where there are a large number of interests at play .
In the end , the directive did not deal with the issue of spare parts for the purpose of repair .
I am referring to the famous repair clause , the spare parts clause : the complex , organic world of the automotive industry .
The committee took great care over its work - and I would especially like to thank its chairperson - although a more conservative , extremely cautious interpretation prevailed in the end , for we did not want to push the boat out too far , since the directive will be supplemented on the basis of three years ' monitoring of the use of spare parts for the purpose of repair .
However , one of the strengths of the regulation lies in its definition of the Community right for products and designs and registered and unregistered products : the proposal to use the central Community trade mark office for design as well , offers an exclusive right to protected use at Community level , with some exceptions .
This is a step towards meeting the clear fundamental requirement of the single market and towards common rules on invalidity , surrender of rights and possibilities of use , particularly in two very important areas : novelty , which is connected to disclosure , and individuality of character , which is connected to creativity .
These are two aspects of a fascinating world , which clearly requires protection , but also requires flexibility .
This is why I insist , in particular , on a minimal package of amendments which , in the balance of protections between the Community right and copyright - I urge the European Parliament to give an up-to-date and , most importantly , realistic evaluation of the highly complex world of designs -will prevent the persistence of monopolies .
I would therefore advocate that a ceiling of 25 years for the protection of registered design rights would be quite sufficient .
On the other hand , the directive is not open to subjective interpretation .
The directive states that the Member States must be able to strike a balance between the Community right and copyright .
I would point out that copyrights last for as long as 70 years in a number of States .
Thus , if we were to add the 25 years to the 70 years , we would end up preventing the modification of a common product which often - and also , so to speak , by its very nature and taking into account novelty and creativity - cannot last very long , not beyond the lifetime of a human being , for example , and therefore a ceiling of 25 years would seem reasonable .
May I insist , therefore , that at least this type of adaptation to requirements is implemented and that the Community of Europe , the single market , is given access to a world which is so important , particularly for the SMEs where , in effect , the productivity of design and creativity - which for the European countries naturally represents a boost for jobs and employment - fits perfectly into this network of rights and freedoms .
I feel that , even with the limits and constraints which I have stressed , in order to give the Members a balanced view , this proposed regulation , which introduces a standardised system with standardised protection throughout Community territory can , in effect , be an important milestone in the construction of Europe .
Mr President , it seems that the long road to creating a single regulation on the legal protection of designs , drawings and models in the European Union is nearing its end .
The large amount of time spent on this regulation was justified on the grounds of the importance of adopting the directive on drawings and models , a job that took most of the previous legislature and part of the present one .
It was clear that once the more serious problems relating to the text of the directive had been overcome - a directive that can be considered as balanced - the task of establishing a resolution would be far easier and so it has been .
The whole process proves that Parliament was right to adopt the approach in creating the directive first , followed by the resolution .
Its decision to intervene to obtain the freeze compromise in drawing up the resolution , with the directive being subject to the codecision procedure , was decisive . What is more , this perhaps would not have been the case had the procedure been the other way round , i.e. first the regulation followed by the directive .
Had this been the case , Parliament ' s role would not have been as decisive and the balance between car manufacturers ' interests on one hand and independent body part manufacturers on the other would not have been achieved . The same can be said of the interests of consumers and insurance companies .
The fact that this agreement - which is far from perfect , but which provided a way out of the impasse in such a contentious issue - was reached , made the task of creating this regulation and this report on the Commission ' s proposal far easier .
This task basically involved incorporating the compromises reached in relation to the directive in the regulation .
If the European Union intended to announce laws regarding the harmonisation of Member States ' legislation , it was only right that its own laws were in line with the laws on harmonisation .
Since the Commission ' s proposal followed the wording of the directive almost to the letter , it received our support .
On this basis , the majority of the amendments we endorse consist precisely in enhancing the similarities between the directive and the regulation .
I should like to thank Mr Ferri for his report and , at the same time , welcome the flexible approach he adopted throughout proceedings .
The rapporteur ' s first report did advocate certain proposals which , though he believed them to be correct , in the opinion -and I believe in the better informed opinion - of many groups in Parliament , contradicted the freeze compromise relating to the repair clause .
However , by adopting this flexible approach , Mr Ferri saw fit to withdraw his proposals and I thank him for that .
At present , there are only two areas on which the rapporteur and my group disagree .
The first relates to the definition of the individual character of the design , which incorporates an element that supposedly brings it into line with the TRIP agreements .
This is neither the time nor the place to begin a debate on this issue . We do not agree with this interpretation and would go as far to suggest that the amendment in question includes certain distortions .
The second point of contention relates to copyright and we shall vote against the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Mr President , my colleague from the PPE-DE Group , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , says that the rapporteur , Mr Ferri , has accused her of being conservative .
I say to my colleague , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , that it is a label she should accept with pleasure and a badge which she should wear with pride .
I am speaking today on behalf of my British Conservative colleagues , Lord Inglewood and Mr Harbour who unfortunately cannot be in the Chamber .
I wish to put on record the British Conservative support for Mr Ferri 's report which we feel finds an acceptable compromise between the various conflicting interests .
In particular , we believe it is right that the directive and regulation line up to provide as seamless as possible a regime for the protection of industrial design across the Union as a whole .
I would also like to record our support for Mrs Grossetête 's report and to emphasise that in our view it is of supreme importance that EU law is implemented consistently , properly and in a timely manner .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Application of Community law ( 1998 )
The next item is the report ( A5-0132 / 2000 ) by Mrs Grossetête , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the sixteenth annual report from the Commission on monitoring the application of Community law ( 1998 ) ( COM ( 1999 ) 301 - C5-0213 / 1999 - 1999 / 2168 ( COS ) ) .
.
( FR ) Mr President , the fact that this report is the final subject for this week ' s part-session does not mean it is unimportant . Quite the contrary , we are all interested in a Citizens ' Europe , in a Europe for the citizens .
It is our duty to consider the interests of the European citizen , to ensure that Community law is applied in all of the Member States and that the European Commission , the guardian of the treaties , monitors this process with the utmost vigilance .
The figures for 1998 , in the report drawn up by the European Commission services , do not , sadly , indicate any significant improvement , and require vigilance from the outset .
Few areas are spared and Parliament must pick out those which are particularly prone to difficulties : the environment , social conditions and public procurement contracts .
Having said that , I am convinced that , in future , we will need to extend our vigilance to other spheres of activity .
The European Parliament must also reiterate its request for information concerning the application of international standards .
All of the Member States are affected to a greater or lesser degree by the problems of applying Community law .
This is why I wanted to stress just how important it is that they behave in an exemplary manner in the period prior to several successive enlargements .
How can we demand that those countries wanting to join the European Union apply Community laws if Member States are themselves unable to respect them ?
If additional information is necessary , this is also in the interests of the citizen , who is becoming increasingly involved in the process of monitoring Community law .
This is where the whole question of the infringement procedure comes in .
The European Commission should not advocate more selectivity in dealing with cases which may give rise to an infringement procedure , a proposal according to which the Commission could abstain from intervening in cases of limited importance , such as , for example , the mutual recognition of qualifications .
We must protest most strongly against such a move , which could not be justified on the grounds of cost and effectiveness .
In doing so , the European Commission would find itself turning away from its role as guardian of the Treaties and would deny European citizens access to justice .
As for methods , I think they can be improved .
As has been indicated several times by the European Ombudsman , it is important to safeguard the rights of individuals through improved confidentiality , better access to documents and justification of the European Commission ' s decisions on classification .
In the same vein , more data should be obtained on Member States ' responsibility for damages suffered by private individuals .
Nobody would think of doubting the importance of petitions , which play a significant part in signalling that , in some instances , Community law has not been applied in Member States .
In this spirit , we are urging that special publicity be given to all complaints in order that any action taken is made more obvious .
Bearing in mind the approach that has been adopted , however , which centres above all on defending the working methods of the Committee on Petitions , I do not wish to support Amendment No 2 .
The attention paid to the CELEX and EUR-LEX databases , that is to say improved access and ongoing optimisation is , I believe , beneficial to the citizen .
Consolidated documents should be associated with some indication of the successive amendments introduced , as required by Amendment No 1 .
I therefore support this amendment .
Finally , there is the problem of the preliminary question .
I do not believe that it needs to be called into doubt in principle , but we can look into its forms .
When such questions are badly drawn up , the effect can run counter to the aim of legal clarification .
I therefore suggest that the Court of Justice reconsider the way this procedure works .
Moreover , I believe that , in order to clarify the text of Recital G , which reads : " whereas it is primarily national courts that must apply Community law " , it would be preferable to state " control the application of Community law " .
There is also , finally , the matter of relations with public administrations which are having to come to grips with new Community standards .
The current state of affairs in Europe ' s construction tends to emphasise the principle of subsidiarity .
In consideration of this key principle , I am opposed to Amendment No 3 .
I do not consider creating a European administrative law to be appropriate .
In conclusion , the fact remains that the aim of a control system is to penalise non-application of the law .
With this in mind , I want to stress the importance of the procedure outlined in Article 228 ( 2 ) , of the Treaty .
This is a new procedure , and is certainly a deterrent in effect , and the Commission should be less reluctant to consider it in future .
By voting in favour of this resolution , we will be sending out a positive signal , from a European Parliament which is in tune with the citizens .
.
( ES ) Mr President , I share the rapporteur ' s concerns regarding the fact that we are debating a report of this type at such a late hour on a Friday , especially given the importance we attach to the application of Community law . The figures given by the rapporteur have only compounded our concerns as they are a clear reflection of Member States ' failure to apply Community law and this report actually incorporates proposals that would force them to do so .
The fact that 1101 letters of formal notice , 675 reasoned opinions and 123 referrals have been presented to the Court of Justice clearly highlight the difficulties inherent in applying European Community law .
I intend to chiefly focus on the proposal put forward by the Committee on Petitions that incorporates amendments signed by all of the groups in the committee .
I should also like to point out , as a result of those gremlins which sometimes appear in this House , that the Committee on Petitions ' conclusions were not incorporated in the rapporteur ' s report .
I have the distinct impression that the Committee on Petitions is considered the poor sister of Parliament and , in fact , at the end of the previous legislature its very future was in doubt .
However , it is in my view one of the most important committees in Parliament , as it has direct and clearly defined relations with the citizens of Europe and the ability to deal with issues , such as concerns for the environment .
The rapporteur points out that more than 25 % of the petitions lodged concern environmental problems , freedom of movement , fundamental freedoms and the internal market , issues that , in my view , are central to the European Constitution .
What is more , in view of the rising number of incoming petitions every year they also highlight citizens ' desire to see Community law complied with .
At times it appears that citizens ' groups , residents ' associations and other types of association show greater concern with regard to the application of Community law than the national public authorities themselves . This is particularly true of environmental issues , something I have personal experience of as a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Proof of this lies in the petitions we handle on a daily basis in the Committee on Petitions . This is why I urge you to approve the two amendments tabled by the Committee on Petitions that are no more and no less than a clear reflection of the Committee on Petitions ' concern regarding the procedures used for handling citizens ' complaints .
There are considerable delays - often one , two or even three years - between the Committee on Petitions ' or the European Commission ' s final decision on a matter following the initial complaint .
The amendments tabled call for procedures to be simplified , as failure to do so would seriously undermine citizens ' confidence in the effectiveness of the European institutions .
Among other things , the amendments call for a certain degree of harmonisation in European administrative law so that all citizens of the Union receive equal treatment .
Much more could be said , Mr President , about the nature and importance of the Committee on Petitions , but as time is short , I would simply urge members to agree to vote in favour of these amendments today , as they represent the opinion of the Committee on Petitions .
Mr President , I share Mrs Grossetête ' s regret : the construction of Europe must involve the creation of a legal area , and the diligence we have shown in timetabling such a major report for a Friday morning is certainly not reassuring .
One great Italian thinker maintains that a society is commonly perceived as such only insofar as it succeeds in establishing rules for itself which are respected by its members .
Certainly , the European Community used to be an institutional model with a remarkable history and the Union is so today ; within this Community we have established rules for ourselves - and the Member States and the citizens respect them - but Parliament must not shirk its lawful duty to implement and ensure the implementation of the rules of Community law . Moreover , it must draw fresh strength , fresh nourishment , from its tasks .
Although we have come a long way and we are making every effort now , I feel that we still have a long way to go . It is our duty to take on board the fact that there is still a great deal to do in the internal market in terms of standardisation , but also and above all , we must realise that there are a great many gaps in the development of the European legal system .
It is good to know that the rate of transposition of Community directives into Member States ' legislation stands at 95 % , but this is not enough if the failure to apply Community law correctly is the result of bad practice on the part of administrations rather than the failure to assimilate directives .
An effective intervention to deal with the national administrations is therefore , in my opinion , necessary , as the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has stressed .
This need is all the greater in that those who are in contact with the law and justice are often unfamiliar with the rules of Community law .
As the report requests , it is therefore appropriate for candidates to the magistracy and forensic science professions to pay particular attention to the rules which we are developing .
I tabled some amendments to Mrs Grossetête ' s excellent report in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , prompted by the concern that the legal protection of the citizens we represent is given insufficient recognition and enforcement in the individual countries .
Petitions to the Commission and the European Parliament in this context should give us not only food for thought , but also cause for concern .
The fact that some national courts hardly ever put preliminary questions to the Court of Justice under Article 234 of the Treaty is a further cause for concern , and the representatives of the Commission should instruct their departments to investigate the reasons for this situation .
In short , we must not underestimate the economic and practical difficulties encountered by the citizens in gaining access to Community case law .
It may be that we need to adopt a legislative initiative as soon as possible in order to facilitate access to case law in economic terms , perhaps by establishing a support fund .
Mr President , the Commission ' s report on monitoring the application of Community law is a most important document because it reveals the true situation in the European Union and more sittings should perhaps have been devoted to it , not just the Friday sitting .
The rapporteur , Mrs Grossetête , has produced an extremely balanced report containing a series of accurate observations which deserve special attention .
The two reports quite rightly divide the subject of the application of Community law into three dimensions : the non-transposition of Community law and the incompatibility of transposition measures with the letter of Community law and application methods .
As far as non-application is concerned , there are still serious delays in certain sectors , including the social sector , to which , I am sorry to see , the Commission ' s report only devotes a few lines , despite the fact that the issues in question relate to social cohesion .
There are numerous reasons for non-transposition and they need to be studied .
Also , it is time that we considered political methods for reducing delays .
For example , what if each country were to appoint a uniform body at the highest political level which would be responsible , vis-à-vis the European Union , for transposing Community law correctly and on time ?
What if each country which took over the presidency had to make a prompt , public declaration of its country 's degree of compliance with Community law , given that it does not make sense for a country to be responsible for administering political matters when it has not honoured its own commitments ?
It might also be useful if the state of compliance of each country were publicly announced before each summit .
Negligence in transposing Community law in the past did not have the same repercussions as it has on a single economic area in which the idea of not having a uniform legal Community order at the same moment in time is inconceivable
As far as the method of applying Community law is concerned , this issue relates mainly to the legislative system , both national and Community , and to the appointment of the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament and the European Ombudsman .
The two basic problems relating to the legislative system are : first , often unjustified recourse to the procedure for obtaining preliminary rulings from the European Court and , as Mr Álvarez has mentioned , poorly prepared references and , secondly , the failure to take such recourse on crucial issues .
Despite appearing different , both have the same root cause , which is the national judges ' lack of familiarity with Community law .
A general campaign is needed here .
We need to propose to the Member States that all judges should gradually be trained and that this should be the sine qua non for the promotion of older judges to more senior positions and for the admission of newcomers to the bench .
The present Grotius and Falcone programmes have become out-dated as a result of developments .
Finally , I should like to say a brief word about where the Committee on Petitions can play an important part in improving the degree of application of Community law .
This committee forms the interface between the European citizen , the European Parliament and the Commission .
We need to upgrade this committee if we are to uncover omissions in the practical application of Community law .
I am in favour of Mr Álvarez 's proposals , which really do form the starting point for European administrative Community law .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I have the pleasure of welcoming Mrs Grossetête 's report .
I particularly want to stress a clause which she mentioned in her own speech : recital ( e ) says that on the eve of several successive enlargements the conduct of the current Member States of the Union in the application of Community law must be exemplary .
And so indeed it must .
Alas , we know that it is not so in all cases .
I have on more than one occasion in this House referred , as others have done , to the shocking case of the foreign language lecturers in Italy who first received a judgment in their favour eleven years ago .
The law of Italy has not yet been brought into conformity with it , to satisfy their rights .
We are tested by our will in favour of the individual , the citizen , seeking their rights under Community law .
No rights are more important than those against discrimination and those in favour of freedom of movement .
If we do not satisfy these we let ourselves down in the face of our own aspirations .
I have received disturbing correspondence this week from a number of sources in Germany , suggesting that a similar problem may be building up concerning self-employed foreign language teachers working there , where laws are being applied retrospectively for the convenience for the state with apparent injustice to the teachers .
I shall be following that up and we may have to look into it again .
I cite these two exemplary cases simply to stress the importance of Mrs Grossetête 's report and to thank her personally for her own intervention in the former case which I am sure will move it forward .
I apologise for the fact that I cannot stay to the end of this debate owing to exigencies of transport between here and Edinburgh , but I am delighted to have had the chance of participating so far .
Mr President , fellow members , this Community law which we are helping to establish presents serious difficulties as far as application in Member States is concerned .
European citizens have used this last resort as a way of expressing their anger and indignation at the disruption and even destruction of their daily way of life , foisted on them by bureaucrats for a purpose that sometimes escapes us and for stakes that do not justify it .
While this report should have offered us an opportunity , as elected Members , to assess the many texts on which we are voting , and to learn from them for the future , we are limiting ourselves to a control / sanction approach .
This type of constraining , over-regulated Europe is certainly not the one our respective fellow citizens want .
The way in which this report has been adopted is appalling .
The rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has demonstrated absolute scorn for the Committee on Petitions by not even seeing fit to put its conclusions to the vote .
Yesterday , the plenary displayed a similar contempt when it ignored the opinion of the Legal Affairs Committee regarding the Maaten report .
I greatly fear that the trend will spread and the Commission will not see the text , on which we in this half-empty House are about to vote , as very much more important .
Rather than unnecessary amendments , I should like a response to the following question .
The 1998 figures show that reasoned opinions have doubled in volume , cases of non-conformity or poor application , revealed automatically , have gone up by over 50 % , complaints by 18 % and letters of formal notice by 12 % .
This is not , at this stage , evidence of effective control , but rather of the existence of a profusion of texts which , in the hands of the judges , leave our national assemblies , which are expressing the popular will both legitimately and democratically , under threat of condemnations as well as of penalties .
Do the Commission and the rapporteur not think that it would be a good thing to reduce the number of texts and , above all , to modify those which quite clearly raise crucial political , legal and practical questions that do not appear to be so obvious and acute when they are framed , or would they prefer to carry on sanctioning our States and turning our fellow citizens into the real victims ?
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Grossetête , I should like to make three comments on the report regarding monitoring the application of Community law , taking as my premise the fact that the proper application of Community law is not just an assessment of transposition in arithmetical terms , but also an evaluation of the practices adopted in actually applying it .
Firstly , I should like to comment on the issue of a community based on law and one based on values . In my view , the community based on law and the community based on values do not stand in contradiction to one other , rather they are interdependent .
Anyone who breaks the law or perverts the course of justice violates certain values .
And anyone who violates these values can be judged and condemned under the law .
You will understand that , in this context , what I am saying from the Austrian point of view is that , in their actions towards Austria , the 14 Member States of the European Union have infringed EU law , international law and the UN Charter , that they have defied the spirit of the European founding fathers and thus damaged the community of values .
And I therefore call upon you to repair that damage .
My second comment concerns the Commission as guardian of the Treaties . On 1 February 2000 , the Commission issued a statement on this matter saying that it would continue to fulfil its duty as guardian of the Treaties .
And with regard to Austria it said that , in this context , the Commission , in close contact with the governments of the Member States , would closely monitor the situation , maintaining its working relations with the Austrian authorities .
I would stress that , as guardian of the Treaties , the Commission has been closely monitoring the situation since 1 February 2000 and , to this day , it has not found any grounds for criticism , which makes it clear that neither the community based on law nor that based on values is being violated in Austria .
My third comment is that yesterday I made a mistake !
I should like to say this in conclusion .
I criticised my Socialist colleagues from Austria for the inconsistent way in which they voted , and I insinuated that at the end they had abstained from the vote on the Feira resolution .
That is wrong ; they voted in favour .
This does not in any way change my critical attitude towards the double standards of the Austrian Social Democratic movement , which were also plain to see yesterday in the way its Members voted .
But I must admit my mistake .
It would not hurt the 14 either if , in Feira , they were to publicly retract the statement they made on 31 January 2000 , contrary to the law , about one Member State , and if they were to rectify this mistake .
. ( ES ) Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and in my capacity as chairperson of this committee , I should like to use some of my allotted time to refute some statements in relation to our consideration of other committees ' opinions .
The rapporteur is absolutely right , Mr President , to say that these amendments , though very interesting , are not relevant in this case .
Firstly , everyone is aware how hard I have fought to establish genuine administrative law in this area , however , the report centres on a different issue .
The same can be said in relation to the Committee on Petitions ' other amendment that refers to an interinstitutional agreement and appeals to the Council and the Commission for greater cooperation .
We shall have to vote on these amendments , but in another report .
With regard to Mrs Grossetête ' s report , Mr President , the fact that I have only tabled one amendment - and even that was in conjunction with Mrs Grossetête herself - is proof of my appreciation of her work and the spirit in which it was carried out .
Those of you who know me will be only too aware of the fact that , if I disagree with a text , particularly one that is close to my heart and to which I attach great importance , I never hold back when it comes to amendments .
There is one issue that I hope Mrs Grossetête will raise during the vote - I unfortunately cannot attend , which is why I am making a point of it here - and that is the mistake in recital G. It should state that monitoring the application of Community law is first and foremost the responsibility of the courts .
As regards the other issues , this report is , in my view , thorough , comprehensive and of great importance .
I should like to mention a few points in relation to Mrs Grossetête ' s report .
We should perhaps consider broadening its scope , not only to encompass Annex IV and the development of Article 65 , but also possibly take it further and perhaps consider -as part of the creation of the Europe of the Citizens - setting up communication channels to enable citizens to discuss issues that affect them in relation to Community law and even the Treaty on European Union .
Next year , Commissioner , we should like to see a more balanced and exhaustive report drawn up .
As Mrs Grossetête herself pointed out , this report is very balanced and exhaustive in some areas but not in others .
The overall message put forward is that Community law must be applied properly ; our Community is a Legal Community ; there will either be a European rule of law or not ; and monitoring compliance with Community law must be considered a priority .
Lastly , I should briefly like to highlight the importance of the infringement procedure and draw people ' s attention , as others have before me , to this reform which is desirable and on which we all agree .
We need to improve the way in which the infringement procedure operates , but do so in a way that does not prevent citizens in the slightest from fully exercising their right to directly contact the Commission which , at the end of the day , is what brings them closer to it .
As we so often speak about bringing citizens closer to the institutions , this is surely one of the ways to achieve this aim .
Mr President , I want to thank Mrs Grossetête for her report .
I agree with her : there is nothing more important that we could devote time to discussing in this Parliament .
Preceding the downfall of the Roman Empire it was customary to take out the imperial decree , unroll the great scroll of purple and gold , read it , have it copied and distribute it - and nobody took the slightest notice of it .
There is no surer way to bring about the downfall and disintegration of this Union than to make laws that Member States do not ensure are then observed .
One thing that did not come up in the discussion was the greater use that could be made of the proceedings in this House , particularly Question Time , to bring to the attention of the Commission and exchange views with them on grievances that arise throughout the Union .
These are increasingly being brought to the attention of Members of Parliament .
In the early days I lived in a border area where the right of freedom of movement of goods and services was not being observed and I found I could get a lot of satisfaction by raising questions directly with the Commission .
In those days Parliament did not have the same power or prestige that it has today .
So instead of reducing working time in this House we should devote a little more time to underlining the failures of the European Union to implement its decisions .
There are some areas that people , particularly in business , are well-familiar with , such as the single market .
But there are other areas where there is a lot of confusion .
I was at a conference last week .
Someone pointed out the fact that we need 100 million migrant workers in this Union over the next 25 years if we are to maintain economic growth and meet our social obligations .
If that happens , there will be a lot of movement of people .
If , from the very beginning , the European Union and the Member States make it clear that these people have equal rights , that the conditions on which they are admitted are common conditions and that they are free to move within the Union after they enter , then citizens would be half-way towards accepting the situation and we could forestall a lot of the difficulties with migrants which are already emerging .
Mr President , it is a shame that Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has already left . However , I should like to speak in favour of the Committee on Petitions ' conclusions .
Out of respect for my colleagues , in my previous intervention I made reference to what I termed the ' gremlins ' that sometimes appear in Parliament , but it is not these poor gremlins ' fault .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi made it very clear that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights had no intention of incorporating the Committee on Petitions ' conclusions .
Proof that these conclusions were unanimously adopted lies in the fact that they were signed by the chairman of the Committee on Petitions , another member of the Committee on Petitions from the European People ' s Party , two members of the Socialist Group and I myself as draftsman of the opinion .
I am of the view that it is imperative for any report on the application of Community law to incorporate the Committee on Petitions ' conclusions , as this committee plays such a key role in ensuring Member States apply Community law .
This is why I urge you to vote in favour of Amendments Nos 2 and 3 .
Mr President , it is not my wish to see a problem arise between the Legal Affairs Committee and the Committee on Petitions .
The fact is that the basic points made by the Committee on Petitions have already been included in the text of the report I drew up .
The reason why we do not agree with your amendments , as Mrs Palacio has explained , is because this is not the place to include them .
If you look at the report in detail , you will find that the basic elements of your conclusions have been incorporated .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Mr President , my Group abstained from voting on the Grossetête report because in the middle of the perfectly acceptable general considerations on the application of Community law , the resolution put to the vote included a paragraph which we are unable to accept .
This is paragraph 11 , which invites the Commission , and I quote , : " to be less timid in the use of the periodic penalty payment procedure in accordance with the third paragraph of Article 228 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty .
This Article stipulates that the Court of Justice may , as it sees fit , impose penalties or fines , sometimes very stiff ones , on a Member State that , for whatever reason , fails to apply Community law .
We feel , however , that the legal problem is not that simple , and that inflicting such penalties on Member States is excessive .
In fact , there may be totally legitimate contradictions between Community law and national law .
For example , a contradiction which may appear following a qualified majority vote in Council - and there are an increasing number of such votes - or a contradiction which may appear between a national constitution and Community law , or even a contradiction which may appear between Community law and a law which has been voted for after due consideration by the population of a Member State .
These contradictions are very serious , they are still unresolved and this is why we see the existence of Article 228 , which was brought in by the Maastricht Treaty , as wholly contestable .
I should like in particular to point out that France is now liable to incur severe penalties through the 1998 law , concerning , for example , hunting seasons which contradict Community law , the em