Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 25 February 1999 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , today 's agenda opens with a series of debates on one of the most important issues for European and world politics today : equal rights for women . I am sure that we all agree that by including these issues in the European Parliament 's agenda , we are contributing to what has been a long struggle .
That struggle has had various successes but it is still not over ; indeed , it would seem that it still has a long way to go . Its aim is to ensure that women have exactly the same rights as men in the employment , social and political fields .
I therefore believe that I am speaking for the House when I say that by including these points in our agenda , we are demonstrating Parliament 's political will to continue this struggle .
It also demonstrates our desire to make progress not only in terms of legislation but also in the various other areas alongside it .
Parliament 's Bureau is soon to consider a report by Mrs Hoff , who was asked to consider how we could make progress within Parliament 's own administration to ensure that more women hold senior posts .
There is a great deal of work to be done .
Efforts have been made , but there is no doubt that we need to continue in the same direction .
Another important aspect is the fact that we are in the run-up to elections , and it is therefore an excellent opportunity for all the political parties in Europe to ensure that more women hold seats in this House .
It would be a great pity if this opportunity were lost .
Applause
The will of this House is therefore very clear and I would like to end this introduction by expressing , on behalf of the entire House , our thanks to the Committee on Women 's Rights and all its members for all the work they have done to help gradually turn this ideal into a reality .
Our fellow Members here in the House are among the most active supporters of this cause and it would be remiss on our part not to thank them for all their efforts and for the work they have carried out during this legislature .
I would therefore ask you to give a round of applause to thank all our female colleagues in the House and particularly the members of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
Applause
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the sitting of Thursday , 25 February have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr Wijsenbeek has the floor .
Mr President , what you have just said is all very well , but we should respect our own Rules of Procedure , especially on a day like today .
I must point out that Rule 6 ( 6 ) states that the report of the committee shall be placed at the head of the agenda of the first sitting following the day on which it was tabled . I see this has not been done in the case of the report by Mr Wibe , which is placed as the last item on today 's agenda following a whole range of reports by the Committee on Women 's Rights .
Rule 6 ( 6 ) has therefore not been respected by the Conference of Presidents whose members , as usual , never read our Rules of Procedure .
I thought that you were going to give priority today to the reports concerning women , Mr Wijsenbeek , but in any event , when we come to the order of business , I shall put your request to the vote to determine whether the Wibe report will be taken first .
- ( FI ) Mr President , I am pleased that you remembered to mention International Women 's Day in your opening speech .
I also wish to raise the subject on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
As many of us know , the most important topic of discussion on this International Women 's Day seems to have become that of violence against women , children and young people , which is really a very serious worldwide violation of women 's human rights .
This evening here in Parliament we shall be discussing with the Commission how the European Union can take determined action against violence towards women .
It is most distressing that half of all women who are killed in Europe do not die as a result of violent crime by someone unknown to them , but are murdered by their own spouse or partner .
Violence against women has been a sort of taboo up to now , and it is gratifying that we can embark on a programme of practical measures in this area together in our capacity as the European Parliament .
It is worth pointing out too that the European Parliament has been responsible for the action the European Union has taken to begin to combat violence against women .
I would add that the Treaty of Amsterdam places entirely new obligations upon us and provides opportunities to promote sex equality at many levels .
This means that we have to work more single-mindedly than ever to promote equality .
The Treaty of Amsterdam places us under an obligation to make equality between men and women an essential element in all Community action .
Nothing of the sort has happened as yet .
We know how difficult this work is .
But we are acquiring new tools for the task , and we must carry out this work together .
Thank you , Mrs Hautala .
I would ask that we do not embark on a debate on this question .
Mr Santini has the floor .
Mr President , like many others , I am keen to take up the invitation to highlight all initiatives aimed at avoiding injustice against women .
I would however like to add one further element to such considerations : it is not only women who are subject to injustice and violence , but sometimes entire communities .
This is the case of the Valle di Fiemme communities in Trentino , the German-speaking , Polish and Belgian communities who were the victims of the plane crash on 3 February 1998 , which last week became sadly and gruesomely topical when the trial in the United States came to an end .
As we all know , the pilot who - in a hazardous manoeuvre , to put it mildly - severed the ski gondola cable , sending 20 European people to their deaths , was inconceivably absolved of any guilt .
I appeal to you , Mr President , somehow to convey to the US Government our sense of anger and dismay , not of course to demand justice or vengeance , but simply to express our bitter incredulity over this outright injustice .
I would also ask you to be so kind as to reply to the letter which I sent you on the very day of the tragedy , 3 February , proposing that Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy should draw up an own-initiative report on the presence of NATO air bases on European territory , and on the pros and cons of allowing these armed personnel excessive freedom to make training flights .
I sent the same letter to the Commission President , Mr Santer , but he did not reply either .
I now ask that justice be done for the families ...
The President cut the speaker off
Mr Santini , this is not the right time for you to be making this speech .
It is , of course , an important issue and you have written to me about it .
On behalf of this House , I will support the Italian Government , which is currently dealing with the issue and which is responsible for any action taken .
Mr President , yes it was , because I wanted to express , on behalf of my group , not just our shock but our disgust at the result of the military tribunal in the United States which acquitted the pilot who was responsible for the dreadful accident in which 22 Europeans died .
I want to give notice to this House that we shall be seeking to table an urgency on this very issue .
I hope the rest of the House will join us in putting it on the agenda for this week .
Mr President , I thank you for your very kind remarks about Women 's Day , and a very happy day to all the brothers and sisters in the House and indeed in the gallery .
Your remarks were particularly welcome in view of the proposal to do away with the Committee on Women 's Rights .
I hope this kind of support will maintain this very important committee .
I have another question .
On 18 February another woman in the Community won her case in the European Court of Human Rights - Denise Mathews v. the UK Government .
I would like to request that you inform the House , if possible this week , whether any efforts have already started on the part of both Parliament and the Commission to enable the citizens of Gibraltar to vote in the coming European elections .
I cannot answer you because it is up to the groups and Members to take the initiative .
Like you , I have read in the press that the United Kingdom Government is going to deal with the question .
If any group or Member wants to take initiatives they will do so in accordance with the appropriate rules .
Mr President , on Friday of the last part-session I drew attention to the scandalous situation of the part-time interpreters who work for Parliament and have not received proper remuneration .
They want to see some money .
The situation has not been very clear since October when I wrote to Commissioner Liikanen to ask him to investigate it .
It now appears that Commissioner Santer should deal with this matter .
I understand they are threatening industrial action , which could possibly affect the drawing up of the new Structural Fund regulations .
I should like to ask the Bureau to speedily resolve this problem , which is causing considerable difficulties for many people without whose good work we could not do our own work .
Mr McMahon , the Secretary-General is taking the necessary steps to resolve the matter as quickly as possible .
Mr President , a few months ago I asked you when we were going to move into the new Parliament building , IPE IV .
At the time , you said you did not know .
We are now three months away from the end of our term of office , and I should like to ask you once again when the new premises will be completed .
Will it be before the end of the present term of office or will we have to wait for the next term ?
I can only give you the same reply , Mr Striby : when it is ready .
That is not in our hands , but in those of the contractor , who was not chosen by us .
He was chosen by SERS , a publicly owned company incorporating various public enterprises in the Strasbourg region .
You might do better to put your question to the contractor and ask if it is going to keep to its schedule .
If that were the case , the building would be completed towards the end of this parliamentary term , but it was meant to be finished last year as well , and that did not happen .
So I can only tell you that we shall have the building when it is ready .
I cannot add anything more , since this company regularly fails to keep to its own schedules . It is unfortunate , but that is how things are .
I would like to make one further point .
I happen to know that France has done everything necessary .
It would appear that the ball is in the European Parliament 's court .
If you are denying this , I am happy to take note of it .
The French Government has used all possible means to try to make progress on a question which is not its direct responsibility , but that of a company , as I would repeat .
Clearly , when it does not have the means to do so , it cannot force the company 's hand and make it fulfil its obligations .
The French Government is trying to move things forward as far as possible , and thanks to its intervention , we have made up some of the delay , which would otherwise be even worse .
I can tell you nothing more .
Put your question to SERS , which can tell you what it is doing in order to meet its commitments .
In any event , we are unable to do anything .
Mr President , after hearing your fine words on the follow-up to Mrs Hoff 's report on equal opportunities for women and men at the Secretariat of the European Parliament , I should like to point out that during the COPEC meeting we had with various officials this morning at the Secretariat of the European Parliament in Luxembourg , we took the view that the European Parliament should set an example by adopting a programme of positive action with fixed time-limits and statistical objectives in order to put an end to the under-representation of women , particularly in A-grade posts in the European Parliament where they only account for 20 % .
You will therefore have the opportunity to practise what you preach by taking an ad hoc decision in the Bureau , the majority of whose members are men .
I am sure that all the members of the Bureau will have taken note of your comments .
Mr President , according to an article published by the Finnish joint news agency on 26 February , we said we did not believe that enlargement of the European Union was being delayed , even though the negotiations on Agenda 2000 were dragging on .
Furthermore , we are supposed to have said that the negotiations on Agenda 2000 might continue during the Finnish Presidency and even up to and including the Portuguese Presidency without creating any problems for the enlargement process .
Mr President , I should like to put it to you first of all , was the report in the Finnish press correct in saying that we do not think it would create problems for enlargement ?
Secondly , what was such a view based on ?
And , thirdly , is this consistent with your duties in accordance with Article 19 of the Rules of Procedure ?
At the moment , I cannot respond to any articles in the press since I do not know whether or not they accurately reflect my position .
When asked in the past if I believed that Agenda 2000 could be concluded , I have always given the same reply . Parliament is doing everything it ought to ensure that , as far as we are concerned , it can be concluded by May .
As far as the Council is concerned , it will be up to the Council itself to decide if it will be able to conclude the negotiations in March .
Enlargement may perhaps take place in 2003 .
But as I do not have the exact details of the article , I cannot tell you whether or not it is correct .
If you send me a translation of the article , I will gladly tell you if it is a true reflection of my views .
Mr President , I thought I heard Mrs Banotti requesting that the citizens of Gibraltar should have the right to vote in the European elections .
I may have missed the first part of her speech , so I would like to know if she initially also asked for the citizens of Gibraltar to have the right to vote in British elections , since exercising European citizenship goes hand in hand with exercising national citizenship .
Thank you , Mrs García Arias .
I believe you heard correctly , but that is a quite legitimate contribution to the debate .
The Minutes were approved
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed .
Mr Wijsenbeek made a comment earlier about the Wibe report .
Rule 6 ( 6 ) of the Rules of Procedure is left over from a time when the reports on these requests were put to the vote at the end of the first item on the agenda .
This was subsequently changed and they are now voted on later instead .
I therefore believe that the spirit of the rule is basically that the debate on the report should be held on the first day of the sitting following the tabling of the report and that this does not mean that we have to change today 's agenda .
Mr Fayot has the floor .
Mr President , I have listened to your interpretation of the Rules of Procedure .
I am sorry to have to contradict you , but in my opinion the provisions of the Rules are perfectly clear .
They state that the report of the committee shall be placed at the head of the agenda , and I think that as the French version uses the term ' d 'office ' , meaning ' without consultation ' , there is no need to take a vote , and that this term simply means the report should be placed at the head of the agenda .
I am sorry that I have to contradict both the Conference of Presidents and the President .
I think that if we are to follow our Rules of Procedure , we must therefore place the report at the head of the agenda . There is no need to take a vote .
Very well , we have heard the opinion of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , and I do not claim to be infallible .
We shall therefore place the report at the head of the agenda and the other reports will follow immediately afterwards .
Tuesday :
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has asked for the Commission statement on the trade dispute over bananas between the European Union and the United States to be brought forward from Friday to Tuesday and taken after the report by Mrs Haug on the Union 's own resources .
Mrs Green has the floor .
Mr President , I wish to say , on behalf of my group , that it is important that this issue , which has become a major trade dispute between the United States and the European Union , should not be dealt with on Friday .
Important as the Friday sitting is , and we all accept that , it is more important for us to be able to debate and vote on this issue when there is a very substantial number of Members in this House .
In the last few days it has become a very critical issue - bearing in mind the fact that the United States is imposing sanctions at this very moment in advance of the WTO ruling - and my group feels very strongly that we should bring it forward to tomorrow so that we can hear the result of the discussions in the WTO today and the relevant Commissioner can be available tomorrow to deal with it .
Mr President , I am opposed to this .
Why ?
Because we chose to deal with the matter on Friday .
This means that whenever there is a debate which is a tiny bit important , it gets taken off the agenda .
That is no kind of a solution .
That is the first thing .
The second thing is that we have already had problems enough with the large number of reports which now have to be dealt with on Tuesday .
If we add bananas as well , our agenda for Tuesday will be even more crowded .
We would be prepared to consider Thursday .
But we cannot endorse the principle as such that an important issue should be taken off the agenda for Friday .
Having now heard one speaker in favour and one against , I put to the vote the change proposed by the Socialist Group .
Parliament approved the request
Wednesday : no changes
Thursday :
Mr President , I find it literally scandalous that a report on the enhanced partnership between the European Union and India has been placed on Friday 's agenda .
We manage to find a space on the Wednesday or Thursday agenda for China , the great Communist empire , but we can find only five minutes at the end of a part-session for the largest democracy in the world .
It is absolutely scandalous !
A vast amount of progress is being made in India .
There is the potential for a strategic partnership for the European Union with a country that has a population of one billion , and we treat it as if it were a small remote island in the middle of the Pacific .
I therefore urge the House to see to it that this matter can at least be discussed on Thursday .
Is there a speaker for or against ?
Mr President , I am not exactly speaking against it but I am concerned that if we take it on Thursday it will , in any case , be voted on Friday .
If that is the case I wonder whether it might not be better simply to take it to the next session when we can discuss it at a more appropriate time .
I have to be against , then .
We have a major problem of principle here in this House .
Various honourable Members have sought to uphold Friday as a full day of the part-session , and we have done that in circumstances which were often difficult .
A second point of principle is that either we take Fridays seriously in Parliament or we do not .
I have some sympathy for Mrs Green 's arguments on the matter of voting , but it is an extremely important question of principle here in Parliament if we decide to stop debating important subjects on a Friday .
Mr President , as Mr Martens well knows , we also have an agreement that if there is an issue on the Friday morning that groups feel is inappropriately placed , then we would agree to try and find a better place for it or defer it .
That has been our position for some time now in the Conference of Presidents and I think if there is clear disagreement by some of the groups that this should be on Friday morning then we should stick with that agreement .
I do not think that is quite what the agreement is .
The agreement is that if there are reports which are controversial , they should not be placed on Friday 's agenda .
In any event , however , I now put to the vote the request by the ARE Group .
Parliament rejected the request
There are no changes to the agenda for the sittings on 22 and 23 March 1999 .
Request for a waiver of immunity
The next item is the report ( A4-0076 / 99 ) by Mr Wibe , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the request for the waiver of Mr Rosado Fernandes 's immunity .
Mr President , let me first of all say that I had no objection to postponing my business in order to allow the important debate on violence against women to take place .
Instead , I shall be brief .
The matter under discussion concerns a request from the Prosecutor-General of the Portuguese Republic for a waiver of immunity in respect of one of our colleagues , Mr Rosado Fernandes , for his disparaging remarks about Portuguese agricultural policy , as well as certain references he made to the Minister of Agriculture at the time .
The matter turns on whether the remarks can be construed as disparaging .
In judging a case such as this , knowledge of the legal principles that govern parliamentary immunity is of paramount importance .
In this Parliament , as in most democratic countries , parliamentary immunity is most assuredly not a personal privilege bestowed on individual Members .
Rather , it is a form of protection for Parliament as a democratic institution .
It provides protection for Members , thus enabling them to carry out the political duties they were elected to perform .
It follows that the key principle underlying our rules on immunity is that the latter should only be waived where the charge has nothing to do with one 's work as an MEP .
If the charge has a direct , or even an indirect connection with one 's parliamentary work , immunity should not be waived .
Other circumstances where it cannot be waived include clear cases of victimisation where the aim has been to discredit a Member politically , or where a trivial occurrence might have serious political implications .
In such cases , it is reasonable to maintain that immunity should not be waived .
In the present case , it should first of all be noted that the Member of Parliament in question , Mr Rosado Fernandes , has a deep and lively interest in agricultural policy issues - in actual fact it is his speciality .
He is also a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
It should also be noted that the remarks with which he now stands charged were made in a definite political context .
They refer to the agricultural policy of his own country .
It should finally be noted that the tone adopted by Mr Rosado Fernandes did not greatly depart from what would be regarded as the norm in a heated political debate .
To sum up , it is therefore reasonable to say that the remarks made by Mr Rosado Fernandes cannot be divorced from his work in Parliament .
For that reason , I do not think the request for a waiver of immunity should be granted .
I therefore propose that we do not grant the request for a waiver .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Violence against women - Daphne programme
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Commission statement on violence against women ; -the oral question ( B4-0145 / 99 ) by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , to the Commission , on the programme of Community action ( Daphne Programme ) ( 2000-2004 ) on measures aimed at preventing violence against children , young persons and women.I give the floor to Mrs Gradin , for the Commission .
I shall start with the declaration .
It is the last International Women 's Day of this century .
A declaration on the situation of women , and especially on violence against women , is thus appropriate .
The Member States of the European Union are democratic societies where women and men have equal rights .
Women form slightly more than half of the population in every country .
However , this is not reflected either in decision-making bodies or in administration or business life .
All of our countries have subscribed to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
We all know that the human rights of women and of the girl child are an inalienable , integral and indivisible part of universal human rights .
What then is the situation in our countries ?
Women have the right to live in safety , but a great number are not even safe in their own homes .
Women have the right to be treated with dignity , but thousands and thousands of women are sold like cattle and regarded as only having the value their pimps and traffickers can get from exploiting them .
Women have full human rights but oppression and violence keep them in subordinate positions in all our countries .
Today the issue of violence against women is internationally recognised as a substantial problem .
With the 1993 Vienna World Conference on Human Rights , women 's rights were finally accepted as human rights .
Gender-based violence and all forms of sexual harassment and exploitation are incompatible with the dignity and worth of the human person .
Such behaviour has to be eliminated .
The issue of violence against women was on the agenda of the United Nations Women 's Conference in Beijing in 1995 .
The Platform underlined that violence against women is an obstacle to the achievement of the objectives of equality , development and peace .
For years it was often said that women had themselves to blame if they were beaten and raped .
It was said that they should not wear short skirts .
This argument is sometimes still used but in slightly different forms .
I personally would not , by the way , use the argument that the wearing of jeans is a guarantee against rape .
Today , the common view is that the woman and her testimony should be relied upon in court .
Most Member States have changed their laws so as to make violence against women a criminal act .
Also , rape within marriage is now a crime .
Women often have the right to a special counsellor during court proceedings .
Women 's organisations play an essential role in the fight against violence .
They reach out to those at risk and are active in raising awareness among the public .
This is the very basis of the Daphne initiative .
Since 1996 we have supported nongovernmental and voluntary organisations in their fight against violence towards women and children .
The demand for support is far greater than the resources available .
The new Daphne programme will also be open for NGOs from countries from Central and Eastern Europe .
The Commission and the presidencies have also launched a campaign against violence towards women , in response to the demand by the European Parliament to make 1999 a year against violence against women .
During this campaign a number of European actions are being organised .
The next big European event will be the ministerial conference on violence against women , to be held in Cologne at the end of this month .
The campaign against violence is not just a series of official European conferences : the Member States themselves are of course invited to initiate events involving both the public and NGOs .
For many years the issue of violence against women was discussed as a women 's problem .
But it is not women who are the problem , it is the violent behaviour of men .
Therefore we should not only focus on women .
Women and children are the victims of this violence .
The problem is men who argue using physical force and violence instead of words .
This campaign should therefore also focus on men and what can be done to change the present situation .
Projects by , for and about men will be supported in the Member States .
Let me quote a Swedish doctor who wrote before the United Nations Women 's Conference in Beijing : ' Sufficient numbers of men must discover and take an active stand against the violence which occurs around them .
A greater number of men must make themselves heard at workplaces in the public debate and refuse to go along with this violence .
Violence of this kind is despicable and inhuman and therefore also unmanly .
Real men do not behave like that . ' . Fathers must pass this message on to their sons , teachers to their pupils , military commanders to their men , and friends to one another .
As part of our European campaign I invite all men today to support the campaign by wearing a white ribbon .
This ribbon is a sign that you are real men , who say ' no ' to violence against women .
Applause
The achievements under the Daphne programme have been impressive .
Violence against women , adolescents and children has been placed high on the political agenda .
A total of 95 projects have been supported since 1997 .
These projects have led to the establishment of useful networks and cross-border cooperation between non-governmental organisations .
An observatory on violence against women has been established and research projects are under way .
An important part of the Daphne programme is the campaign against violence against women .
This campaign is based on an initiative from the European Parliament .
A preparatory meeting was held in June last year under the British presidency .
In December the Austrian presidency hosted a conference in Vienna .
It focused on the role of the police in combating violence against women and violence against migrant women .
At the end of March the German presidency will host a ministerial conference in Cologne .
There are also plans for a concluding conference towards the end of the Finnish presidency .
Between these conferences several actions are being organised on both a European and a national level .
Examples are the production of television spots , information packages and a website on the Internet .
We are also conducting a statistical report on violence as well as Eurobarometer .
Projects will also be supported in the Member States .
One of the main targets will be projects focusing on men and how to prevent violent behaviour from men towards women .
On 20 May 1998 the Commission presented a proposal for the new Daphne programme .
This programme will run from 2002 to 2004 with a total budget of ECU 25m .
Since then I have been anxious to have the proposal adopted as soon as possible .
We need to have the programme in place at the latest by 1 January 2000 .
During the Austrian presidency progress was meagre .
By the end of 1998 the discussion focused on the legal base of the proposal .
A number of Member States made it clear that they were opposed to Article 235 as the legal base for the programme .
On the other hand , many Member States saw Article 129 as an appropriate alternative to the legal base .
The discussions in the Council in January and February showed clearly that there was a considerable risk of blockage if Article 235 was maintained .
The Commission was therefore forced to accept the proposed new legal base .
Nobody should be in any doubt that we would have preferred to keep Article 235 but we had to face the fact that there is no value in an unadopted Daphne programme .
I assume that Article 129 will not limit the scope of the programme .
The context in which we work to combat violence and in which women and children suffer is , indeed , the context of human rights .
However , the impact of violence on women , young persons and children amounts to injury or the risk of injury to their physical , mental and psychological health .
It should be noted that according to the World Health Organisation 's definition , health is ' a state of complete physical , mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity ' .
Furthermore , the Daphne programme is victim-based .
Its aim is to prevent all forms of violence and to protect all victims and potential victims of violence , irrespective of whether the violence takes the form of trafficking , sexual abuse , the abandonment of children or any other form .
I regret the inconvenience that this amendment has caused the European Parliament .
However , in our view it was necessary to act swiftly in order for Parliament to take account of the amended proposal at its committee meeting on 16 and 17 February this year .
When the new Daphne programme is adopted it will provide a new impetus in the fight against violence .
Under the programme we will continue to provide support for NGO cooperation within the European Union but we will also be able to include cooperation with NGOs in the candidate countries .
I recently participated in a conference in Budapest with NGOs active in the fight against sexual exploitation of children .
The extent of the problem is immense .
The need for support and cooperation with the NGO community in these countries is evident .
If we are to succeed in the fight against violence we need concrete action involving all parts of our society .
To fight against violence towards women is the responsibility of us all .
We welcome the fact that the European Parliament will consider the amended proposal in its appropriate committee in March with a view to submitting it to the April plenary session for first reading .
Applause
Mr President , I am speaking here on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
Hardly anyone can be left in any doubt that the Committee on Women 's Rights and the European Parliament have been responsible for the European Union 's decision to tackle the problem of violence against women , children and young people .
We want these campaigns to be carried out as this is a very serious social problem .
In previous years the European Parliament adopted specific budgetary policies to counter the problem of violence against women , children and young persons , and there has been overwhelming interest in setting up projects of this kind , so that in 1997 , for example , funding could be provided for only just over 10 % of all the projects proposed .
The European Parliament has also approved two very important reports dealing with violence against women .
A report compiled under the leadership of Marianne Eriksson raises the issue of so-called zero tolerance in matters of violence .
An important report was also put together under the leadership of Susan Waddington extending the debate to cover the issue of the trade in women .
It is an astonishing fact that there are two million women and young girls in the world being sold every year to be sexually exploited , which means that the issue is not actually merely an EU problem , but a global one , and one in which we must be able to intervene .
Our committee is very worried that if the Commission now gives in to those Member States which do not agree that the Daphne programme should be made law under Article 235 , the scope of the programme will not be adequate to the scale of the problem .
We would like it to deal with all the possible legal aspects connected with violence against women , including the trade in women .
If the legal basis is the promotion of public health , we want guarantees that the Commission will actually be able to create a programme , in conjunction with the Member States , in which violence against women is not merely reduced to a health problem .
All credit goes to Mrs Gradin for her attempts to meet our demands that the notion of public health must be understood in as broad a context as possible here .
But we actually want guarantees that legal instruments might also be on the agenda .
Let me tell you about the situation in Finland .
A law came into force at the beginning of this year in Finland under which the police or a court can impose a restraining order on a person who has behaved violently . In other words , a person may be prevented from coming near their victim when there is reason to fear that violent acts will be carried out again .
In the Member States there are certainly other excellent examples of how this matter can be approached using legal means .
As for the global nature of this problem , I have received , in my capacity as chairman of the committee , a letter from an Iranian organisation pointing out that women in Iran are still being stoned .
We should also remember that we are sure to become involved in these global aspects of the issue with this programme .
Commissioner , I was not altogether convinced , having heard your reply , that this change to the legal basis will now guarantee us a good programme within the Daphne context .
Perhaps we can try together to convince those reluctant Member States I mentioned that they should agree to consider Article 235 as a legal basis .
I understand that in fact you were of the same opinion as us originally , but that now you base your opinion on the overall importance , in general terms , of accomplishing this programme .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I warmly welcome you all to International Women 's Day .
I have just come from a worldwide video conference , organised by Unifem , the UN women 's organisation , which calls for a worldwide campaign for a world free of violence against women .
We in the European Parliament are preparing to make an important contribution to this campaign .
We are taking part in worldwide actions and I think it is most important for the women in our Member States to realise that they are not alone , that we are fighting alongside them .
We in the European Union have been fighting for a long time for a European year against violence against women .
A year ago 350 Members supported the written declaration calling for this and for a campaign to that end .
Now we have reached the point where we can start the campaign and have a draft programme on the table .
But legal problems are arising now : reasons - which in my view are pretexts - are being put forward by the most varied groups of people , which will prevent the Daphne programme from being adopted at an early date .
We Social Democrats want rapid action . We want the programme to be adopted quickly , obviously with the participation of the European Parliament , which also has a greater say thanks mainly to the use of Article 129 as the legal basis .
But I can see that it will be very difficult to get the programme ready on time so that it really can enter into force by 1 January 2000 .
What we definitely want to ensure - and we will fight for this - is that large sections of the previous draft programme are not cut , such as those on trafficking in women and domestic violence - I find it difficult to call it häusliche Gewalt , violence in the home , as it is called in German , for no home is violent as such , it is always the people , and usually the men who are violent in the home - and that we get the programme wrapped up in good time .
You all know we will be having new elections , Parliament has to be formed first , and the Council presidencies have to take that into consideration .
The German President-in-Office of the Council , Christine Bergmann , said in the Committee on Women 's Rights that she wants to see the Daphne programme signed and sealed as soon as possible .
The Justice Ministers want the programme too , but nevertheless formal difficulties have cropped up again .
This is probably largely because we do not have a formal Council of Ministers for women 's affairs that could adopt the programme , and this is another very crucial demand made by my group .
If we discuss the matter at all , we would say that Article 129 must definitely lead to a multidisciplinary approach .
We also want to take account even at this stage of the provisions that will come with the Amsterdam Treaty , which will presumably enter into force by the year 2000 , and we want a comprehensive definition of what the concept of health actually covers . This means that we must also look at the social background to violence and in particular we must adhere to the approach that non-governmental organisations , Member State authorities and the judiciary and police can all work together here .
That is vital if we are to pass on the message to our citizens that Europe and the European Parliament are fighting to prevent all forms of violence against women .
Applause
Mr President , today is a day of celebration for many of us , a day of solidarity , a tribute and a mark of our respect for all the women and children who still do not have rights and who are subjected to abuse and violence .
The fight for equal opportunities and the struggle against violence affect us all and their success benefits the whole of society .
I would have liked to have been here presenting the report by the Committee on Women 's Rights on the Daphne Programme , for which I am the rapporteur . However , as you all know , this was not possible as the legal basis was changed at the last minute , when a great deal of work had already been done on the report .
It is not bad news although certain aspects do concern us .
Our main priority is to ensure that the Daphne Programme moves forward .
As you will remember , it was this House 's initiative to create a special budget line to fund measures for combating violence against women and children , and in the three years since its creation , it has seen magnificent results .
There is a high degree of collaboration between NGOs , civil society and public bodies which has led to many new ideas and projects . Together they are searching for better solutions , and it is our responsibility - and that of all the Community institutions - to implement this programme before the end of the year .
For the first time , the European Union is facing the challenge of a five-year programme to combat violence .
Five years is a long time for those who are suffering .
It is therefore also our duty to prepare a good text setting out an appropriate strategy for the medium term that effectively helps to prevent and mitigate the effects of violence on women , children and young people .
As a result , Commissioner , we are extremely concerned about the definition of the concept of public health .
This must be interpreted more widely to mean a state of physical , mental and social well-being and we hope that this will be the case .
Trafficking in women , sexual abuse and the disappearance of children are all forms of violence .
The European Union can provide an important added value in combating such violence .
It would be unfortunate if these issues were left aside just because a legal concept was poorly interpreted .
Today is the last 8 March of this millennium .
On the first 8 March , women were almost invisible .
Over the last 20 years many inequalities have been corrected but discrimination still exists .
I do not want to end without highlighting the major challenge facing us if we are to make the principle of equality a reality .
The ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam will certainly help us to do that as we will have firm legal bases that establish mainstreaming as a fundamental and horizontal objective .
There is still too much direct and indirect discrimination that prevents women from playing a full role as citizens , that hinders their access to employment and that prevents them from being independent and having high self-esteem .
The fourth action programme serves as a guideline in all the Member States but its aims must not end with the programme . Rather , we should pursue them and improve them in a fifth action programme .
We must promote the reconciliation of professional and family lives and encourage women to get involved in politics . These are key elements for the participation of women in society and , of course , their integration into the labour market .
The European Union has many resources it can draw on to provide assistance .
I hope that Agenda 2000 and the new Fund regulations - which are vital documents - establish clear measures in favour of working women .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I totally endorse what Commissioner Gradin has said .
She rightly points to the fact that women are still under-represented in decision-making forums , government and the world of business and industry .
This is despite the fact that there are more women than men in the European Union .
Parliament 's President himself has just said that more work is needed here .
She rightly observes that women 's rights are human rights .
Women are entitled to be safe and to be treated with human dignity .
To a lot of men , including men in this Chamber , violence against women is a marginal and rare phenomenon , at least in the European Union .
But the figures tell us that one woman in five has at some point been the victim of violence .
Violence against women and children too occurs in all societies and at all levels of society , irrespective of culture or religion .
She is also right to say that the battle against violence against women must not be waged solely by women and by non-governmental organisations seeking to help stop violence against women .
First and foremost we have to tackle its root causes , and those are not short skirts or too little assertiveness on the part of women , but the millions of European men who use violence in some form or other every day .
We must use 1999 , the year of campaigning against violence towards women , to make men aware of their obligations .
For all these reasons and given your most excellent statement , I find it a pity that the new legal base for the Daphne programme is so restrictive , even though you are asking for it to be interpreted broadly .
Lastly , the Daphne programme also covers violence against children and young people .
I have tabled a number of amendments on behalf of my group to ensure that this is made clear in the resolution , in the title and in a number of paragraphs as well .
Mr President , I am delighted to be the first man to speak in this debate on International Women 's Day .
I want in particular to assure my colleagues here that the vast majority of men would support them fully in ensuring that they have full equality of rights , parity of esteem and protection against any violence whatsoever .
I am proud to wear the white ribbon to show that I make that stand myself personally .
I know I speak for the majority of my colleagues here as well .
It is important that the statements made in this House are not just made in a vacuum and that we send a message out to the wider world that we in the European Parliament are willing to be visionary and to bring the world into the 21st century by guaranteeing equality of rights for all ; and , in particular , by putting in place special protection programmes for those who suffer violence .
That is why the Daphne programme is so important to us , not only because - if I could use the phrase - it was our own child , but also because we see the importance of its effect on a global scale .
We have already experienced some of the benefits from the Daphne programme .
It is unfortunate that legal difficulties - which this Parliament has encountered many times through the use of Article 235 - have delayed the implementation of the new programme .
However , I am confident that , utilising the new legal base , we can begin once again to put this issue on the map .
It is also important that when we decide to bring in new programmes , we ensure that the voluntary sector and the non-governmental organisations who are working at the coalface , who are there with women 's and children 's refuges to help them , are brought in at the very earliest stage to advise us of what is the most effective way of utilising funding .
But it is equally important to bring the governments of the Member States along with us , because , as has been seen from the use of Article 235 , certain governments felt this was an imposition on them , and that it interfered with their democratic rights under the rules of subsidiarity within the Treaties .
Therefore , we must ensure that governments are seen to be playing an active role in that regard .
The new equal opportunities created for us in the Treaty of Amsterdam must be grasped fully .
But henceforth let the message from here be : men and women oppose violence against women , against children , against all .
Mr President , there has been some talk about the legal basis .
If the Commissioner does not have a problem with the legal base , then as regards the Daphne programme , nor do I. It is just that my own personal dream of including preventive medicine and the trade in women has still not been fulfilled .
I hope that in spite of everything , we may yet be able to reach agreement on all areas .
However , I can see that it is going to be an uphill struggle , although perhaps we should not paint too gloomy a picture .
Now that I have the floor , I should in any case like to thank the voluntary organisations for their work , not just within the European Union , but all over the world .
Even though we politicians may be amazingly competent , we cannot deny that there is a need for teamwork between us who are elected by the people and those who toil at grass-roots level .
It is that teamwork which will enable us to make progress .
I should also like to mention that I am wearing jeans in honour of the day .
I must say that I was extremely surprised by the Italian court ruling .
It made me think that if only it were a simple matter for myself and our children to wear jeans , we would have an infinitely better working arrangement with the jeans manufacturers who are currently having such problems .
Unfortunately , however , wearing jeans is not a simple matter .
I have been wearing jeans now for several days in celebration of International Women 's Day , which was first proclaimed by women Socialists at the beginning of the century , and by the United Nations in 1975 , since we are hardly ever able to celebrate it on 8 March .
I hope that some time in the next century it may be possible to designate 8 March a holiday in honour of us women , so that we can celebrate that one day in a fitting manner .
I am delighted about the ' White Ribbon ' campaign , organised by ' real ' men in Canada to demonstrate , by wearing this token , that they actively oppose violence by other men against women .
I think it is a very commendable campaign , and I sincerely hope that all those men who are wearing a ribbon today in the House continue to sport it for the rest of their lives , instead of discarding it once this day comes to an end .
Violence by men against women is , as was mentioned earlier , a worldwide problem of enormous proportions and with devastating implications for those concerned .
It is not good enough for one man to say ' but I for one am not usually violent ' . Obviously , there are other men who are .
This is something we are frighteningly aware of today .
I should also like to thank the Swedish Government , which last year brought in legislation to protect women that viewed their problems from a different perspective .
For example , the customers of prostitutes are to be criminalised , an approach which this House found highly amusing some 18 months ago , but which is now the subject of legislation in one Member State at least .
Finally , I should like to extend my thanks to Leyla Zana , one of several women who are still the victims of political violence .
Although the President should never make comments , Mrs Eriksson , I would inform you that in several of our countries there are many initiatives along the same lines as the one launched in Canada , even though they have not yet been as widely publicised .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again for the umpteenth time we find that in some Member States it takes clever legal manoeuvring to combat violence against women and children in an effective manner , and that some Member States resist that .
We hope the Commissioner is right , or wins through , and that even with an inadequate legal base she will manage to implement a programme which is effective in combating crimes such as trafficking in human beings .
Measures to combat violence against women and children are a priority worldwide .
They really mean the start of peace - the start of moves towards a peaceful society and a humane society from which many women and children are still excluded .
Many men suffer violence too , but as we take up and intensify the campaign against violence against women and children today , I think we can be pleased with what Commissioner Gradin has said , although of course the Chamber does not altogether reflect that .
The men have drifted away in droves , despite being sympathetic on this issue .
Happily we have already heard one male speaker , and undoubtedly there are many others who will feel sympathetic .
But it took some time before women too realised that we must not simply act to defend the victims better , but that violence is a problem of men which must therefore be tackled by men .
That being so , I readily endorse what has been said here on the subject .
I shall respectfully submit a written declaration to you , Mr President , I hope on behalf of a large number of honourable Members , asking you as the President of Parliament to take steps to set up a commission on children 's rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to point out how ridiculous it is to hand out little white ribbons at the entrance of Parliament , as if it were heroic to wear it as a sign of courage and originality .
For goodness sake , what type of conformism is society being taken over by ?
Would anyone here dare to say that if he does not wear this white ribbon , it is because he is in favour of violence against women ?
There were other periods in history when it was more difficult to wear the white rosette , as did young knights who fought to defend the most martyred queen in our history , Marie-Antoinette .
In France , where I come from , talking about violence against women would involve mentioning all those women who were guillotined during the French Revolution , the Carmelite nuns of Orange and all the acts of persecution .
It would mean having to mention the 3 000 French women who were deported to Algeria in 1962 amidst total indifference .
The European institutions did not want to hear a word about it .
These women were deported to houses of pleasure of the Fellaga army rabble in Algeria .
Jasmina and a friend of hers were saying to me only yesterday in my office that yes , they are frightened every day , frightened of being threatened with their lives or being raped .
That is the reason there is violence against women .
Why not say so then ?
In some areas in my country , there are more cases of rape each day than there are burnt-out cars .
This year , 700 cars have been burnt out in Strasbourg .
Yet , how many more rapes were there ?
Nothing is said about this because it is a millstone around our necks . It certainly must not be discussed .
However , why not talk about the presence of displaced persons on our territory who have the same morals as those who are fighting over in Algeria , and who are raping women and slitting people 's throats ?
Talking about violence against women would mean having to talk about the infamous group , ' Nique ta mère ' , which has been glorified as a so-called anti-racist group .
It is despicable that it dares to have a name like that , and yet the records are selling thanks to capitalists promoting them , as is seen in FNAC and elsewhere .
Talking about violence against women would of course mean having to talk about abortion , which is the worst kind of violence , and which has become commonplace nowadays ; it would also sadly mean having to talk about self-destruction , a type of violence sometimes forced on women by the propaganda with which we are all familiar .
Finally , talking about violence against women would mean having to admit that the death penalty , which is necessary for the most abominable assassins , must be reintroduced for those capable of such forms of torture .
Mr President , I would like to begin by warmly congratulating Commissioner Gradin on her speech on the issue of violence against women .
This is a very significant day .
It illustrates a real determination for a Europe-wide campaign against violence to women .
All the work we have undertaken in the Committee on Women 's Rights and in this Parliament in the last few years illustrates the influence of Parliament and the Committee on Women 's Rights in taking a determined stand against violence to women .
We expect to see action across every Member State .
We know the difficulties we have already experienced in getting this far .
There have been objections from many quarters .
Yet we have reached the point , that we know there are going to be new actions , new research , new initiatives , new projects , all of which will contribute towards raising awareness of the issue of violence towards women and combating it .
I am sure all of us recognise that we have a responsibility to work in our own Member States , in our own networks , to combat violence .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party have accepted that and we are beginning our own campaign this week .
We intend to consult with practitioners in all the regions of the UK and to prepare a platform for action .
We also want to develop partnerships between our own non-governmental organisations and those in other Member States so that we can share good ideas and good practice .
We want to extend that globally to work with countries like South Africa .
I have just returned from that country and the issue of violence against women is very high on the agenda .
There is a great need for all of us to work together globally .
Like Commissioner Gradin we also want men to stand beside us .
It is men in this Parliament and men in the various committees that have been dealing with this issue who , for budgetary and legal reasons , have often resisted the work we have been doing .
It is men who are the perpetrators of violence against women and men have to take this seriously .
I think the white ribbon campaign is excellent and I want to see British men , and men in all communities and all towns wearing that white ribbon and supporting women across the European Union .
One in four women experiences violence and virtually every woman is vulnerable to violence .
Every woman supports this campaign .
The European Union is known for combating oppression and opposing violence .
Let us make sure we oppose it in our own cities , towns and homes .
Applause
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mme Gradin .
When she was appointed in 1995 she made this topic one of her priorities and despite a great deal of discouragement she has actually won through and we are now having a major debate in this Parliament about a subject that was often sniggered about but rarely taken seriously until she decided to do so .
I would also like to congratulate the staff who are running the Daphne Programme .
They are always available and always very supportive .
Mr Simpson is perhaps the person we know best .
He has made a real campaign out of this and a real mission for himself .
These programmes - Daphne , STOP and Grotius - came into existence following the tragedy of the Dutroux murders in Belgium .
It was a tragedy but also proved to be a catalyst when finally the political classes woke up to the fact that there was a really serious problem .
If I concentrate my remarks on children in this debate it is not because I am not totally at one with my colleagues who have spoken about the need to confront very seriously the major problem we have in all our societies with violence against women ; but increasingly , in the last three or four years the issue of children 's rights and the protection of those rights have begun slowly but finally to take their place amongst the political priorities in many of our countries .
All too often the real movers and shakers in this area are the NGOs who are , invariably , inadequately funded and constantly knocking on the door to try and bring these issue to the public .
For that reason we need a dedicated unit within the Commission to draw together the many programmes .
They are quite small , there is not a lot of money in them , but they are in danger of fragmentation if things continue like this .
I would stress that all of us in our own countries , as Mrs Waddington has said , have to get the men to recognise that children are not just the responsibility of their mothers .
Mr President , I obviously agree with Mrs Hautala 's resolution and of course , with women 's struggle to secure their right to human dignity and integrity .
However , I should like to make one remark in connection with this .
Like Mrs Banotti , I note that the Committee on Women 's Rights has to some extent taken possession of the Daphne programme , which is the result of the initiative taken by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and which to begin with was mainly directed towards the campaign against paedophilia .
Like Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , I should not like current events to result in this programme being redirected slightly , guaranteeing protection for women only and neglecting its other mission when every day children are the victims of unthinkable acts of cruelty .
I therefore urge the Commission to continue to earmark a substantial proportion of the funds for important measures undertaken by organisations whose task is to search for children who have disappeared and support families who are victims of this type of tragedy .
Finally , I would say to the House that rather than tearing each other apart for the sake of a small amount of funds , I wish that all the different parties could join together - not only today but also when we discuss the budget - in calling for a significant and substantial increase in funds for a purpose which is quite obviously first and foremost a humanitarian one .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are celebrating International Women 's Day with great enthusiasm , emotion and hope .
I should like to add ' with admiration and dignity ' , as women represent 50 % of the world 's population and are responsible for the remaining 50 % .
In modern societies , a woman is called upon to perform many roles , as mother , wife , simple companion , scientist , worker , politician , and as a woman in the arts .
Today a woman can claim these roles as her own and on an equal footing with men , with whom she can also share them .
I believe that the European Union has made a significant contribution to bringing this about . The European Parliament especially has taken decisions to strengthen equal rights and equal opportunities legislation on behalf of the women who live in our Member States .
Yet it is a sad fact that , even today in our modern and civilised societies , we see that prejudice still exists in relation to the position of women .
The practical implementation and observance of the regulations we institute cannot always be taken for granted and is often difficult to establish , as discrimination is something which does not always happen directly .
Let us not forget that there are countries where women and children still lack the most basic rights and where women do not know what is going to happen to them or how important their children are .
I should like to remind you that , above all , women continue to be responsible for passing on our culture , our identity and our values from generation to generation .
That is why modern society needs them more than ever , especially as a vehicle for culture and peace .
If we want the legal protection of women 's rights to have any substance and if we want the opportunities and rights of women to be put into effect , we must ensure that they receive the support they need to enable them to fulfil their roles . Today more than ever , we must place greater emphasis on education , training and health and on allowing women to grow up with dignity .
Women must be able to take advantage of their rights and to take on their responsibilities . They must be able to pass on the precious values our society needs today and to cross the threshold of the new millennium with faith in justice and in the freedom of mankind .
Mr President , Mr Antony has already left but his speech reminded me of the intrinsic institutionalised violence against women , the disabled , and ethnic and religious minorities that we unfortunately experienced during the era of European fascism .
Commissioner , you are well aware that violence against women is not a public health problem , although as in the publicity against tobacco , we can say that violence and violent men seriously damage the lives and health of women and children .
Violent people are not sick people .
We must make it quite clear that they are criminals .
Nevertheless , we are now faced with a challenge that has been laid down by the European Commission : we must readapt the objectives of the Daphne programme to fit a different legal basis , namely the protection of public health .
Commissioner , I know just how much your personal commitment and efforts have allowed us to truly begin to cooperate in the fight against violence within the European Union .
But I would like to ask you what effects you think the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam might have in the coming months in terms of our approach to combating violence .
Will it mean that at a later date we will be able to modify the Daphne programme again or extend its scope ?
I am worried about this because as you said , despite the broad interpretation of the concept of health , the fact is that all references to cooperation or programmes concerning the trafficking in women have been removed from the programme , yet we know that this is a Community programme .
I disagree with Mr Crowley 's defence of the principle of subsidiarity .
The Community provides an added value in combating trafficking in women and children , the abuse of children and paedophilia , and this is important when the European Union has to act not only in the context of cooperation under the third pillar , but also in collaboration with NGOs .
In conclusion , Commissioner , I would like you to give us some reassurance about the broad interpretation of the concept of health and to tell us what effect the Treaty of Amsterdam might have , since I wonder whether it might not be better to wait until it enters into force .
Mr President , how pleased I am to have heard some male voices in this debate , and likewise that this part of our discussion is being chaired by such an attentive male President : thank you !
It is vital that Europe should feel duty-bound to take action concerning both general and sexual violence against women .
All of us - all of our governments , the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council - have been striving over this past year to achieve a single currency and a single bank , to ensure that the euro is capable of holding its own against the excessively powerful dollar .
We all strive to give financial matters pride of place ; but we must try equally hard to ensure that the campaign against violence , particularly violence against women , becomes a cornerstone of European culture .
Mention has been made of Daphne and of pursuing new aims : I agree with what has been said here , but I would call for new and steadily increasing funds for the programmes and projects under Daphne relating to children and women .
I must thank the Commissioner , Mrs Gradin , for having mentioned in her speech the question of so-called anti-rape jeans .
A tragi-comical judgment handed down a month or so ago , in Italy , caused astonishment around the world .
Today , provocatively , I am wearing jeans and displaying them for all to see , not to attract attention but because the Italian Supreme Court and Court of Appeal have declared that a woman wearing jeans cannot be raped .
Jeans are a guarantee against rape .
We do not wish to judge the Court of Appeal , but to highlight a lack of culture .
The Europe which we create must be one of culture !
Let me quote an item from yesterday 's Italian press , originally published in an Austrian newspaper : the miniskirt is dangerously provocative .
In Austria , a woman in a miniskirt has been dismissed because of her attire .
However , the problem is that everyone rushed to the defence not of the woman , but of the man who dismissed her , because apparently it was he who had been provoked and suffered sexual harassment .
Mrs Gradin said that women must be protected ; but we must also look after men wherever they need looking after , as men and as human beings .
Mr President , I shall speak later on the Hautala proposal , and I shall refrain from commenting now on 8 March .
Instead I would turn to the Commissioner , Mrs Gradin , and begin by taking this opportunity to thank her for her hard work .
I believe that Mrs Gradin 's dedication to this topic - her strength , intelligence , good will and generosity - will go down in the annals of the European Union .
She is without doubt responsible for the fact that , in recent years , there has been a series of actions aiming to overcome violence against women .
On this point , I would ask that we take a positive view of the transition to Article 129 , in that it confers much greater powers on Parliament .
This House should theoretically be pleased , because progress might perhaps be more rapid at the end of the day .
It remains to be seen , however , whether the programme will stay as before .
I am all in favour of looking after men ; indeed , I am convinced that only if we do so will they at last stop thinking that women can be bought , robbed and seized rather than being won over .
I also agree to looking after women who have been the victims of violence and have suffered physical as well as psychological damage .
But we are also committed to other actions under Daphne , and all I wish to know is whether the move from Article 235 to 129 will alter the content of this programme .
That is precisely what we would not want .
Mr President , I too am most grateful to the Commissioner , Mrs Gradin .
Without wishing to repeat what colleagues have said , if the European tide has been turned in this area , then we owe it largely to her .
I would echo what Mrs Marinucci said concerning the scope of the programme under Article 129 .
Let me give an example : in Italy , as elsewhere , women 's organisations have for years supported , protected and housed women who have suffered violence , helping to reintegrate them socially .
They have done so partly through refuges , where women can take shelter , along with their children , and can receive psychological and legal support as well as help in returning to work .
In my view , if Article 129 really were restricted to health matters alone , it would greatly curtail the activities which are already under way and need to be extended .
I therefore believe that , although we in Parliament certainly do have an important role under Article 129 , since we can step in and bring matters to a rapid conclusion , we share Mrs Gradin 's desire to see this programme up and running by early 2000 .
It really would be a shame and a retrograde step , in my opinion , if all the actions originally scheduled for Daphne could not be included in their entirety .
Mr President , I wish to thank everybody for a very interesting debate , and the Committee on Women 's Rights for the support it has given to this campaign concerning violence against women , and also for the support for the Daphne programme .
Many of you have been concerned that we have had to change the legal base for Daphne .
It must be said that we had a long debate in the Commission before we presented this programme to the Council and Parliament and we came to the conclusion that Article 235 would have been the best base .
That is why we proposed it to both institutions .
During the debate at least five countries - Germany , Britain , France , Denmark and Belgium - were very categorical that they could not accept Article 235 .
They wanted Article 129 .
In my view , it is better to get Daphne decided , and then after a year we can see whether the programme can be improved .
Perhaps the programme is narrower than we had originally planned but let us get it started now , and then we can review the situation later .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I have received a motion for a resolution tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
Women 's health
The next item is the second report ( A4-0029 / 99 ) by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the Commission 's report to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the state of women 's health in the European Community ( COM ( 97 ) 0224 - C4-0333 / 97 ) .
Mr President , I would like to say , concerning the previous speech , that Mrs Gradin has our full support to get the Daphne programme under way , and we will certainly be in a position to cooperate fully on this issue in the future .
But now I would like to focus on another matter .
The European Commission commissioned a report from the University of Limerick on the subject of women 's health in the European Union .
However , Parliament was rather perplexed as the Commission did not really make any decisions on the basis of the report , but sent it directly to us and the Council .
Our task , as Parliament , then , is to lay down guidelines on how the issue of the state of women 's health should be understood .
It is certainly quite obvious that public health has improved in many respects and thus women are also healthier and live longer .
However , we should realise there are new kinds of health threats which target women , such as the fact that more and more women have to be solely responsible for looking after their families , as single mothers .
As is well known , they have many financial problems in such roles , and it is clear that the capacity and resources available for all the different kinds of health care are perhaps not perfect either .
There are also new kinds of health problems which women seem to suffer from in particular , and which were not really so very widespread in earlier times .
Take , for example , eating disorders such as anorexia and bulimia , though it has to be said that , surprisingly , young men too have started to suffer from these .
The nature of such problems is certainly so difficult to understand as to be inexplicable , but we should recognise these phenomena and think about where their actual origins lie .
Why does society put so much pressure specifically on young women , pressure that makes them react in this way ?
It is a very interesting time to raise the matter of women 's health , as the European Union is committed under the Treaty of Amsterdam to including at least two matters connected with this as part of all its activities .
The first issue to form part of all Union policy is equality between women and men , and the second is public health .
In my report I state that we have before us a double challenge , and that we have to apply the principle of transparency .
Thus we really must examine the Union 's future public health policy particularly , in this case , from the point of view of women .
My first contention is that women are very poorly represented in decision making in the healthcare sector .
They are of course very fully represented in the workforce , for example as nurses .
But they are clearly under-represented on the managerial ladder and on decision-making boards in the healthcare sector .
I know of research that shows that when women are also included in the management team the whole perspective changes .
More attention starts to be paid to preventing , rather than merely curing , illness .
This is a very interesting example , and one that shows that women also have their own way of working when they are allowed to take decisions .
Then there are illnesses that only affect women , especially in health problems relating to childbearing .
It is vital that we ensure that at every stage of a woman 's life there are good , high-quality basic healthcare services available to her , whether they relate to maternity problems , maternity welfare or other gynaecological issues .
Then there are complaints that affect women in a different way from men : heart and vascular disease , and alcoholism .
Depression also seems to be commoner among women .
This all has to be discussed without forgetting that as the population ages , there will be even more of us older women in society and that will place enormous demands on the healthcare system .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate the Committee on Women 's Rights on the report it has tabled and to say that , in general , I support it .
However , I would like to highlight the fact that we do not aim to attach more importance to women 's health than to men 's health but to look at them in an equal light .
Nonetheless , we need to emphasise that some of the health problems experienced by women are different and therefore require specific action .
I am not going to describe again the state of women 's health in the European Union as we already have a very clear picture . Moreover , the rapporteur , Mrs Hautala - whom I would like to congratulate on her report - has already done this exhaustively and the details are included in all the documents .
I am therefore only going to concentrate on those points that the Committee on the Environment wishes to stress .
We essentially want to focus on primary prevention when harmonising measures on women 's health to be implemented in all the Member States . Some of these measures are already being implemented in certain countries and , in our view , we need to step up activities in specific areas .
The first of these relates to smoking and alcohol consumption among women . It is particularly important to combat this among adolescents as more and more young women are beginning to smoke and consume alcohol at an earlier age , which is why preventive measures are important .
It is also essential to highlight the importance of a balanced diet .
Anorexia , bulimia and coronary diseases are becoming more prevalent and , in the case of anorexia and bulimia , increasingly common among young women .
We must also work to prevent the spread of AIDS by providing young people with more information .
Preventive measures like these should devote more attention to young people .
It is important , too , to look at secondary prevention measures as there are significant differences between the Member States . We need to introduce and implement more programmes to detect both cervical and breast cancer in the EU and provide systematic screening for all women , particularly those in high-risk categories .
Early detection of diabetes is becoming increasingly important as are the issues of hormone replacement therapy , osteoporosis and so on .
In addition , we need to ensure that any health statistics published are broken down according to sex . There are substantial differences that must be taken into consideration when decisions are made if these statistics are not broken down , as is the case at the moment .
Mr President , this is the second time in the past few months that we have held a debate on a report on women 's health in the European Community and I do not want to repeat what we said earlier .
Mrs Hautala has made enormous efforts to improve the report and , in particular , to reach an agreement within the Committee on Women 's Rights that will allow us to finally approve it , and I congratulate her on this .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy also studied the report drawn up by the Commission , which shows statistically that there are clear differences between the disease processes in men and women and that particular solutions therefore need to be found to problems or diseases which are specific to women . It also highlights the fact that for women , universal public health cover is essential as they still have lower living standards and earn lower wages than men .
In any event , the Committee on Research believes that we need better statistics on the public health situation which should be broken down according to gender , age group , income level and place of residence .
We also believe that more scientific research is needed into the causes and appropriate treatment of diseases such as anorexia and bulimia which , unfortunately , are currently having devastating effects on the health of adolescents .
It is also important to give greater consideration to occupational illnesses that are more common among working women , and this is particularly important today , 8 March .
We must point out that since it is more difficult to organise women in society , we know less about the incidence of occupational illnesses among women .
Mr President , people are still reluctant to recognise that there is anything specific about women 's health , even though ample evidence exists .
How could one fail to realise that women 's health is quite different from men 's in certain respects ?
Men do not have problems linked to reproductive health , and have fewer ailments caused by nutrition and lifestyle .
Men lead completely different lives from women and age less .
If it is true - and it is - that ageing is currently one of the major problems confronting all our health systems , there are generally more elderly women among the population , and they are sometimes poorer than their male counterparts .
Women 's health is different , as was recognised in the Beijing platform : indeed , its key paragraph recognised the right of women to the safeguarding of their health , above all their reproductive health .
It is a good thing that the Commission has presented a report specifically on women 's health , but conclusions must be drawn from it , and I am grateful to our chairman , Mrs Hautala , for having rescued this report against all odds .
She has made it down-to-earth , coherent and constructive , and is now rightly calling on the Commission to go one step further by presenting a specific programme .
We wish women 's health to be taken into account in the health programmes and mainstreaming to be built into these , guaranteeing the high level of protection which is recognised - first in the Maastricht Treaty and then in the Amsterdam Treaty - as an obligation of the Union .
We wish for even more than that : a specific programme !
Surely the need for this is obvious , especially in respect of information ?
Women do not take care of themselves ; they are used to looking after the health of their families but neglect themselves and , often , neglect preventive care because they are too busy looking after their nearest and dearest .
Once they realise they are ill , it is already too late .
Campaigns must be mounted to educate and inform women , to convince them to look after themselves .
Information campaigns must be directed at family doctors and general practitioners so that , when they enter a home to look after a sick child , they speak to the mother and ask her whether she is using contraceptives , whether she is looking after herself and whether contraception could help her avoid the need for an abortion .
Family doctors and GPs should take every opportunity to make women think about themselves and answer questions on their health .
Often they do not do so , which is why a specific programme is needed to provide information for women and for health personnel dealing with women .
This topic must not be deferred any longer .
Today is International Women 's Day , and not the Festival of Women , as its detractors call it .
It is the day that Clara Zetkin called for in 1912 to advance the condition of women .
We want women to occupy positions of power , but above all else we want them to be healthy , so that they can do so as well as possible .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , although the past few years have seen enormous progress in our knowledge of the prevention , diagnosis and treatment of illnesses that put women 's health at risk , there is still a great deal to be done in this area .
I thank Mrs Hautala very warmly for her report .
I think we have managed this time broadly to reconcile our positions on the important aspects with those of the other groups .
The report concentrates on the essential aspect , namely women 's health , and also considers the distribution of powers in the European Union .
The provisions on the controversial question of abortion and on toxic shock syndrome are worded in such a way that most Members can support them .
Yet I still believe that it is difficult for the European Union to give an answer to the question of abortion .
However , during the discussion on pregnancy , we gave priority to the possible health risk to the woman , including the psychological health risk , and even the risk to her life , in addition to the child 's right to life and protection .
I welcome the fact that the report also takes up issues such as society-related health issues , which also show that lifestyle , socio-economic circumstances and a healthy life are determining health factors .
I think it is only right that the report calls on the Commission to take into account and refer specifically to the topic of women 's health in its new action programme on health .
If we want to improve the health of women , it is important to take targeted measures on information , prevention and health promotion .
Women must become better informed and more involved in the planning and implementation of preventive programmes .
Since women live longer than men and have a lower mortality rate at all ages and for all causes of death , there is a general impression that they are healthier than men .
But the price of a higher life expectancy is the risk of becoming chronically ill and infirm .
If we use indicators to assess the state of health that also look at illness and impairment , and not just mortality , we find that in all age groups the state of women 's health is worse than that of men .
This applies particularly to older women .
So we must aim to give women a greater chance of living their later years in good health , with greater independence and less impairment .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , improving the position of women in health care was one of the 12 strategic objectives at the conference in Beijing .
The Amsterdam Treaty which will shortly be coming into force increases the Union 's powers in the areas of both health and equal opportunities .
There is no longer any excuse to do nothing about a policy for women 's health .
More to the point , we need a policy for women 's health .
Certain diseases are specific to women , are more frequent in women or affect women differently from men , and in defining this policy the following points are of prime concern .
A gender-specific approach to health care can reduce its cost .
Better prevention , for example through realistic health targets for conditions affecting women primarily in later life , such as osteoporosis , certain cancers and cardiovascular disease , can improve the quality of women 's lives .
Equal and adequate access to health care remains a problem for some women outside the Union , but in the Member States as well .
In line with its traditions , my group is sceptical about Europe interfering too much in policy areas which ought really to be regulated at national level .
In other words , we do not want to undermine the subsidiarity principle .
We certainly recognise the importance of a specific policy on health at European level , but we think this is only feasible if its aims are to prevent , encourage and coordinate .
So we shall vote against paragraphs 10 , 11 and 16 , and part of paragraph 24 .
We would also warn of the excessive cost to the budget of all the calls for studies and research contained in the resolution .
Speaking personally , I should like to compliment the rapporteur on the way in which she revised the report after broad consultation with the groups .
Mrs van Dijk 's report was not acceptable to us and we could not approve it .
This report is much better , and at least makes clear what Parliament 's priorities are with regard to women 's health .
Madam President , today is known internationally as a day for taking action in support of women , and we need to reflect a little on the continuing , unimaginable struggles of the women 's movement , which continue to bring about many changes not only for women but for society as a whole .
Today we must honour the force of these struggles , and stress the need for them to continue , as crucial problems remain unsolved and other , new , problems appear which threaten their rights and achievements .
Women continue to be one of the most vulnerable sections of the population , as their rights , including their right to health , are violated .
These rights are often infringed by the current socio-economic system , and we must acknowledge this if we want 8 March to be more than just an opportunity for anniversary celebrations .
Throughout the length and breadth of the planet cultural and political underdevelopment , hunger , wars and skirmishes , conservative and backward-looking societies , economic regulations , have all dealt a cruel blow to women , to their role in the economy , in society and in the family .
The Hautala report puts forward interesting proposals regarding the serious health problems faced by women , and I congratulate the rapporteur on her work .
However , I wonder whether promoting issues relating to women 's health problems , and affording women protection under the law against discrimination of any kind , can be understood and strengthened within a socio-economic system which commercialises everything and subjects public health to the harsh financial policy of EMU .
I wonder whether a policy which affords women substantial protection can be implemented , regardless of the reorientation and the grass-roots reorganisation of the development model of our society .
In the face of exploitative and oppressive plans and practices , in the face of discrimination tactics , women are called upon to push forward and assert their claims together with men , in the context of a broad popular battle front ranged in each country .
Today 's date , 8 March , and the tradition of militancy which accompanies it will show the way .
Let us follow it unflinchingly .
Madam President , in view of the short time I have to speak , I will be concentrating on the paragraph in my colleague 's report which is devoted to reproductive health .
This term is a little complex , and I suppose we must take it to mean all health issues linked to a woman 's ability to give birth .

I fully agree with your demand in paragraph 8 that ' high quality reproductive health services ' must be available to women , and with your demand in paragraph 12 that ' attention is drawn to the advantages and disadvantages of hormonal treatments for menstrual and menopausal problems , and that alternatives to these are researched ' .
Having said that , I should like you to go into more detail about the advantages and disadvantages of hormonal contraception .
However , I will not be able to agree to your recommendation in paragraph 10 where you call for ' the promotion of unrestricted availability of contraceptives ' .
Should we take this to mean that contraceptives are to be made available without any medical follow-up , which is essential wherever hormonal contraceptives are being taken since they affect the endocrine system and natural hormonal regulation ?
I am therefore unable to agree with you on this point .
I think unrestricted availability of contraceptives without any medical follow-up does not show due respect for women 's health .
In anticipation of the United Nations Conference on Women in Beijing , I have obtained within the framework of STOA a study on the impact on health of the different contraceptive practices in Europe and the reliability in scientific terms of what is called natural family planning .
Unfortunately , the study was ended prematurely .
It would be worth resuming the work carried out on it because in accordance with the resolutions voted by Parliament on 11 March 1994 and 28 October 1994 , I think we need to respect a genuine freedom of choice for women .
They need to be aware of the risks involved in the different methods of contraception so that they can choose alternative methods without risk to their health .
Madam President , I would first of all like to thank the committee for its constructive report on women 's health .
Mrs Hautala , the rapporteur , has produced an excellent piece of work .
The Commission decided that its first specific report would be devoted to women 's health and medical problems .
The report deals with the major trends in women 's health .
It also includes an overview of women 's illnesses and the factors that crucially affect women 's health .
Furthermore , the report discusses particular problems such as eating disorders , HIV / AIDS , family planning , abortion , the menopause and violence against women .
As has been pointed out , to a certain extent women experience different health problems from men .
We must therefore ensure that these differences are taken account of in health services and medical care .
Adequate resources should also be made available .
I also agree with Mrs Hautala that we need better data gathering on women 's health .
It is important that medical research takes into consideration the differences between women and men .
We know , for example , that most experiments on animals are performed on males .
As a result , women may experience undesirable and harmful effects when they use medicines that have only been tested on male animals .
The Commission has already taken a number of initiatives with the aim of promoting women 's health .
A study has been carried out on osteoporosis in older women , and the report will be ready shortly .
The EU is also giving its support to projects that include studies of life expectancy and general health development , as well as of statistics relating to morbidity and mortality .
In these studies , we have stressed the importance of gender differences .
Support will also be given to studies on cancer , age-related diseases and women 's health problems .
Since 1996 , the Commission has been running a special programme aimed at preventing AIDS and other infectious diseases .
The programme includes several projects relating exclusively to women .
Last year , for example , we set up a network to combat the spread of AIDS among women in the Mediterranean countries .
The Commission recently submitted a report on the implementation of the 1995 directive relating to health and safety measures at work for pregnant women and women with new-born infants or mothers who are breastfeeding , known as the pregnant workers directive .
The conclusions of the Commission regarding implementation of the directive are generally satisfactory , although unfortunately some Member States have not yet implemented it in full .
The Commission has therefore started proceedings against those countries for non-compliance .
This concerns , amongst other things , sick leave , a statutory two-week paid holiday , maternity leave and a ban on allowing pregnant women to carry out work that is potentially harmful to health .
Another important instrument is the 1996 directive on parental leave .
As you know , it entitles all employees , regardless of sex , to at least three months ' unpaid leave to look after their own children of eight years or less .
As part of the programme on equality of opportunity for women and men , the Commission has compiled a report on the representation of women in health services and medical care .
The report covers state and semi-private health care institutions in all the EU countries .
A qualitative study of women in decision-making positions has been carried out in France , Italy and Sweden .
The results showed that involving women in health care decision making has a positive effect .
Women bring new needs , ideas and values to the work .
Furthermore , they often represent a different style of leadership and an alternative approach to decision making .
The aim of the Commission 's ' mainstreaming ' strategy is to incorporate equal opportunities for women and men into all Community policies and activities .
The Union 's health policy is no exception , although consideration should be given to the differences that exist between the sexes .
Parliament and the Committee on Women 's Rights have , through this report , made a valuable contribution to the work in hand .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Mainstreaming
The next item is the report ( A4-0072 / 99 ) by Mrs Eriksson , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the follow-up to the communication on incorporating equal opportunities for women and men into all Community policies ( COM ( 98 ) 0122 - C4-0234 / 98 ) .
Madam President , what Commissioner Gradin has just said in her concluding remarks about incorporating equality of opportunity into all Community policies , and that health should be no exception , is indeed gratifying .
However , after studying the Commission 's progress report on the incorporation of equality of opportunity for women and men into Community policies , I should say with a touch of irony that I hope in fact it is an exception - a positive exception .
Besides the Commission 's report , I have also examined other documents from the Council of Ministers and the United Nations , amongst others .
However , I decided to compare the report with the Beijing Declaration .
It is true that we have not signed this declaration . Nevertheless , since 1995 we have been stressing the importance of ' gender mainstreaming ' in policy making and other areas of work .
I think that Chapter V , in particular , has most relevance for the European Union .
In comparing the Commission 's report with the Beijing Declaration , I see that there has been no fundamental change : there is still a lack of clearly defined objectives and accountability mechanisms , and changes in the internal dynamics - including the introduction of different values , behaviour , rules and procedures - have not been implemented .
The European Union is not pursuing an active and visible policy on equality of opportunity accompanied by such things as follow-up and evaluation procedures to assess its performance and policies .
The Commission rightly notes that there has been progress , but obstacles and shortcomings still exist .
The measures taken up to now have not had an effect in all areas or on the direction in which Community policy is going .
In the Commission 's view , the most serious obstacles are a lack of awareness of gender equality issues at the decision-making level , a lack of human and budgetary resources , and a lack of gender experts .
However , your rapporteur believes that the first of these is the key point , namely a lack of awareness of the need for gender equality at the decision-making level .
Unfortunately , this lack of awareness does not only apply to the Commission , it also permeates large sections of society and , I would also contend , Parliament itself in large measure .
We know that for only 28 % of the Members of Parliament to be women is hardly representative of the European population a whole , but that is how things stand in this particular decision-making body .
Naturally , something has to be done .
In our view , the committee , through my report , lays down some constructive proposals .
In order to make everyone happy , let me assure you that these proposals do not increase costs by one single euro .
The Commission can and should show the way by deciding on the objectives and accountability mechanisms , cooperating with new policy players , strengthening the methodological framework , overhauling its own structures and introducing gender equality at the decision-making level . Of course , the same also applies to Parliament .
It is still the case that women in the workplace are held in lower esteem than men .
This state of affairs has not changed in more than 100 years , but hopefully at some stage - and perhaps soon - change will come .
Consequently , this is one of the issues on which the committee hopes to be able to cooperate with the Commission - as an ongoing and balanced committee .
Madam President , Commissioner , as today is 8 March I too would like to say a few words . For me today is a day of remembrance , not a day of celebration .
It is a day of remembrance for those women who led the struggle for equal rights and equal opportunities .
8 March is a symbolic day for this unending struggle . It is a day on which to render an account of women 's achievements , a day of raising awareness and debate .
I should like to take this opportunity to stress once again that we are fully behind all those women who , at great danger to themselves , are fighting against totalitarianism and against any plan to create a society in which women are marginalised .
They are fighting against violence and racism , they are fighting for democracy and human rights , they are fighting for their survival in many parts of the world where poverty is still rife or where wars are being waged .
I should like to thank Mrs Eriksson for her excellent report and for what she has told us .
It is significant that , in its progress report , the Commission resumes its stance and expresses its desire to promote a policy of equal rights in relation to other policies .
This progress report makes it clear that incorporating an equal rights policy is a long-term measure .
As the Commission correctly points out , there are obstacles to implementing this policy .
Nevertheless , I fervently believe that the Commission must create or strengthen special mechanisms to incorporate equal opportunities , for example in the new technologies and information technology , and in research where access for women is especially limited .
The gender issue must also be incorporated into all legislation and into all action programmes and action plans .
The Commission must continue to urge Member States to take initiatives to promote and implement mainstreaming and we too must push our governments in this direction .
We must stress once again the need for gender relevant statistical data for the purpose of assessment and programme planning , in relation to which the Commission 's progress report exhibits certain weaknesses .
The message of this progress report and also of this House must be twofold .
Firstly , there must be systematic implementation of the analysis relating to the gender issue and its impact on all the policies and actions of the European Union . We must also press on with and strengthen the special positive action measures to promote equal opportunities .
In closing , Madam President , I should like to say that , of course , for all this to happen , we need the necessary resources and the right people , as an analysis of the gender issue can only be undertaken by people with the appropriate training .
It requires knowledge and information .
I should also like to stress that a fifth action programme is necessary and I hope to hear the Commissioner announce one .
Madam President , it most certainly augurs well for us that today , on the occasion of International Women 's Day , we have the opportunity to review this much talked-about mainstreaming , this great concept which consists in incorporating equal opportunities for women and men into all Community policies and activities .
Two years after the communication on mainstreaming was adopted by the Commission , it seems clear that progress has been rather modest , and that we still have a long way to go both internally and externally .
In fact , in spite of the good intentions of which we are assured , the results seem to indicate some disparities , and numerous barriers and shortcomings still exist as regards the balanced participation of women and men in both the decision-making process and the implementation of Community policies .
This is why I consider it necessary for the Commission to now reassert its firm commitment to the promotion of an active and visible policy on equal opportunities .
The entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty and the stronger legal basis for equal opportunities for women and men must be turned to good account in order to envisage positive action and take ' all-out ' measures , if I may use the military language used by General de Gaulle , in order to achieve equal treatment and equal opportunities for women and men , which we have still have not achieved in many areas .
However , it is my duty to point out here that mainstreaming does not render unnecessary the specific equality policies that have so far been developed by means of directives and Community action programmes .
May I also take this opportunity to remind you once again that we are hoping the Commission will finally propose an amendment to the watered-down 1986 directive on equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity , including assisting spouses .
Apart from two round-table discussions , no action has yet been taken in response to the report I produced in 1996 , in which Parliament unanimously proposed a framework status for assisting spouses in Europe ; there are millions of these invisible workers in our societies , and the overwhelming majority are women .
This status - the framework of which needs to be outlined in the 1986 directive that is to be amended - will need to provide for compulsory registration of assisting spouses , independent social security entitlement and , in particular , compulsory pension insurance .
It will need to put an end to all forms of discrimination which assisting spouses are subject to , for example in companies and professional organisations , especially in the event of divorce , and so on .
Rest assured , Commissioner , that the Committee on Women 's Rights will - within the scope of its political responsibilities , which will need to be redefined and strengthened following the elections on 13 June this year - keep an watchful eye over the action taken by the Commission in response to this debate and our report .
Madam President , I also hope that Parliament itself and its political groups will not ignore the conclusions reached in paragraphs 19 to 22 , particularly with regard to strengthening the political responsibilities of the Committee on Women 's Rights , and not abolishing it , as advocated by some of our colleagues .
Madam President , I made my maiden speech in 1984 on emancipation and here I am now giving my ' old maid 's speech ' .
I have three points to make .
Firstly , after seven directives on emancipation , I think the cornerstone of European legislation has to be the burden of proof directive .
A fair distribution of the burden of proof between employer and employee makes it possible for women to enforce the rights which these seven emancipation directives give them .
For the rest , I think we should hold back and leave any law making to the social partners .
Secondly , we have to straighten out the things that are crooked .
In other words , positive action is still needed until the barriers left over from the past have been removed - until the crooked is made straight .
Thirdly , we must strive manfully - or perhaps womanfully - to see that new obstacles do not arise .
The biggest challenge of the 21st century for emancipation is mainstreaming , the integration of equal opportunities into all areas of European policy .
The Amsterdam Treaty provides a good legal basis for this .
It is a splendid concept , but a dangerous one too : splendid because it is more effective , if properly applied , than constantly introducing new pieces of legislation ; and dangerous because it can serve as a lightning conductor , a sop , a paper tiger .
So extreme vigilance , healthy suspicion and the measures suggested in Mrs Eriksson 's excellent report are called for .
She rightly asks for a breakdown by gender and statistics , as Mrs Hautala does too , whose report is better than that by Mrs van Dijk , though that is not to say it is a good one .
We want more women involved in decision making .
Commissioner Flynn , incidentally , has no women at all in his private office .
The Commission and Parliament have five women officials in lower-ranked policy-making positions .
Mainstreaming means building without obstacles , not first erecting obstacles and then solemnly dismantling them .
Mainstreaming also means emancipation impact assessment .
As suggested in paragraph 21 by our Liberal colleague Mr Cars - a man at that - we need an interinstitutional working party for Parliament and the Commission and a monitoring board within the European Parliament .
Can we wind up the Committee on Women 's Rights ?
No , we still need it as a watchdog , to see that mainstreaming actually happens .
And I think it means one must be able to sit on the Committee on Women 's Rights in addition to being a full member of another committee .
We cannot have one cancelling out the other , or we shall have an underuse of resources , we shall have fanaticism operating in isolation .
Madam President , I welcome the opportunity to speak briefly on this report incorporating equal opportunities for women and men in all Community policies and activities .
I want to refer specifically to the need for such integrated policy for women in rural society , for until now suitable employment opportunities have been limited , with women having to migrate to urban growth centres to find employment .
This is an unsatisfactory situation and has contributed significantly to the depopulation of rural areas .
It is a serious social and economic problem which everyone , including this Parliament and national governments , now recognises - late in the day , perhaps - and that we are now endeavouring to correct through rural development policy .
Committed as I am to rural policies , I now believe they will not achieve their full potential in the absence of integrated national and regional policy .
Unless we create sustainable employment at regional level and , in the context of this report , employment suitable for women , then the economic and social viability of rural communities will be put at further risk .
If rural society is not economically and socially attractive to women it will be impossible to retain living and vibrant rural communities .
While such policies are relevant to all rural women , I want to specifically refer to the often forgotten role of women in agriculture .
I am sure Parliament will agree that in the context of the present discussions on Agenda 2000 the viability of many family farms will be put at risk .
If we are serious about retaining the European farm model referred to in the Santer proposals then we must provide suitable off-farm employment for both women and men .
I want to acknowledge and pay tribute to the significant contribution of women to the work of voluntary community organisations .
Their role , however , must not be confined to voluntary community work .
They are entitled to participate , if they so desire , in the work of nation-building and to meaningful and rewarding employment opportunities .
Madam President , as the coordinator for the Green Group on the Committee on Women 's Rights , I should like to stress the importance of having men support women in achieving equality in the European Union .
I , along with my colleague Mr Mann and one or two other men , are active on the Committee on Women 's Rights in support of those objectives .
I only wish we had the wholehearted support of many of the other men in this Parliament including those who tried to abolish the Committee on Women 's Rights earlier in the year .
I am glad we have resisted that so far and we must resist it in the future .
I congratulate Mrs Eriksson on her report .
It shows clearly that equal opportunities and mainstreaming are good objectives .
However , we have moved very little towards them .
Until the men in the European Union take them seriously we will not achieve them .
And that begins at the very top , in the leadership of the Council of Ministers : all those male leaders who are not taking it seriously .
I include my own government in this .
Its record is rather poor .
Tony Blair forgot to appoint a Minister for Women , then called Harriet Harman back in and gave her the job of Secretary of State for Social Security as well and finally sacked her because she had to carry out unpopular decisions .
He has now given the job to the Leader of the House of Lords and women 's issues have tended to sink without trace .
By effectively deselecting three of our women colleagues - Sue Waddington , the Labour Spokesman on Women 's Rights , Christine Oddy and Veronica Hardstaff - the Labour Party has made a poor contribution to getting women re-elected to the European Parliament .
We should look at the record in the Member States if we want to achieve our equality objectives .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am happy to add my own thanks to the Commission .
Seven directives , that is no mean achievement .
Women in Europe can see that the Commission is sympathetic to women 's concerns .
But much still needs to be done on jobs and equal pay , for example .
I would say that men are still lagging behind when it comes to care , both in and outside the family .
What worries us most at the moment is the continuing inequality of power .
This is an injustice which we must battle against .
The Nordic countries have quite a good record , with 37.6 % , and the European Parliament too , with 28 % , compared with the 13.1 % of women involved in the highest levels of decision making worldwide .
But it is a long way from the democratic parity we dream about .
It is after all a democratic right that the bodies taking decisions which affect society should reflect the make-up of that society .
In any event , the Commission should continue to press the Member States to take steps to ensure that this is indeed the case .
Women will then recognise their role , will feel more involved , will see their problems acknowledged as political problems and will also feel more attracted to the political arena .
That reciprocal effect is by no means commonplace at present .
Many good things have of course already been said about mainstreaming .
I echo them .
We need equal opportunities at all levels , in all undertakings , and we need to study gender effects in all areas , devising instruments to monitor whether or not progress is in fact being made .
But this must not form an excuse for abruptly halting a number of positive actions in favour of women which are still desperately needed .
That is not only the case in Europe ; I can think of certain cases in the developing world where actions in favour of women are simply being stopped because all attention has now switched to mainstreaming .
Slogans are no use to us .
We want women to be given the real leg-up they sometimes need in order to make full use of this splendid mainstreaming .
I hope the Committee on Women 's Rights will remain vigilant , because we need that committee .
And that is one of these positive actions .
Madam President , I support everything that Mrs Lulling has said on the need to provide a status for assisting spouses , a position held by so many women in the various countries of the European Union .
I hope that the term ' non-working female population ' , which I find shocking in connection with the subject of equality between men and women , will be eliminated both from Commission texts and various other European documents .
There are probably tens of millions of these women in Europe and they should not be described in this way simply because they are engaged in unwaged work .
I would like Mrs Keppelhoff 's report - an assessment of the economic value of women 's unwaged work which dates back ten years or so - to be taken up again .
We should broaden our economic concepts so that the contribution made by this unwaged work to a nation 's wealth is taken into account in the GDP .
This would seem important with regard to the subject which we are dealing with here .
Moreover , the complete marginalisation of the various aspects of pregnancy and motherhood also seems a great injustice with regard to the matter we are dealing with at present .
I think there are some avenues here which we need to explore at all costs , in order to achieve greater justice between men and women in the different countries of the European Union .
Madam President , equal rights and equal opportunities for men and women are recognised as an indisputable basic principle of democracy and human rights .
This recognition is reflected in the Amsterdam Treaty , in which equality between men and women is set out as a goal of the Union , and in the fact that the principle of equal opportunities is enshrined as the fourth pillar of EU employment policy .
But the Commission 's first progress report shows up the very wide gulf between demands and reality .
For instance it states that the measures taken to date have had no tangible influence on the various policies . That should give us food for thought .
Of particular importance is the awareness raising , awareness changing and sensitisation of all the various decision-makers in all the various areas of society .
But specifically as a woman I would not want to see the baby thrown out with the bathwater .
Will a call such as that for a balanced participation of women and men in the decision-making process really achieve any added value for women ?
Are we talking about quantitative or qualitative equal treatment ?
If I manage to succeed in my job , it is not because I am a woman but because of the good work I have done .
I know that many women agree with the view I take of the policy of positive discrimination .
Madam President , several colleagues as well as the rapporteur , Mrs Eriksson - whom I wish to compliment - have said how much has already been done in Europe to implement an equal opportunities policy .
I would point out that the European Union actually introduced the principle of mainstreaming into its actions and documents prior to the Beijing Conference .
As we all remember , this was first done in the regulation on the Structural Funds in 1993 .
Therefore , from the point of view of intentions , but also of directives implemented , we can say that much has been done , helping to change our conduct , actions and culture .
It does not , however , mean that no problems exist .
The first evaluation report , which was the subject of Mrs Kokkola 's report , made it very clear that the statements and documents were by no means being implemented in practice by the Commission and the Member States .
As regards the Structural Funds , for example , even though the policy of mainstreaming was introduced as long ago as 1993 , the latest progress report reveals that only 1.6 % of their resources have been used for this policy .
We are a long way from the practical implementation of equal opportunities in all policy fields !
That is why we , as a Parliament , urge that mainstreaming should not merely be reasserted as a principle in the renewed Structural Funds , but that the Member States and the Commission itself should be subject to some form of sanctions if this principle is not translated into tangible measures .
With regard to the European Social Fund , we call for 15 % of project funding to be targeted at women , since much still remains to be done in terms of their employment and pay .
In our view , the action plans submitted by the governments following the Luxembourg summit are very disappointing .
There are still too few countries where equal opportunities are deemed to be an across-the-board principle to be applied in all policy areas .
The real problem , however - and I can say this because I come from a southern country , Italy - concerns the presence of women in decision-making positions .
In Italy few women are to be found , whereas in northern European countries there are more .
Where women are present , the political agenda of governments and institutions really does change , and the policies introduced really do change as well .
Madam President , as soon as the Amsterdam Treaty has been ratified in all Member States , it will produce new benchmarks .
But we will have to wait a few more months before the principle of equal opportunities for women and men is also strengthened .
It is stipulated as a principle and a goal of the Community in Articles 2 and 3 of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Today , on International Women 's Day , I recall other articles , such as those on equal treatment in the workplace and on the labour market , on equal pay for equal work and on combating discrimination on the basis of sex .
The European Commission has established that there are considerable shortcomings as regards incorporating equal opportunities into the Community programmes .
The main reason , according to Mrs Eriksson , the rapporteur , is the lack of awareness of the decision-makers , and this is a view that the Group of the European People 's Party naturally shares .
Effective individual measures cannot replace an integrated general concept .
However much cooperation there is with the NGOs , with the committees of other bodies , there are no adequate organisations to promote awareness-raising among the political players .
When they do exist , it will become possible to check the incorporation of equal opportunities in draft legislation , ensure a balanced gender participation in decision-making jobs and finally prepare statistical material that can be broken down into gender-relevant data .
We need a benchmarking procedure to make it easier to evaluate programmes and projects and we must continue vigorously taking positive measures in favour of women .
However , the working party between Parliament and the Commission that is called for in paragraph 21 already exists !
Its members include two representatives of the Committee on Women 's Rights and two representatives of the Committee on Employment ; I am one of them and we hold regular meetings with the representatives of the European women 's lobby on the one hand and the responsible Commissioners and heads of cabinet led by Jacques Santer on the other .
We have always reported on their outcome in the committees .
We will have to do so in more detail and certainly also in writing .
I believe that is one message that comes across from today 's International Women 's Day .
Madam President , I think that , as has already been mentioned here tonight , the key is to have women in decision-making roles and in positions of power .
That is the only way we are going to get any change .
You only have to look at the European institutions themselves .
Look at the number of women Commissioners .
I know that my own country has yet to appoint a woman Commissioner , and I hope that when it appoints a new Commissioner , the government will take this into account and appoint a woman Commissioner .
The Irish Government has never yet appointed a woman to the Court of Auditors .
In most of the key areas and senior positions of power , women are not visible .
That is the reality .
You only have to look at a photograph of the Heads of States of the European Union and compare the number of men and of women - it is just not acceptable .
The only way we are going to get some sort of equality for women is when women actually occupy the key decision-making roles .
As someone said a few years ago in my own country : when there are as many incompetent women in roles of power as there are men , then we will have true equality .
Women have to be two or three times better than men if they are to get anywhere , to actually achieve anything .
This is the problem - the women who are here at the moment in this Parliament - the women who have actually achieved - who have got somewhere - are much better than the vast majority of men .
That is because they have to be so much better to actually get there , and we really have to address this point .
What we also have to do is make it possible for them to get to that position .
You cannot compare the position of men and women in society because first of all women have families , they have commitments ; and it is only in countries where proper structures have been put in place that women can participate on an almost equal footing .
That has not happened throughout the European Union , and we have to do something about it .
Madam President , Commissioner , once again we are nearly only women debating this report .
But I must inject a strong note of protest into our joy at discussing many aspects of equality between men and women . If we look at the draft agenda for this part-session , we find no mention of the existence of our debate about women .
The three reports on women are mentioned once right at the end .
If that is what the press and audiovisual services understand by mainstreaming then I must say I have good reason to fear that in the end all that will be left is the mainstream .
The credibility of our Parliament depends on it .
Last Friday I held talks with colleagues from this House .
Women represent 54 % of the staff working in this House .
At first glance this figure seems fine , but if we take a closer look we see that women account for 80 % of category C staff employed in the lower echelons , 40 % of category B staff but only 20 % of category A , where staff hold senior positions , and 0 % of directors-general !
Women MEPs are fairly well represented in Parliament , making up 28 % - I thank Mrs Eriksson , who established this - but it is not enough .
On 13 June Parliament will be re-elected and then we women must be more strongly represented .
We must move closer towards parity .
I am pleased that in my party in Germany , the Social Democratic Party , 44 % of nominations have been for women .
So we are approaching parity here too .
But we simply must ensure that equal opportunities are enshrined in all policy areas , which means that we cannot just look at the gender mainstreaming aspect but need to accompany it with the dual approach , with special measures for women .
We need the fifth action programme and regular checks of the results , especially by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , otherwise the whole issue will disappear from the agenda and women will no longer play any part in European politics .
Thank you , Madam President , and thank you , Commissioner .
I am very proud to be able to add in a small way today to what our colleagues have said , particularly in my capacity as a member of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
We may be surprised that in our society which is based on human rights , we still need to emphasise the need to incorporate equal opportunities for men and women into all Community policies and activities .
I think Mrs Eriksson 's report is excellent , but she raises a number of points on several issues . I hope her questions will be answered .
I should like to mention a further point which I am concerned about .
You will no doubt remember that of the priorities singled out by the hearing in Luxembourg on employment , the fourth and final priority concerned the problem of equality between men and women .
It is not a coincidence that this priority has indeed been put in fourth place in the subsequent National Action Plans , whereas if it had been incorporated into all the other policies , it would have had to be in first place .
Madam President , the EU 's policy on equality has been very progressive , but equality has yet to penetrate the thick walls of the European Commission .
You would have to look a long way to find more traditional gender role patterns than those found in the Commission .
The higher you go in the hierarchy , the greater is the male dominance .
Women make up 80 % of the people who carry out secretarial and office work , while men occupy 87 % of the managerial positions .
The Commission maintains that it sets targets and draws up action plans to bring more women into managerial posts .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission , and especially Mrs Gradin , whether it would not be a good idea to introduce positive discrimination for women in managerial posts within the Commission ?
Positive discrimination should not be used aimlessly and without thinking .
There should always be individual assessment of individual candidates .
But if a man and a woman are equally qualified , the woman could be chosen .
Positive discrimination should not be a permanent solution , but as the situation stands in the Commission at the moment , it is necessary to resort to drastic measures .
Madam President , I welcome Mrs Eriksson 's report on mainstreaming .
It sets out some valuable points of view on the Commission 's progress report on the incorporation of equality of opportunity between women and men into all EU policies .
We hope that in a few months ' time the Amsterdam Treaty will be ratified by all 15 Member States , thereby making equality of opportunity between women and men an overarching goal in our Treaty .
Mainstreaming is an important policy instrument .
The point was made most emphatically by the United Nations at the Fourth Women 's Conference , where the EU was one of the driving forces behind the principle .
Even more importantly , some progress has been made .
In my view , one of the most significant achievements is that gender equality has been written into some of the common strategies for employment .
It has also been mentioned during our discussion that gender equality should be taken into account in the allocation of Structural Fund resources .
The Commission has now appointed officials within its directorates-general whose remit is to ensure that equality of opportunity is respected in their day-to-day operations .
I can assure Mr Blak that the Commission practises positive action .
When two people with the same qualifications apply for a job , it is given to the member of the under-represented sex .
In my view , it is not just in terms of employment and structural policies that gender equality is an important factor ; it must also be incorporated into all the policies that affect the daily lives of women and men .
At the moment we are trying to pursue major initiatives in the health sector , but the same principle also applies in education , science and technology .
A notable example in this respect is of course the communication recently forwarded to Parliament on women in research .
We have already discussed my own particular areas of responsibility , namely the STOP and Daphne programmes , as well as violence against women and children .
Mrs Eriksson , the rapporteur , also raises the issue of gender equality at the decision-making level .
We know from our research that only when one third of decision-makers are women will they have any real influence on decisions .
In its communication on women in science and technology , the Commission has established that the under-represented sex should account for at least 40 % of those working in these fields . The same figure also applies to the proposals concerning advisory committees , evaluation groups and , more importantly , decision-making bodies in the fields of research and technology .
Finally , like the committee , I too am keen to see separate sets of statistics for women and men .
It is particularly important for us to have clear data , so that we can formulate policies that take account of the needs of both women and men .
We are also working on establishing criteria for measuring gender equality and its practical effects .
At the same time I agree with all of you , and Mrs Eriksson too , that a great deal remains to be done in order to ensure that there really is gender equality .
There is no shortage of work in this area for this House , the Commission or the Council of Ministers .
Earlier , someone alleged that my colleague Mr Flynn did not have any women in his office - he has one .
And I can assure you that in my office I have four women and three men .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin - and for setting such a good example .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Equal treatment for men and women
Mr President , Commissioner , following the Kalanke ruling - concerning the gentleman from Bremen whom the European Court of Justice ruled on 17 October 1995 to have fallen victim to discrimination because his female colleague had been promoted rather than himself , based on the state law on equality in the Land Bremen - the Commission submitted on 17 March 1996 a proposal to amend the 1976 directive .
In so doing , it most certainly believed it had done the right thing .
I was then appointed rapporteur on 2 July 1996 . I considered that this proposal - which was admittedly well-intentioned - still jeopardised the positive action which we , at least in the Committee on Women 's Rights , still consider to be necessary in order to achieve equal treatment and opportunities for women and men , should we want to see this equality before the year 3000 .
In agreement with Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights , I decided to await the Court 's ruling on another case , that of the Marschall case : again a man , this time from North Rhine-Westphalia , who claimed to have fallen victim to discrimination because his female colleague had been chosen for promotion over him .
In this case , the Court of Justice did not find in favour of Mr Marschall in its ruling of 11 November 1997 .
Why not ?
Did it want to correct what many experts we consulted had referred to as the serious mistake committed in the Kalanke case ?
Does the Amsterdam Treaty , which will soon be ratified , have anything to do with it ?
In fact , the Treaty makes equal opportunity policies a Community task , and expressly stipulates in Article 119 that measures providing for specific advantages with a view to ensuring full equality in practice between men and women are compatible with the principle of equality , and do not therefore constitute discrimination .
In other words , positive discrimination does not discriminate .
Following the Marschall ruling , we considered in consultation with another expert hearing whether the positive action can be preserved without amending the 1976 directive .
Since we know that on the open sea and before judges we are all in God 's hands , we took the view on the one hand that in a future case we would not be able to trust the Court because it might completely change direction on this .
On the other hand , we considered that the proposed amendment still jeopardises positive action .
Why ?
Certainly , both judgments can be interpreted as meaning that only rigid , inflexible and automatic positive discrimination granting the absolute and unconditional right to appoint or promote women - or men - where they are under-represented would be incompatible with Community law , but even a quota system which does not preclude the assessment of the particular circumstances of an individual case would be compatible with the directive .
This means that , in practice , a woman can be given priority for promotion in the event of equal suitability , competence and professional performance , unless reasons specific to an individual candidate tilt the balance in his favour .
Precisely because the Commission proposed a text to us which stipulates that measures giving preference to a member of the under-represented sex are possible , ' provided that such measures do not preclude the assessment of the particular circumstances of an individual case ' , we consider that with such a formulation comes the danger that the aim of positive action will be circumvented where reasons specific to an individual candidate are put forward which risk not being interpreted objectively , thus watering down the positive action which , for that matter , increasingly concerns under-represented men .
In my country , the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , the number of women primary school teachers and magistrates has already been increased too much , in my humble opinion .
Giving the current situation regarding the Amsterdam Treaty , we take the view that the amendment of the directive proposed in 1996 is inappropriate .
We call on the Commission to withdraw it , but we also urge it to submit a new proposal based on the Amsterdam Treaty .
At the same time , we stress the fact that it is no longer necessary to regard positive action as a derogation - which is permitted and can therefore be revoked at any time - from the principle of equal treatment , in order to recognise an individual right only and not a right which has a place in a society seeking to achieve such equality through democratic means .
We no longer dare to question the right to equal treatment and opportunities between men and women as a fundamental right of a democratic society , which demands equal treatment and opportunities that are achieved through a series of active measures , including positive action .
The proposal for a directive which we are hoping for should contain mandatory legal instructions with a view to taking positive action wherever necessary in order to achieve equal treatment and opportunities for men and women and to remedy the under-representation of women in decision making .
Our message is clear , Commissioner : withdraw the proposal to amend the existing directive and draft a new one , taking account of the conclusions of my report which we will be voting on before the draft legislative resolution .
Moreover , before voting on this legislative resolution , we want to see here and now , hic et nunc , the Commission 's clear and firm commitment to agree to both these paragraphs in the draft legislative resolution .
Mr President , I welcome this general debate on equal opportunities on International Women 's Day .
Women have come a long way this century .
In the 19th century in English law women had no capacity to enter into contracts and were classified along with minors and lunatics .
It was only this century that they were granted equality in divorce law .
In my profession women were forbidden to become solicitors until 1919 , and I recently celebrated 75 years of the first woman solicitor in England .
But there is no room for complacency : women still have not achieved equal pay in reality or equal status in very hierarchical job structures .
Mrs Lulling 's report looks at the Commission 's proposal on positive discrimination following the decision in the European Court of Justice , namely the Kalanke decision , which decreed that positive discrimination was not normally lawful .
Subsequent to the Commission proposal , the Marschall decision was given by the European Court of Justice which qualified the Kalanke decision and said that in certain circumstances positive discrimination could be lawful .
In addition , we need to note the Amsterdam Treaty , which will strengthen equal opportunity rights for women when it has completed its ratification process and comes into effect .
Consequently , I agree with Mrs Lulling 's conclusion that the Commission 's proposal is not timely and needs to be withdrawn and a new , better proposal needs to be reintroduced when the Amsterdam Treaty comes into effect .
Mr President , let me once again ask you too to persuade the audiovisual services to ensure that the debate on International Women 's Day is at least put on record here tomorrow , even if it is not published in advance .
I would say to the Commission : you really will be offering flowers to the women workers of the European Union if you withdraw the proposed amendment to the equal treatment directive .
Women have waged a hard struggle here in the European Parliament , but also in my country , Germany , especially the Social Democrats , to achieve progress in equal treatment legislation .
In Bremen and in North Rhine-Westphalia we had a very progressive ruling , which then suffered a bitter defeat with the European Court of Justice ruling in the Kalanke case .
We had an equal treatment law that emphasised that given applicants with the same qualifications , preference should be given to the under-represented sex , something we have finally also achieved in the Amsterdam Treaty .
A man felt this law discriminated against him .
So he took legal action and won his case at the European Court of Justice .
Fortunately the Marschall ruling mitigated this a little , by specifically stressing the hardship clause in North Rhine-Westphalian law , which allows positive measures to be taken .
The Kalanke ruling had disastrous outside effects .
The fact that the Commission proposed an amended directive following that ruling reflects the same trend .
I was approached by the Korean president of a women 's organisation who had examined the effects of the proposed directive in Korea .
The Kalanke ruling was also discussed at many international meetings .
But worst and most frightful of all was the discussion in our Member States , among the regulars in the pubs and bars , where the men all started to feel discriminated against and thought they could invoke the law .
We must ensure that this proposal for an amended directive is withdrawn .
I cordially request you to announce this today .
Mr President , the struggle for equality between men and women has seen some significant successes but has also suffered some bitter setbacks .
The 1995 Kalanke ruling , which found in favour of a man who believed he had been discriminated against because an equally qualified female colleague was given preference over him , belongs in the second category .
The ruling stated that , given identical qualifications , it was an infringement of Community law for female candidates automatically to be given preference .
The Commission amended its directive and argued that a rigid quota system that did not take account of individual circumstances was unlawful , while positive action - for instance flexible quotas - was lawful .
Our Committee on Women 's Rights regarded the proposal as a whole as not very useful and warned against any watering down of the directive .
While the Kalanke ruling was a setback , the European Court of Justice 's decision in the 1997 Marschall judgment was encouraging .
Laws that give priority to women but also allow individual cases to be assessed and do not exclude men from the outset are absolutely consistent with Community law .
Accordingly , positive action measures must be taken to remove the still considerable inequalities on the labour market and in regard to promotion .
At the time the Commission was waiting for the Court of Justice 's judgment and for the negotiations in the run-up to the Amsterdam Treaty .
So it would be consistent for you , Commissioner , to take a similar approach today .
Articles 2 and 3 of the Amsterdam Treaty stipulate that equality between men and women is a task and an aim .
All active policies will pursue that aim in future .
So I would ask you to accept the plea by Astrid Lulling , our as ever pugnacious rapporteur , which the European People 's Party will of course approve again .
Withdraw your proposal to amend the directive ; it dates from the time after the Kalanke and before the Marschall ruling , so it is certainly old enough ! .
A new proposal must respect the evaluation of equal opportunities as a Community task , as it must the specific advantages allowed in Article 119 for the under-represented sex in the Member States of the European Union .
Mr President , Mrs Lulling 's report recommends that Parliament should reject the Commission 's proposed amendment to the directive implementing the principle of equal treatment of men and women in the field of access to jobs , vocational training and promotion and working conditions .
It argues for it to be rejected since both the hearing which took place and the text of the Treaty on European Union show that the Commission proposal is already outdated . This further drives home the fact that if this directive , which is getting on for a quarter of a century old , is to continue to be justified it will have to be updated so that it can make an effective contribution towards positive measures to combat social discrimination on the grounds of sex .
The rapporteur believes that it is not enough to combat discrimination by means of civil law and insists that the right to equal opportunities must be guaranteed by having social structures designed to achieve that equality in society . We cannot make do with formal and , to some extent , inconsequential statements .
Equal opportunities have , after all , a lot to do with access to the labour market and , regardless of whether or not we agree with the position taken by the rapporteur and the Committee on Women 's Rights which has been put before Parliament , it seems highly appropriate to recall - yet again and at the risk of repeating what has already been said about the subject - what day it is today .
For our part , 8 March is extremely significant and this report makes it all the more appropriate to mention it .
8 March was not plucked out of the air but was selected as Women 's Day because , in 1857 , the seamstresses of New York held a major demonstration to protest against the exaggerated excess ( pardon the tautology ) of their working hours .
Nearly half a century later it should be pointed out that one of the main demands is a reduction in working hours in keeping with modern living and working conditions while , on the other hand , employment is becoming more precarious . As a result of what is known as atypical work , the working day has virtually become limitless especially for women , who are taking on all kinds of tasks .
Home-working , piecework and contracting out are all , in some way , turning today 's textile workers into latter day New York seamstresses . They are now experiencing at very close hand the worsening discrimination in the labour market .
It is therefore with some surprise that we realise that in 1999 we are not so far from 1857 .
We could and should have come a very long way from those times .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the present report on implementing the principle of equal treatment for men and women provides a good opportunity for asking some crucial questions about women 's policy .
We have two rulings by the European Court of Justice before us , in addition to the proposal to amend the Council 's directive .
The Committee on Women 's Rights finds that the proposed amendment would water down the directive .
Just as it cannot be right to rectify one injustice by committing another , so it cannot be right to rectify the discrimination against women by discriminating against men .
The very concept of positive discrimination should make us think again .
Positive and discrimination : how can you combine the two ?
For the word positive must mean removing practical occupational hindrances , obstacles or disadvantages affecting women , such as the shortage of child care facilities or the non-payment of pensions for the years spent in child care .
The strategy of women 's policy should not simply be to achieve a numerically fair distribution .
Reverse discrimination in the form of a mechanical preference in fact conflicts with another basic value , namely the equal treatment of every individual .
Mr President , on this International Women 's Day , I would ask Mrs Gradin , who has already been so helpful on women 's issues , to give Europe 's women a special little present by withdrawing this proposal for a Commission directive , as other Members too have urged her to do .
I fully appreciate that the Commission was trying with this proposal to resolve the uncertainty which has existed since the Kalanke judgment and which in my view the Marschall judgment did nothing to dispel .
We are quite convinced that the proposal now before us will just make things more chaotic still .
The fact is that the individual power of assessment in recruitment and promotion envisaged in the text will in our view trigger huge numbers of lawsuits in which men invoke individual exemptions to the positive actions rule .
We are convinced that escalating numbers of lawsuits like this will weaken the action taken by Member States which have strong legislation on positive action and which apply quotas - not positive discrimination but positive action - in favour of equally well qualified women . This legislation may be undermined .
We have a basic problem in Europe , namely that European law has always regarded positive action as the absolute exception to the individual 's right to equal treatment .
All of us in this Chamber know that the position of men and women is very different in employment , in education , in the family , in society , not because one sex is worth less than the other , but because society remains fundamentally male-oriented and thus inherently discriminates against women .
My conclusion from that is that equal treatment alone cannot get rid of inequality .
On the contrary , equal treatment reinforces inequality .
So our view is that this Commission proposal does not provide the answer .
As other speakers have already said , the Amsterdam Treaty will help the Union a great deal , because it commits the Union to taking active measures against discrimination and at the same time to taking active measures to promote equality .
So that means not just the mainstreaming we were looking at just now in Marianne Eriksson 's report , but positive action too .
So once again I join other Members in asking the Commission to withdraw this proposal and come up with a new and stronger one .
This really would be the best present the Commissioner could give Europe 's women on this International Women 's Day , but you could do something else as well .
I had a phone call from Bosnia-Herzegovina recently .
Elections are due there very soon .
There used to be quotas for women on the list in Bosnia-Herzegovina , although it was not a statutory requirement .
It now looks as if these quotas may be scrapped , and Bosnia 's women are looking expectantly to Europe for help .
It really would be terrible to see a retrograde step being taken here .
Mr President , as far as women 's rights are concerned , we obviously keep taking one step forward and two steps back .
In regard to equal opportunities for women the Amsterdam Treaty may be one step forward , but the European Court of Justice ruling in the Kalanke case and the Commission proposal to amend Directive 76 / 207 / EEC represent two steps back .
Women today are better educated and more mobile than ever and the number of women in employment is rising .
But there is a definite shortage of women in the higher echelons of politics , industry and science .
That is not because women are less qualified or less intelligent but because of the glass ceiling , an unseen barrier set up consciously or unconsciously by a traditionally male-dominated ruling class .
So why the Commission has replaced the term ' women 's opportunities ' with the term ' under-represented sex ' is beyond me .
We should not adopt a directive that falls short of the Amsterdam Treaty and thereby undermines women 's opportunities to occupy a position in society consistent with their qualifications , especially now that the European Parliament and the Vienna Council have taken up the equal opportunities cause .
The Amsterdam Treaty represents progress along the road to equal opportunities .
It must be implemented and not watered down .
So the Lulling report and the request to the Commission to withdraw its amended proposal for a directive make sense .
Mr President , in an ideal world positive discrimination should not be necessary but , unfortunately , we do not live in an ideal world .
While some people may say that it is not the right approach , it is the only way we are going to get any sort of progress for women .
As you can see , even in the electoral process in Member States positive discrimination is the only way to get women elected to national parliaments and to the European Parliament .
It means that men and the policy-makers are going to have to look at the way society is structured .
As society stands in the vast majority of Member States , it does not favour the participation of women in the workforce .
It is important for women who have not been in the workforce before to get access to it .
Even the way the programmes have been set up in Member States does not take account of the fact that these women were in the unofficial workforce and were contributing to society in their role as carers etc .
They are now being prevented from joining the workforce because they do not have a track record .
Even in training programmes this is not taken into account .
The only way we are going to move forward is if we put in place measures which some people may feel discriminate against men .
Unfortunately , society has discriminated against women for centuries and the only way we are going to move forward is if we put in place some sort of structure that ensures that women actually get into decision-making and into the workforce .
When we eventually have true equality there will be no need for positive discrimination .
The report by Mrs Lulling already has a long history .
After the Kalenke judgment in 1995 , the Commission proposed to amend Directive 207 / EEC of 1976 .
This proposal was submitted to the Council at the end of March 1996 .
Since then the Committee on Women 's Rights has worked long and hard on that proposal .
In Mrs Lulling 's report the Commission is now asked to withdraw its proposal .
That is also what all of you have been talking about .
As you know , my colleague Commissioner Flynn appeared before the Women 's Rights Committee on 16 February and clearly stated his position .
His intention is to propose to withdraw the proposal as requested by Parliament .
On the same occasion Commissioner Flynn announced his intention concerning use of the new legislative powers given to the Community .
The aim is to adopt measures in order to ensure full equality or treatment between women and men in the field of employment , and these two issues are linked .
The ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty will hopefully be complete within a few months .
We will then have a Treaty which confers a new legal base , Article 141 ( 3 ) , for legislating equal treatment between women and men in the field of employment .
I can confirm to you that we are looking very actively and positively at the question of legislating under Article 141 .
We are doing so with a very open mind .
There are legal questions on several aspects of the Article , particularly as regards its scope .
The Commission is therefore taking legal advice .
In the light of this advice we will then decide the content of a proposal for a directive based on Article 141 .
I believe this statement should answer Parliament 's question and indicate the Commission 's willingness to make use of Article 141 in a general positive action .
Finally , let me once again thank the Women 's Rights Committee and Mrs Lulling for their work on this important issue .
Closing of the session
I declare the 1998-1999 session of the European Parliament closed .
The sitting was closed at 8.35 p.m.
Opening of the session
I declare opened the 1999-2000 session of the European Parliament .
Decision on urgent procedure
Madam President , let me say in regard to this item that we have not yet concluded our discussions in committee , and therefore cannot agree to the request for urgent procedure at this part-session .
But I would suggest we deal with it at the second March part-session , by which time we will have concluded our discussions .
Mr von Wogau , another solution would be - if you and the House were to agree to it - for us to vote in favour of urgency now , but to include this on the agenda for the sitting on 22 March .
Would you be in agreement with that proposal ?
Parliament agreed to urgent procedure for 22 March
Amendment of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the report ( A4-0070 / 99 ) by Mr Corbett , Mr Gutiérrez Díaz and Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the amendments to be made to the Rules of Procedure .
I would inform the House that Mr Crowley has endorsed the minority opinion which is set out in the explanatory statement .
I give the floor to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy for a procedural motion .
Madam President , under Rule 128 I must move the admissibility of the document to be debated .
Either I can table it now or I can wait until you have formally opened the debate on this document , as you wish .
We are at the beginning of the debate , so you have the floor , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
Madam President , the purpose of this inadmissibility motion is to raise procedural issues which emerged during the drafting of this text .
I am disputing the debate on this text on two essential grounds .
The first is that it is intended to make some of the proposed changes to the Rules of Procedure in implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
People may say that the Treaty of Amsterdam has been ratified , or just about .
But one country , France , has not yet ratified it , and it would be discourteous to my country 's parliament to make changes to our Rules of Procedure before the Treaty has been formally adopted .
But above all , and this concerns all the Member States of the European Community , a treaty which is an essential instrument of Community law cannot enter into force until it has been formally ratified by agreement of the Heads of State and Government of all the Member States .
However , clearly none of the Member States has yet exchanged instruments of ratification , to put it in diplomatic terms .
The second reason is that while it is the responsibility of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities to apply the Treaty of Amsterdam , or rather the draft Treaty , which should soon be ratified , the Committee on the Rules of Procedure has gone way beyond that .
The Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , which is our fundamental document , must be subject to basic laws , in particular the Treaty .
In my minority opinion which I submitted on this text I list the points where I think the report goes too far .
I shall not go into them now , but those are my reasons for asking Parliament to make a decision on my motion of admissibility .
Madam President , I would like to reply briefly to the two points raised by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
The first was on the implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Changes to the Rules of Procedure obviously cannot enter into force until the Treaty has itself come into force .
What we are doing here is preparing Parliament for that time .
Clearly the provisions of the Rules of Procedure that are linked to the Treaty will not apply until the Treaty of Amsterdam is itself in force .
It is also clear that Parliament needs to prepare for this as it is a complex matter .
We cannot wait until the Treaty of Amsterdam is in force to work on the implementation of the Rules of Procedure , and that is why I think Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's objection is unacceptable .
The second point was whether we have gone too far with these changes to the Rules .
We have actually taken advantage of the work relating to the Treaty to adapt a number of our Rules to new circumstances .
I believe a parliament 's most fundamental right is to adapt its rules to the constant changes in parliamentary life .
For this reason I cannot accept Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's second point either .
In my capacity as chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure I therefore urge Parliament to reject Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's objections .

Ladies and gentlemen , we have heard Mr Fabre-Aubrespy present his motion , and Mr Fayot in his capacity as chairman of the committee .
Does anyone wish to speak against ?

Madam President , I am opposed to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's position for the following reason : although strictly speaking - as Mr Fabre-Aubrespy is well aware - his first objection , which relates to the Treaty might perhaps appear acceptable in the context of this parliamentary procedure , his second objection concerns the essence of the matter .
In such circumstances , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy should restrict himself to voting against certain amendments if he feels they should not be adopted in the context of this revision of the Rules of Procedure .
To return to the first question , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy is well acquainted with the nature of statutory law .
It has the privilege and also the duty of regulating the internal running of an institution .
The institution in question is therefore not merely advised but required to take appropriate measures in anticipation of the entry into force of the Treaty .
It needs to draw up internal rules that will be compatible and consistent with the Treaty when it enters into force . It is this Treaty of course which establishes the guidelines for the development of these internal statutes .
I therefore believe that his first objection is not acceptable either , Madam President .
Does anyone wish to speak in favour of the motion by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy ?
That is not the case .
Parliament rejected the motion
Madam President , this report constitutes the most comprehensive revision of our Rules of Procedure since the entry into force of the Maastricht Treaty in the early 1990s .
It does not simply deal with the necessary transposition into Parliament 's Rules of what is contained in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It takes the opportunity , as we did after the Maastricht Treaty , to review the whole of Parliament 's working methods and its procedures .
In short , we are preparing Parliament for a new era .
Parliament has traditionally taken the treaties and tried to stretch them like a piece of elastic .
We cannot contradict the treaties , we cannot do things that are forbidden by the treaties .
But the treaties inevitably allow a margin of appreciation , a scope for interpretation .
They leave space and gaps to fill in .
Parliament has always tried to do that in order to make the Union more effective , more open , more transparent and more democratic .
That is the philosophy that underlies this revision of the Rules of Procedure .
Of course , if you stretch elastic too far it can snap and you can hurt your fingers .
But I am convinced that the package that we put before you today has stretched the elastic to just the right degree and that what we have come up with is a package which we can commend to the House .
After Amsterdam Parliament will be an equal part of a bicameral legislative authority with the Council , at least for the areas subject to codecision which will include most non-agricultural legislation .
Much work has therefore gone , in this report , into improving and redefining our legislative procedures .
This includes technical improvements to simplify the way that we vote in plenary .
The codecision procedure has been rewritten in our Rules , partly to take account of what has been agreed in Amsterdam : the possibility of first reading agreements between the institutions , for instance ; the elimination of the Council 's right to adopt a text unilaterally at third reading if Parliament fails to reject it .
These changes are incorporated into the Rules and we have done so in such a way as to encourage early dialogue between the Council and Parliament to try and reach agreement early in the procedure , wherever possible .
We have also highlighted the cases where it is the final vote in Parliament which will henceforth determine the entry into force of European legislation .
In another area we have looked at the new provisions giving Parliament the right to vote on the President of the Commission .
This new legally binding vote is highlighted in the revision of the Rules by describing it as the election of the Commission .
We want to underline the fact that the Commission , the Commission President and , later , the Commission as a whole are politically accountable to Parliament .
The Commission is not an unaccountable bureaucracy as some eurosceptics would have us believe .
The Commission is a political executive accountable to the directly elected Parliament .
This , too , we have attempted to highlight in the revision of the Rules of Procedure .
Parliament must look , too , at the developing Common Foreign and Security Policy and sharpen its procedures for monitoring , scrutinising and controlling that policy .
The Rule changes do this .
We have taken up a number of suggestions made by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy in this regard .
They include provisions for dealing with the new High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
We provide for the High Representative to enter into a dialogue with Parliament , to come to Parliament to explain his or her statements , to go before the relevant parliamentary committee and for Parliament to monitor the procedure for appointing a High Representative .
We have put new provisions in the procedures for dealing with what we could call ' atypical legislative procedures ' : Third Pillar procedures and Schengen procedures , legislation adopted at the request of the social partners under the Social Agreement , legislation proposed at the initiative of a Member State under Article 67 ( 1 ) of the Treaty , suspension of a Member State , and legislation adopted under enhanced cooperation .
All these will now have a precise procedure allowing parliamentary involvement in what would otherwise not obviously be the case under the treaties .
We have tried to reform Parliament 's internal voting procedures so that less time will be spent - as we do so often , spending hours - voting in plenary .
We have brought in a number of technical changes which would simplify the way that we vote in plenary , without diminishing the rights of Members or groups of Members to table amendments .
We hope we have come up with a balanced package there .
We have tried to rationalise our procedures in other ways .
For legislative reports , for instance , there would no longer be explanatory statements .
They would be replaced by short justifications for each of the amendments tabled to a Commission proposal , as we already do for the budgetary procedure .
Similarly , opinions from other committees would be confined to tabling specific amendments .
This would focus our work specifically on the legislative texts and the changes that we wish to make to them and away from long discursive texts where Parliament 's opinion is not always clear .
Topical and urgent debates would be rationalised as well , in that the subjects chosen would be agreed when the agenda is adopted on the Monday and not by an ad hoc procedure one day later .
This will leave more time to prepare the debates properly and that , too , would be a small but significant step forward .
New rules would ensure transparency of Parliament 's proceedings at all levels and guarantee the public a right of access to EP documents .
Here we are following up the recent report on openness and transparency by my colleague , Mrs Lööw .
We also eliminate the possibility of late challenges to the legal base of proposals , when this challenge is only made at the last stage in plenary as a way of having the matter referred back to committee and to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
We have a rationalised procedure there , which preserves the right of the Legal Affairs Committee and of the committee responsible , leaves the final decision in plenary but avoids the possibility of filibustering .
In terms of enhancing our scrutiny of the Commission , we also provide in our new Rules for the President of the Commission or another member to come and make a statement to Parliament immediately after Commission meetings , where we so request it , and to be subject to a half-hour period of questioning on the decisions taken at that meeting .
That would again illustrate the accountability of the Commission to Parliament , but would give the Commission the possibility of informing Parliament directly , rather than the press , of the decisions it has taken as our executive .
The initial announcement of the decisions taken would be here and the initial reaction would be by directly elected Members posing questions to the Commission .
We would also try to liven up parliamentary debates .
At the moment we have debates , as you know , by long lists of speakers .
We have experimented with what we used to call the Delors procedure , where for an hour the President just gives the floor to individual Members who catch the President 's eye .
We codify both systems in the Rules of Procedure - neither of them is explicitly there at the moment - but we would allow for the possibility of combinations .
The debate could start with the usual rounds of speakers from each political group , but an hour , half-an-hour or even just ten minutes could be left at the end for a few extra speakers to come in by catching the President 's eye , so that Members who have sat here throughout the debate , patiently listening to the arguments , could come in and respond at the end ; somebody who has already spoken might wish to come back and respond at the end .
This would liven up our debates a little bit , make them appeal more to the public , without taking away the right of each group to have its appropriate share of speaking-time .
We also provide for the Rules of Procedure to be rewritten , where necessary , in gender-neutral language .
It was International Women 's Day yesterday and I know that many of our female colleagues take offence at the fact that the Rules in some languages refer only to Members in the masculine form - as he and not as he or she - and the rule changes would also cater for that particular problem .
There are also minor things taken up in these rule changes .
I shall not go into all of them .
A lot of minor details are tidied up and we seek to improve procedures wherever possible .
Individually , many of these changes are minor but cumulatively they will improve Parliament 's working methods and its procedures .
They will also make Parliament more open and transparent .
This package has been put together over almost a year - a year of hard work in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
I must pay tribute to my co-rapporteurs , to Mr Fayot in his capacity as chair of the committee , in which he has had a trying time but has handled it extremely well ; to all the members of the committee and , indeed , other committees which have tabled opinions and proposals to us , and , last but not least , the secretariat of the committee , which put an enormous amount of work into this report .
After a year 's hard work , I am confident that we have put together a package which is fair , balanced and can command a virtual consensus across most of the political groups of this House .
I have no hesitation in commending this package to the House .
Thank you , Mr Gutiérrez Díaz .
The vote will not take place tomorrow morning , but on Thursday morning , as I will have the chance to make clear shortly .
Madam President , as the two rapporteurs who preceded me have already indicated , this revision of the Rules is first and foremost a way of regulating our work in the House , as are the Rules themselves . The result should reflect the interests of the House , the concerns of all the Members and also the concerns of those who work behind the scenes undertaking essential tasks , to whom we have already paid tribute .
In this context , I should like to add my voice to those who have congratulated the other two rapporteurs .
They worked as a team on a task where natural differences of opinion actually make the work even more challenging .
I should also like to congratulate the technical services , principally those attached to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure . However , congratulations are also due to all of Parliament 's services , and in particular to the officials of the Group of the European People 's Party , who have given me tremendous support .
Madam President , I referred to our Rules as a way of regulating our communal life , and the lodestar of parliamentary activity .
Nevertheless , it is worth remembering that the Rules of Procedure have a much more important role to play .
They are a symbol , a banner , a programme and a point of reference .
They are the internal constitution of this institution ; they summarise and reflect how Parliament wishes to present itself and the role it sees for itself in the interinstitutional balance .
They represent all that Parliament has stood for throughout its short but fruitful history , and anticipate the part it would like to play in the process of European integration .
Consequently , any revision of the Rules of Procedure must inevitably take account of the Treaty , bearing in mind however that there is considerable scope for interpretation when applying the Treaty to existing situations , as there is with any legal instrument .
The Rules must be practical and realistic , whilst retaining their emblematic value .
They must enshrine respect for all , for groups - both large and small - and for individuals . They must also establish a definitive balance between the inertia carried over from when this House was merely a parliamentary assembly without power and its new role as a colegislator which is to all intents and purposes on an equal footing with the Council .
All the amendments are important , Madam President .
The most minor detail of parliamentary Rules of Procedure can have far-reaching political consequences , as we have seen recently .
Nevertheless , the amendments can be grouped into three main categories , according to their nature .
First , there are those of a directly political nature that have direct political consequences . Among these , I would highlight Amendment No 15 on the composition of the political groups .
It will doubtless be criticised , but it is in line with the concept of European integration . If we are moving towards greater integration in Europe , it does not make sense to have a group composed exclusively of Members of one single nationality in a Parliament whose function is to represent all the people of Europe .
Amendment No 16 on the election of the President of the European Commission has also received a great deal of criticism .
I do feel that here , we have respected the spirit of the Treaties , as should be the case . We have taken advantage of the Treaty of Amsterdam to ensure that Parliament 's vote on the appointment of the President is an integral part of the process , and this is reflected in our Rules of Procedure .
It is also worth mentioning the statements on the broad guidelines for economic policy laid down in Article 99 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , as well as Rule 24 which fully exploits the opportunities provided by the text in question .
I shall not go into details on the High Representative , as his or her function has already been extensively debated .
Nevertheless , I should like to support my group 's amendment which clarifies the situation and , I feel , does away with certain somewhat arbitrary features of the current Amendment No 129 .
As regards relations with other institutions , I would emphasise that relations with national parliaments will be strengthened , as will relations with the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee .
I should also like to highlight Amendment No 28 on interinstitutional agreements which enhances the status of these fundamental acts which are so important to us . Above all , they are rendered more transparent , legally sound and directly accessible to all .
I mentioned transparency , and the new Chapter XVIIa has been referred to in this connection .
It clearly reflects the new guidelines laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
There are many other issues I could mention concerning the third pillar , human rights and compliance with the principles of the Treaty .
Nevertheless , I should like to move on and deal with the second group of amendments , albeit briefly . These amendments have a direct bearing on the new legislative powers .
I would stress that all these amendments have a dual purpose . They aim to promote interinstitutional relations , to foster the joint but unregulated efforts being made by the Commission , the Council and Parliament , and to streamline and update existing procedures .
Turning for a moment to the issue of the legal basis , the Group of the European People 's Party has tabled an amendment in this connection , together with the Liberal Group.In my view , the Committee on Legal Affairs ' right to review has so far proved very useful and should be maintained .
We must remember that any dispute concerning the legal basis can as a last resort lead to a case before the Court of Justice .
The Committee on Legal Affairs ' right to review must therefore be maintained , together with its special powers .
Madam President , I referred earlier to inherited inertia , and this leads me to the third group of amendments , to which Mr Fabre-Aubrespy referred .
Given that Parliament was previously a parliamentary assembly with no power , it retains a number of earlier procedures .
Some of these have already been streamlined , whereas others are in need of further reform .
The will is certainly there .
There are certain outstanding reforms which do not go beyond the Treaty of Amsterdam but which are an inescapable consequence of the Treaty as they involve bringing Parliament 's earlier historical functions into line with its recently acquired role of colegislator .
An effort has therefore been made to make speaking time and resources more efficient , and to simplify and update procedures through the use of new technology .
Finally , now that I am discussing resources , new technologies and speaking time , my own speaking time has elapsed .
I firmly believe that although this is not a perfect document , and despite the fact that I personally do not support all the amendments , the package before us is a clear representation of what this institution stands for , its energy , its vitality and the role it seeks to play at the heart of European integration .
We have included a number of reports in this debate , namely those by Mr Ford , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , Mr Vecchi , Mr Nordmann , Mr Voggenhuber , Mr Fayot , Mr Wijsenbeek and Mr Spiers .







Madam President , firstly I would like to congratulate the three rapporteurs on their joint report amending the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament in the light of the Amsterdam Treaty .
It contains an enormous amount of work which will underpin Parliament 's ability to use its powers to the full and , as Mr Corbett says , stretch them to the limit .
Some people in this Parliament describe the Rules Committee as like watching paint dry in 11 languages .
The fact that many people believe this is demonstrated by the speed at which the Chamber emptied when you said that we would be talking about rules .
Nevertheless , I often think that the Rules Committee Members are the stagehands of this Parliament - the unsung heroes without whom the political stars of this institution would lose their lustre .
Mr Corbett and his colleagues have very adequately outlined the thrust of their report .
I want to concentrate on aspects of the nine other reports by the Rules Committee that have been taken simultaneously , particularly the series of amendments relating to issues concerning the declaration of Members ' interests .
With the passage of the Nordmann report and my own report on control and registration of lobbyists in 1996 , this Parliament made an enormous step forward in transparency and openness .
We now know that every Member has five shadows behind him .
There are 3 000 lobbyists trying to shape the views of 600 Members .
A dialogue with the representatives of employees and employers , consumer groups , producer groups , representatives of foreign governments and environmental and human rights organisations is both necessary and desirable .
But dialogue should not turn into ownership .
Members cannot be seen as products on the shelves of some kind of political supermarket available for purchase by those who have the money .
In these reports a number of holes in the system are being filled in .
Firstly , Amendment No 10 from my own report deals with the plight of former Members .
We currently have an ambiguous situation in which some former Members are honorary Members , which has led to confusion in the past , with people considering them as senior Members of this institution rather than ex-Members of the institution .
My amendment gives the Bureau the job of laying down the rights and privileges of former Members without distinction .
Secondly , we have Amendment No 110 in the Wijsenbeek report which changes the rule on declaration of interests so that Members with a direct financial interest must orally declare such an interest before speaking in committee or plenary .
Thirdly , Amendment No 112 in the Spiers report will make the chairs of intergroups responsible for making an annual declaration of any assistance in cash or kind received by such groups and making that available to the public .
Fourthly , Amendment No 111 deals with two problems .
Firstly , with the failure of a small number of Members - 9 for 1996 and 21 for 1997 - to complete their declaration of Members ' interests .
It would mean that , after a final warning given by the President , their names would be published in the Minutes of our proceedings and then , if they still failed to comply , they would be suspended from the House .
The second part makes it clear that benefits of a value greater than ECU 100 must be declared .
At the moment there seems to be a great deal of ambiguity on what constitutes the level at which declarations should start .
Finally , Amendment No 2 from Mr Vecchi makes it clear that after elections or the appointment of new Members , credentials cannot be verified without a full declaration of interests , and that they will not be allowed to take an elected position in Parliament or to be represented on any delegation until they have completed their declaration of interests .
In the current climate of public opinion we owe it to our electorate and ourselves , not only to operate in a fair and proper manner , but also to allow the people of Europe to see that we do so .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I was asked to write a report on one very small , very specific point in the amendments put forward today .
It involves the existing Rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure , more precisely two of its paragraphs - paragraph 3 and paragraph 5 - governing resignations by Members of this Parliament , which can sometimes pose a problem .
There is some uncertainty surrounding the date of effect of a resignation as a result of a legally doubtful distinction which is drawn between , on the one hand , the formal conditions governing resignation - first a letter and then notification in an official record - and , on the other , the date of effect of that resignation as stipulated by the existing paragraph 5 of Rule 8 .
Notification of resignation in an official record was intended to be a condition which must be fulfilled before the resignation can take effect .
It is a guarantee for the Member of Parliament and there is no question of changing it .
But we considered whether we needed to retain the procedure of the resignation letter and the official record , and concluded that the Rules could be simplified by stipulating that notification of the resignation must be made in the form of an official record , as laid down in the existing paragraph 3 and dispensing with the letter of resignation , and that the vacancy will be established as from the date indicated by the resigning Member in that official record .
So the ambiguity on this point will be removed if Parliament adopts Amendments Nos 6 , 7 and 9 , which I believe met with widespread agreement in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
I would now like to speak on the report as a whole to explain why , on behalf of my group , I am opposed to its adoption .
Quite frankly , the report does not properly answer the question that was asked , and it imprudently raises questions that were not asked .
With regard to the implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam , I maintain that this implementation is premature , firstly - and here Professor Duhamel might remember that the parliament of the state he represents consists of two chambers - because in fact the ratification debate is currently still taking place in the French Parliament , and also because , with no date set for the Treaty to come into force , the provisions we are going to adopt will come into force in the next part-session , which will be before the Treaty has been ratified .
But the text also goes beyond the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This is the case , in particular , in Amendment No 28 enshrining the practice of interinstitutional agreements , which are legally doubtful .
This also applies to Amendments Nos 67 and 68 on the common foreign and security policy .
The report is also imprudent in introducing issues not included in the mandate given by the Conference of Presidents .
This applies to Amendment No 90 which provides that mutually exclusive amendments are inadmissible ; this is a very ambiguous provision .
It also applies to Amendment No 96 which states that the composition of the committees shall , as far as possible , reflect the composition of the plenary .
It also applies to Amendment No 14 on censure of parliamentary office-holders and to Amendment No 78 .
I refer Members interested in these issues to the minority opinion where I have set out my reservations .
Madam President , in recent years , consolidated practice concerning the verification of credentials has established a number of procedures and precedents , which lend a broad interpretation to both the Act of 20 September 1976 and Rules 7 and 8 of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
Confirmation of the validity of the mandate of elected Members has thereby become more rigorous , as have the conditions governing the termination of the mandate and the full extent of Members ' powers .
This is of course a complex field where a plethora of common rules - laid down by the Treaties and by Parliament 's Rules of Procedure - and national rules coexist .
There are moreover several large ' grey areas ' , where the borderline between national and Community competence is not always clear .
Greater certainty concerning powers and competences will be achieved once the uniform electoral procedure and the single Members ' Statute enter into force .
Nevertheless , the Rules Committee appointed me to draw up a report - which has been incorporated into the report now under discussion , in Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 and 8 - on ways of exploiting fully the existing scope under the Treaties to maximise the European Parliament 's competence to ensure that the composition of Parliament is and remains as desired by the electorate , and that the exercise of its mandate is not subject to undue impediment .
The amendments propose , firstly , that procedures already followed during this legislature should be written into the Rules of Procedure , for example the obligation to sign declarations of non-incompatibility and financial interests .
Secondly , we wish to enhance Parliament 's powers to monitor withdrawals of candidates under national law .
Finally , Parliament is empowered to require the Member States to cooperate fairly and squarely in forwarding all information liable to affect the exercise of the mandate , concerning national electoral legislation or the conferring of a national assignment on an MEP .
Amendment No 4 is of particular importance : it enables Parliament to interact with national authorities in procedures which might lead to the disqualification of a Member from holding office .
The adoption of these amendments will constitute a further step towards an effective Community-wide Members ' Statute , which is a vital precondition if our institutions are to function properly and the European Parliament 's role is to be strengthened .
Madam President , first I have to present my own modest part in this overall report .
It involved the necessary clarification of the Rules on expressing minority opinions , and I am delighted that the work schedule has you chairing this sitting , because in a previous legislature we were co-authors of a minority opinion and we came up against difficulties in applying the Rules as they were then and as , on the whole , they remain .
What was needed then , and is needed now , is to specify the conditions whereby a minority opinion can appear in the explanatory statement , and the general idea has been to use the technique and model set out in our Rules for the written explanation of vote , setting a precise ceiling on the number of words .
It was also necessary to decide where the minority opinion should appear .
The opinion must be expressed when the vote on the full text is taken in committee .
That is the time when ideas , thoughts and vague hopes are crystallised into a completely identifiable formal opinion .
Of course , an arbitration authority is needed in case our work is inadequate and does not cover the range of situations which could arise , and we feel that the chairman of the committee should be able to settle any disputes which might still arise despite this improvement in the Rules .
That is the intent of Amendment No 99 , which clarifies paragraph 3 of Rule 146 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , of course you are right to note or criticise the fact that this report aims far beyond the amendments that would have necessarily resulted from the Amsterdam Treaty and therefore also exceeds its task .
But that is not really my problem .
What I criticise is the spirit underlying these amendments .
I believe that we must ask ourselves whether such a comprehensive amendment of the Rules will really make Parliament more democratic .
The acid test of the democratic culture of a parliament is minority rights .
Have they been strengthened or weakened here ?
I think it is not difficult to see that the countless amendments restrict the rights of the smaller groups , the minorities , that they do not strengthen the rights of the individual Member , that they give precedence to majority rights and to the bureaucratisation of Parliament .
I think it is a pity that the majority of Members are using this opportunity to make Parliament less democratic rather than taking substantial steps to make it more democratic .
Mr Corbett has described the Commission 's position in relation mainly to future integration and is looking , in the final analysis , to a European government ; but I think he must also realise that a European government of this kind would have a particular result for Parliament , as it would split it into an opposition and government parties .
That is what makes it so precarious , for it would mean that minority rights were restricted rather than strengthened .
There are many examples of this .
Let me name three : the vote of no confidence against senior office holders of this House - no one group even has the right to express no confidence ; the number of signatures in support of initiatives is increased from 29 to 32 ; it will become more difficult to table motions for resolutions .
That is the reverse of making Parliament more democratic .
It is an attempt by the majorities to win themselves advantages , and I regret this development because it does not benefit the European Parliament , and certainly not its democratic culture .
Madam President , I wish to speak on Rule 168 ( new ) , in other words Amendment No 109 , which is the result of an own-initiative report .
This is the last rule in our Rules of Procedure and it concerns the annexes .
The annexes are not exactly rules , but they are still part of the Rules of Procedure , and with this new Rule 168 we aimed to clarify the structure of the annexes by arranging them under three headings :
implementing provisions for procedures under these Rules , adopted by simple majority in Parliament ; -provisions adopted in implementation of specific terms of the Rules of Procedure , in particular , for example - as an illustration - Rule 9 on the code of conduct .
The code of conduct is adopted by an absolute majority .
Provision is also made in our Rules for permanent and temporary committees to be set up by the Conference of Presidents and under Rule 135 ; -interinstitutional agreements , and a whole series of procedures with a bearing on Parliament 's operation.I think this subdivision will make the annexes clearer and easier to follow .
Let me make one final point , Madam President .
We are discussing eight reports by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , in association with the Corbett-Palacio-Gutiérrez report .
This is like clearing out the Rules Committee 's cupboards .
I do not think it is a very useful practice , but I suppose it is better than nothing at all .
Thank you , Mr Fayot .
I note that by addressing the Chair as ' Madame la Présidente ' , you are already applying the proposals made by Mr Corbett .
Madam President , in French I would say ' Madame le Président ' , because the position you hold represents a role .
So we should see you not as an individual person , but in a particular role .
Having said that , Madam President , I shall now return to my mother tongue , Dutch , because the Rules are written in each of our languages and I think we should respect that fact .
Let me begin by saying that I do not intend to talk about my own report .
Mr Ford has already covered it for me extremely well .
To me it is obvious that if you are speaking on a subject in which you have a personal interest , you make that fact clear to the House .
I will start by complimenting Mr Corbett on all the work he has put in on this extremely complicated subject .
The same goes , in different measure , for the two co-rapporteurs , Mrs Palacio and Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , the latter supposedly expressing the opinion of the smaller groups .
I cannot in all honesty say that it was unduly prominent .
I think we can say that with this review , Parliament certainly has come a step closer towards becoming a true parliament but has not yet come of age , and that consequently this general revision has not quite achieved its goal .
Why do I say that ?
Because we still chop up our debates into little snippets , with all nationalities and parties and shades of political opinion speaking individually , rather than having a single spokesmen for all the groups who can make a real and fundamental contribution to the debate .
Nor is there a true dialogue with the Council and the Commission in which Parliament says something , the Council or Commission responds and then we have the chance of a second round .
One last comment addressed to Mr Voggenhuber .
He is exaggerating , these are not Rules of Procedure for the big groups .
All they do is consolidate the current position .
Forgive me for exceeding my speaking time .
It was due to inattentiveness on the Council 's part .
Mr President , I am going to speak about what was my bid for parliamentary immortality as the Spiers report but what is now merely Amendment No 112 of this much larger report .
Some years ago the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities was asked to extend to intergroups the rules that require individual Members to declare any outside support received .
This proved surprisingly tricky , partly because no definition of an intergroup could be agreed , and partly because some groups registered as intergroups with the group chairmen do not receive outside support whereas some other groupings of Members which are not considered to be intergroups receive such support .
The amendment therefore speaks in terms of groupings of Members , both intergroups and other unofficial groupings .
These will now have to declare any assistance they receive whether in cash or in kind , which would include secretarial assistance , support with research and so on .
Such groupings in the European Parliament often perform a valuable role .
There is not a major problem with intergroups in the European Parliament and the current Rules which require Members to declare any significant support they receive would embrace support received via an intergroup as well .
However , there are concerns about intergroups and there is clearly a lack of transparency .
These rule changes should make everything much more open .
Finally , the quaestors are charged with drawing up detailed rules .
These should include a requirement that groups receiving outside support must file their minutes and records of attendance with the European Parliament , and that these should be publicly available .
That would enable everyone to see who might be influencing whom .
Madam President , my task on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy is an easy one .
Our suggestions have been both accepted and now explained by the rapporteurs .
It is our belief that it is a legitimate prerogative of this Parliament to debate , to suggest and to question actions taken by the Executive in foreign affairs , be that the Commission or the Council .
The High Representative will be the key , and it seems to me a matter of great urgency that we hold a confirmation hearing jointly with the chairmen of the foreign affairs committees of the Member State parliaments to examine the mandate and the intentions of the successful candidate , whoever he or she may be , once the High Representative is appointed .
It also seems to me - and we cover this in our draft opinion - that a similar procedure should be available to us on the appointment of special representatives , envoys and EU ambassadors .
So , I can endorse these rule changes heartily .
I should like to make a personal intervention to suggest to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities something it might like to consider in the next Parliament .
I detect an insidious growth in the power of the Conference of Presidents over the internal organisation of this Parliament , a growth in power at the expense of the Bureau , of the Conference of Committee Presidents , of the Quaestors and , most importantly , of this plenary .
I have had the opportunity of watching the Conference of Presidents in action .
It is consistently overworked and often ill-briefed .
To make the Conference of Presidents the ultimate arbiter of every decision in this Parliament is an abuse and a mistake .
I am full of admiration for the leaders of the two big groups , but to adapt the terminology of the World Trade Organization , these are the two great elephants of Parliament .
They cannot be experts on everything .
They each lead complex coalitions .
Their joint voting power in the Conference of Presidents leads to the governance of this House by a ' condominium of the confused ' .
It will be real test of the democratic vigour of this House if it can look its leadership in the eyes , and amend its Rules accordingly in the next mandate .
Madam President , first let me express my appreciation to the rapporteurs and congratulate them on their comprehensive work .
The revision of the Rules of Procedure focuses on the innovations arising from the Amsterdam Treaty .
The Committee on Budgetary Control proposed few amendments , since the Treaty of Amsterdam makes no substantive changes either to the process or the nature of the discharge procedure .
It tabled only two amendments .
The first concerns institutional responsibility for decisions overruling a withholding of approval by the Financial Controller , which in our view should revert to the President of Parliament .
Secondly , we want to clarify that there is no interaction between the consequences of discharge and the procedure whereby Parliament may request the Commission to submit to it any appropriate legislative proposal pursuant to Article 138b of the EC Treaty , on the basis of an own-initiative report .
Unfortunately , neither amendment has been adopted to date .
Meanwhile things have progressed , however .
The refusal to grant the Commission a discharge last December brought to light a whole range of inconsistencies between the provisions of the Treaty and Annex V of the Rules of Procedure .
These inconsistencies must be remedied immediately to ensure the smooth running and completion of the discharge procedure .
We can congratulate the Committee on the Rules of Procedure on its zeal and thoroughness in tackling this problem .
We await Mr Fayot 's report in the near future , confident that it will clarify this complex subject for us .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Petitions . ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Petitions urgently requests the Committee on the Rules of Procedure to take account of the following points when adapting the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
With reference to Rule 157 ( 1 ) , second paragraph , of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , the Committee on Petitions welcomes the guidelines for specialist committees of the European Parliament considering petitions , which have been drawn up by the Conference of Committee Chairmen .
However , the committee stresses the need to build on the successful cooperation established between the European Parliament and the European Ombudsman and to anchor it sufficiently clearly in the Rules of Procedure .
We therefore propose that Annex VI , XX ( Powers and responsibilities of standing committees ) should be clarified and that relations with the European Ombudsman should be included among the responsibilities of the Committee on Petitions .
We further propose that clearer rules on submission of the annual reports and special reports on the activities of the European Ombudsman should be included in Chapter XX , Rule 161 ( Activities of the Ombudsman ) .
It is important to insert in the Rules of Procedure more precise rules on the submission and consideration of the Ombudsman 's annual reports and special reports by the European Parliament .
If in future the Ombudsman were to submit more interim or special reports on very specialised topics , we would advocate that not all of them should necessarily be considered in plenary .
Some of the matters covered by such reports could be dealt with more effectively if simpler and more rapid procedures were applied , which might be devised if this were felt appropriate .
Corresponding provisions , modelled on Rule 44 or Rule 52 , could be inserted in the Rules of Procedure .
Finally , it would be appropriate for a procedure to be introduced in the Rules of Procedure for urgent consideration of the Ombudsman 's reports by Parliament , especially with regard to their placing on the part-session agenda .
I thank the rapporteurs and hope our amendments will be adopted .
Madam President , while thanking the rapporteurs I also have one point of criticism .
The committee proposes that the vote on approval of the President of the Commission and the Commission as a whole shall be taken by roll call .
That is a grave mistake .
Behind rules there are thoughts , ideas , concepts , aims , strategies .
What were the Heads of State and Government thinking when they wrote into the Treaties that the vote on a motion of censure shall be by roll call ?
The thought behind that is obvious .
Roll-call votes split Parliament into national delegations and political groups .
This puts Parliament under pressure and therefore makes it subject to control .
That is the point of a roll-call vote .
Now we are introducing it for approval of the President of the Commission and the Commission as a whole .
And that means that we too are exposing ourselves to pressure and can therefore be controlled .
That is the result !
Parliament would be stronger if the vote were by secret ballot .
In fact the Commission would also be stronger if the vote were by secret ballot .
This vote on approval would not give the impression of being a forced vote .
That is why I regard this as a grave mistake .
I cannot imagine that Members really want it .
Hence my appeal to support the amendments calling for a vote by secret ballot .
Madam President , the Group of the European People 's Party supports the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
My group has nevertheless tabled a number of amendments - Amendment No 125 and the subsequent amendments - most of which are technical . We trust that these amendments will therefore gain the necessary support within the House .
I should like to respond to the remarks made by Mr Rothley on behalf of the Socialist Group .
As ever , his remarks were pertinent and largely justified .
It can nevertheless also be argued that a vote as important as the one to approve the nomination of the President of the European Commission must display visible symbols of its significance , and voting by roll call has traditionally always served that purpose .
Notwithstanding this , we shall certainly consider the suggestions put forward by the Socialist Group .
On behalf of the European People 's Party , I should like to highlight a number of points on which either the group cannot agree with the Committee on the Rules of Procedure or where it has tabled political rather than technical amendments to clarify the issue .
Referring again to the three categories of amendments , and more specifically to the political ones , our group is opposed to the so-called ' internal censure motion ' provided for in Amendment No 14 .
In our view , it achieves nothing and would result in more complications than advantages .
Amendment No 124 by the Socialist Group concerning interparliamentary delegations raises serious legal problems .
The delegations are , after all , bodies with power vested in them by the House , and it is inconceivable that their membership should fall into two categories - primary members from the Bureau , elected by the House , and secondary members , appointed by the Conference of Presidents .
The Group of the European People 's Party understands the logic behind this amendment , but feels that the democratic principles which must provide the foundations for the composition of each and every one of Parliament 's bodies should also be respected as far as these interparliamentary delegations are concerned .
As regards the appointment of the High Representative , we have tabled Amendment No 129 , which provides further detail and is more in line with the Treaty than the amendment tabled by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
In terms of the legislative amendments , the Group of the European People 's Party is totally opposed to the amendment to Rule 53 concerning the legal basis and is therefore also opposed to Amendment No 38 .
Turning to the third group of amendments on the indirect consequences of having gained the status of colegislators , and as regards time , improved management of resources , translations , the introduction of new technology and so on , the Group of the European People 's Party tabled Amendment No 144 which clarifies the situation concerning explanatory statements and makes it more manageable .
A large majority opposes the exclusion amendments to Rule 90 and the one-minute speeches in Rule 78 .
Finally , I should like to say a word about the implementation of this revision .
As Mr Fabre-Aubrespy has rightly said , we must be aware that implementation must await the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Before Thursday , therefore , an oral amendment or technical amendment needs to be introduced to take account of this situation .
On behalf of the European People 's Party , I propose that all the amendments should come into effect at the first part-session following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have just one minute and shall confine myself to one point concerning the powers of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , namely determining the legal basis .
As you are aware , where there is uncertainty as to the correct legal basis , every committee of Parliament has so far had to seek the opinion of the Legal Affairs Committee .
Amendment No 38 is now proposing that , in the event of a dispute , this requirement to seek an opinion should be replaced by a requirement merely to inform the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
That is a very dangerous development in the wrong direction .
If every committee can determine the legal basis individually , this will lead to still more conflicts of responsibility between the committees and it will be very hard to see any consistency in the basis or Treaty article which the European Parliament uses in its decision making .
My group has therefore retabled Amendment No 138 to the effect that in the event of disagreement over the legal basis , the Legal Affairs Committee must be consulted , not informed .
Arguments against this on grounds of the supposed unnecessary delay are overcome by an urgency procedure which is appended to the amendment .
I would commend this amendment to the House .
Madam President , many of the proposals contained in this comprehensive report constitute definite improvements or necessary adaptations to the new situation created by the Amsterdam Treaty .
There are , however , some rather radical proposals of a political nature which would give the European Parliament more power than is actually provided for in the text of the Treaty .
In that category belong , for example , Amendment No 60 on the agreement between the labour market partners , Amendment No 69 on the Council 's foreign policy representative and Amendment No 16 relating to the President of the Commission .
It is totally unacceptable to attempt to overstep the clear boundaries set in the Treaty .
The report also contains other proposals that are equally unacceptable .
This applies particularly to Amendment No 90 , which states that groups may not table mutually exclusive amendments .
I think there are many people in the House who regard censorship of this type as undesirable .
We all know that different viewpoints can be accommodated within the various political groups .
I therefore hope this proposal will not succeed for one reason or another .
In my view , we should have used this opportunity to establish that the President of Parliament should be elected for five years , so that we can be spared the extraordinary procedure whereby the two large groups end up sharing the office between them .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their tremendous work in this area and , even if I do not agree with a lot of what they did and their final conclusions , I do appreciate their diligence and their efforts to try and find compromises where it was possible .
As has already been highlighted by other speakers within this Parliament , there are a number of contradictions and elements within this combined report which will cause us difficulties in the future .
I would specifically like to draw Members ' attention to the question of whether we elect the President of the Commission or whether we approve the nomination of the President of the Commission .
Likewise , this proposal that the Conference of Presidents acting by three-fifths majority , representing at least three groups , may propose to the plenary - acting by absolute majority - to terminate any elected office holder 's position within this Parliament .
I think it is ridiculous that somebody who is elected by the body of the Parliament - by the individual Members here within the Parliament - can have their office terminated by a decision of the Conference of Presidents .
I have no difficulty if three-fifths or three-sixths or three-sevenths of the Parliament decide to terminate such offices , but if the Conference of Presidents does so it is absolutely crazy .
Likewise , the role of the EU High Representative on Foreign Policy and the special officers should also be brought before this Parliament .
We are imposing new restrictions which we do not have the power to do under the Treaty .
I am delighted that my group 's amendment with regard to the numbers required for the formulation of groups has been accepted and I also hope that Members will vote for the one-minute speech at the start of the first sitting of each part-session which gives us the opportunity to raise issues of importance in our own Member States .
It is important for us to ensure that our new Rules of Procedure are unambiguous , direct , and able to deal with the actual powers that we have and not try to create new ones .
Most importantly , it must be remembered that the dignity of the Members of this House and their rights as elected representatives of the people of Europe must be foremost in any formulation of our rules .
Madam President , the rapporteurs have done a thorough and comprehensive job , in fact too comprehensive in my view because the proposed amendments go beyond the innovations contained in the Amsterdam Treaty and therefore also beyond the task assigned to the rapporteurs .
Many of the amendments were eliminated in committee , but a few that worry me remain .
I am particularly concerned about one point .
It is particularly important that the European Parliament , which has rightly dedicated itself to the protection of minorities , does not lose sight of this aim in its dealings with the minorities in its own House .
The proposals to amend the provisions on the formation of groups , and also the horizontal increase in the number of required signatures from 29 to 32 , unjustifiably weaken the small groupings whose importance to the diversity of opinion inherent in a democracy has indeed recently become more than apparent .
Madam President , at present the Commissioners are appointed by each individual Member State .
Mrs Bjerregaard is Denmark 's representative and a new majority in the Danish Parliament can send a new representative next time .
So ultimately our voters are the ones who have the final say and indirectly appoint the Danish Member of the Commission .
The Amsterdam Treaty gives Parliament the right to approve nominations by the Member States , and this is a power which is now to be written into the Rules of Procedure .
But now Parliament is saying instead that it should elect or reject the Commission .
The Commission is no longer to be a result of the decisions of the Member States alone , but in effect a common government of the EU .
The Commission is to be elected by Parliament in almost the same way as a national parliament elects a government .
That is a recipe for a federal state with a common parliament and a common government .
Parliament expects to be able to reject the names which are put forward by the Member States when they are not in line with the views of the majority .
In reality , Parliament wants to transfer the power to appoint the Commission from the national parliaments and governments to this supranational assembly .
That is contrary to the Amsterdam Treaty and therefore illegal .
Parliament cannot simply take power from the Member States on its own authority .
The June Movement is therefore voting against the new Rules of Procedure , and we call upon the Member States to protest against Parliament 's attempt to transform the national parliaments into a kind of junior branch of local government .
Madam President , first of all I should like to say what many others have already said , namely that the three rapporteurs have done an excellent job .
I agree with 99 % of what they have produced ; however , there are two points on which our views diverge .
The first concerns the proposal that would prevent political groups being formed of Members from one country only .
I simply cannot find a logical reason for such a proposal .
It is justified on the grounds that the larger countries should not be given an advantage , which is illogical and untenable in itself since the larger countries always have an advantage , for instance when it comes to having to collect 29 signatures in order to table an amendment .
The only logical reason I have been able to find for such a change is political , in other words the rapporteurs would like to make it impossible to form national groups so as to tone down national differences in the House , thereby giving it a more European character .
This is a commendable objective , but the Rules of Procedure are no place for political aims .
The Rules of Procedure should be politically neutral .
For that reason , I am going to vote against this amendment .
The other amendment which in my view is unnecessary states that a political group cannot table amendments that are mutually exclusive .
It is already difficult enough to table amendments in this House .
Such a change would only add to the difficulties .
I do not think we should set about making Parliament less democratic in this way .
Furthermore , the gains in efficiency that would result from such a change are negligible .
At most , only a tiny fraction of all the votes are mutually exclusive .
Consequently , I am going to vote against these two proposals .
Madam President , the valuable work done by our three rapporteurs confirms , yet again , the need for the exercise of MEPs ' constitutional duties to be autonomously regulated .
Consequently , this House is lending an initial interpretation to the Amsterdam Treaty - assuming that it does enter into force - even before the establishment of the relevant judicial and extra-parliamentary practice .
We must devote particular attention here to the regulatory nature of the new legislative procedures , since in its next term , Parliament is certain to enjoy equal status with the Council in a twin-chamber legislative system .
More specifically , according to this blueprint , the new codecision procedure is in line both with the resolution adopted by Parliament on this matter and with the joint interinstitutional agreement that is soon to be approved .
I must however endorse the requested addition to Rule 66 , recognising the Commission 's role in so-called informal conciliation .
The Commission 's monopoly over legislative initiative is undoubtedly an anomaly within the Community system ; but it is a welcome anomaly , considering the meagre legislative output of many national parliaments .
The Commission 's role of counterbalancing the two legislative bodies is in itself an element of regulatory coherence and consistency , with its constant emphasis on the rationale behind proposed legislation .
But this role must be performed throughout the legislative process .
Mr President , the European Parliament is a young parliament .
This is a fundamental difference between it and the national parliaments , some of which have been sitting for centuries .
Twenty years is barely an anniversary , not quite the age of reason .
So our Rules , which are the charter of our parliamentary life , are particularly important .
For democracy to work despite all our differences , the letter as well as the spirit of the Rules must be observed .
They cannot be bent to the dictates of the political climate .
Their reliability depends on consistency in their daily interpretation and application .
That is also why the Rules need to evolve .
Above all they must be amended to make the procedures simpler and less burdensome so that they are faster and more effective .
We must not allow them to be used politically to block a parliamentary institution whose role is to take legislative decisions .
In a Parliament where five-year government majorities do not exist , but where majorities change with the issues , simple and transparent procedures are essential for the public to understand what we do .
So I cannot accept Mr Voggenhuber 's complaint that this change in the Rules means less democracy .
I think a balance has been struck between democracy and effectiveness .
I would like to make one last remark , Mr President , following what Mr Spencer has just said in the debate .
It has been suggested that when we restructure the committees in the next parliamentary term , we should remove the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities by merging it with another committee .
I would regret such a merger .
Personally I think it would be better to create a proper constitutional committee in the European Parliament to deal with all aspects of the working life of Parliament .
I think it is important to oil the wheels of our procedures .
As chairman of the Rules Committee may I make one last comment on the controversial issue of entry into force .
I think , and the three rapporteurs agree with me , that this package of amendments to the Rules should come into force at the same time as the Treaty of Amsterdam .
There are two series of provisions here , some adapting the Rules to the Treaty of Amsterdam , others independent of the Treaty .
So for reasons of simplicity , Mr President , I think the best course is to bring the changes into force at the same time as the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11 a.m.
Orphan medicinal products
The next item is the report ( A4-0078 / 99 ) by Mr Cabrol , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Regulation ( EC ) on orphan medicinal products ( COM ( 98 ) 0450 - C4-0470 / 98-98 / 0240 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a regulation that is before us concerns orphan medicinal products .
Its purpose is to encourage the pharmaceutical industry to concentrate on the research and marketing of medicinal products which would not otherwise be marketed by the industry because they concern rare diseases affecting only a very few people , and are consequently not commercially viable .
Tropical diseases , which affect so many who have no hope of paying , should also be included . That is the aim of Amendment No 2 , which I support .
This regulation raises two main issues and several secondary issues .
The initial problem is that of definition .
The first criterion is epidemiological , in this case diseases affecting no more than 5 per 10 000 of the population and , of course , serious , chronic and debilitating diseases .
This is specified in Amendments Nos 3 and 7 .
Then there is a medical criterion which applies where there is no satisfactory method of diagnosis , prevention or treatment for these diseases .
I think that is an excellent criterion , and I reject Amendments Nos 33 , 34 , 35 , 41 , 42 and 43 , which seek to limit diagnostic research to curable diseases , as if it were not important to be able to recognise a disease .
That seems ridiculous , to doctors in any case .
The second issue is that of incentives .
I think they will be effective , whether it be assistance in drawing up a research protocol , exemption from registration fees - supported by Amendments Nos 11 , 14 and 21 - national incentives , fiscal for example , and above all market exclusivity for ten years , although with provision to reduce it to six years if certain criteria are no longer met or a clinically superior medicinal product is discovered .
I shall not be supporting Amendments Nos 25 , 28 and 31 , which seek to remove this criterion , because I think it will be quite simple to observe in practice .
In terms of obtaining excessive profit , I find the guarantee relevant .
I shall therefore uphold that criterion against Amendments Nos 17 , 32 , 36 , 37 and 39 which seek to remove it , but propose to pay the excessive profit - if there is one - to a research support fund for new orphan medicinal products .
And I shall be supporting Amendment No 38 , which makes it impossible to extend an authorisation to market a similar non-orphan medicinal product for the same therapeutic indication .
I am also in favour of a retroactive measure for orphan medicinal products presented before this regulation comes into force , in order to benefit the sick people concerned as early as possible .
That is the aim of Amendment No 40 .
In accordance with the proposed regulation , the designation of these orphan medicinal products will be obtained from a special committee set up within the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products .
Finally , I support Amendment No 15 , which calls for that Agency to receive a special contribution that is sufficient to cover the exemptions from registration fees and is intended to maximise the incentive to carry out research in the orphan medicinal products sector and submit these applications for authorisation .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think this regulation is extremely important and useful as it will not only allow the treatment of diseases for which no diagnostic or therapeutic resources are currently available - and that includes vaccinations of course - but it will also lead to research in the pharmaceutical industry that will create employment , in particular in small and medium-sized enterprises .
I therefore urge you to vote for this regulation , taking into account , of course , the amendments I have mentioned .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after lengthy preparatory work , this proposal for a regulation is a step in the right direction .
In accordance with a need felt by millions of patients , it aims to create favourable conditions at Community level for research into and the development and marketing of medicinal products to treat rare diseases .
First and foremost , the development of treatment possibilities for patients requires that the field of application of the regulation be extended as far as possible , in particular to new indications even for well-known pharmaceutical products and forms of treatment .
Since most of the applications come from small and medium-sized enterprises , at least in the United States , it would be appropriate for the Commission to specify special conditions for the SMEs so as to step up the use of funds earmarked under the fifth framework programme and the programme of Community action on rare diseases .
We agree completely with the idea of full access to the centralised procedure , without this becoming binding , and a partial or total exemption from the payment of fees to the Agency , provided that it is guaranteed an adequate supply of funds , and we would hope that this financial incentive would also be adopted by the Member States in the event of the mutual recognition procedure being applied . This should explicitly be laid down in the regulation , at least in the form of an emphatic recommendation to the Member States .
Exclusivity is one of the lynchpins of any system of incentives and hence should be extended to every application , in particular to new indications for well-known medicines , so as to encourage research in fields which otherwise would not be exploited for lack of adequate patent protection , provided that the criteria set out in Articles 3 ( 1 ) and 3 ( 2 ) are respected , especially in the case of well-known drugs .

The concept of a ' similar medical product ' should be given a more detailed scientific definition in order to take into account current scientific developments and the characteristics of the products .
Only through cooperation between the private and the public sector and the creation of favourable conditions for research into new medicines , with the help of treatment and diagnosis , can we respond to the patients ' needs .
Mr President , Europe is finally catching up with the United States , which has for some time been encouraging the research , manufacture and marketing of medicinal products intended for the diagnosis and treatment of rare disorders which - although affecting only a small number of people - are serious , incapacitating and often fatal .
We note with satisfaction that the Commission has kept its word to Parliament and , after the adoption of the provisions on rare diseases , has presented to Parliament and the Council a draft regulation intended to steer the industry towards researching and manufacturing medicinal products which are unlikely to be profitable , given the narrow user base .
In this way , the European Union as an institution is meeting its commitment - laid down in the Maastricht Treaty and consolidated in the Amsterdam Treaty - to contribute to ensuring a high level of health protection for all European people ; it is also , for humanity as a whole , assuming the responsibilities deriving from its economic and cultural strength .
Biomedical science has made tremendous progress and yet , in the case of certain genetic diseases and rare disorders , our degree of impotence is unacceptable to patients ' families , who feel abandoned and betrayed .
The families have achieved a good deal by grouping together and organising themselves .
Celebrities from political and artistic circles have joined them in collecting funds for research : we need only think of the growing role , year by year , of initiatives such as ' Telethon ' .
The European Union cannot shirk its duty , which is not to take over the role of private manufacturers in the individual Member States , but to draw all the necessary strands together .
To this end , the measures provided for in this regulation will be complemented by Community funding under the fifth R & D framework programme .
The main incentives will be market exclusivity for ten years , awarded to the manufacturing company on certain conditions , assistance from the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products , exemption from paying all or part of the fees due , and the possibility of tax incentives - albeit at national level .
Having pressed the Commission to present this proposal , the Socialist Group - to which I have the privilege of belonging - now supports it enthusiastically . We would stress that the final version of the regulation must prioritise scientific and humanitarian bodies rather than economic ones .
In other words , the caution required in a field such as this must not cause difficulties in offering incentives or implementing the provisions , which must be formulated and read in such a way as to open the door wide to the research , manufacture and marketing of medicinal products to treat rare disorders .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I should like to express our full support for the proposal for a regulation put forward by the European Commission .
It responds to a social need and to long-standing requests by patients ' groups .
Incidentally , I believe that those groups deserve special public commendation here and now , in the House , for their excellent support of the parliamentary work we all carry out .
For his part , Professor Cabrol has prepared an excellent report . We are happy to support its general approach and agree with its main conclusions .
Nevertheless , we have tabled a number of amendments aimed at increasing the effectiveness of the regulation .
I should also highlight the fact that there has been an excellent climate of cooperation and agreement amongst all the political groups represented in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
In my view , it is important to accept the amendment that allows the committee on orphan medicinal products envisaged in the Commission 's proposal to operate under the aegis of the European Agency for the Assessment of Medicines .
This would lead to increased efficiency whilst the Commission 's powers would remain intact .
It is also important to make adequate financial resources available in the European Union 's budget on a regular and permanent basis .
Amendment No 18 , which I tabled , aims to create a fund to promote innovation , Mr Bangemann .
The intention here is to respond to the demands of efficiency and demands of an ethical nature .
Once the period of special protection for these orphan medicinal products has elapsed , it is only reasonable that part of the income from them should be used to build up a fund which will continue to support this regulation and new orphan medicinal products . This will in fact provide better treatment and respond to what could be called society 's ethical demand for continued operation .
I urge the Commission to study the operational experience gained in the United States and Japan .
Our proposal must be in line with our own European identity and the restrictions imposed by Community legislation and our institutions .
I believe it is workable , though it may be somewhat complicated .
I hope that the Commission will welcome this idea with the high degree of efficiency we have come to expect of it and I should like to thank the Commission in advance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is just as difficult and costs just as much to find a treatment and develop a medicinal product which will save a few human lives as it does to market a medicinal product which will save millions of lives .
If we want to do more than simply fight a lot of very common diseases but also help those who suffer from one of the 5 000 identified rare diseases , then we have to give the necessary incentives to the industry .
And we should not forget that today 's rare condition may become tomorrow 's far commoner disease .
So we must encourage research into these rare diseases by assuring investors of a measure of exclusivity and allowing them advantageous tax treatment .
The regulation is certainly a step in the right direction , but I think the Commission needs to rethink its definition of ' orphan medicinal products ' .
A number of other Members as well as myself have tabled amendments on this .
Perhaps a compromise amongst the various suggestions can produce a better definition .
Together with Mrs Dybkjær , I have also tabled an amendment which provides for the industry to be given an extra incentive in the case of a disease which has around three thousand sufferers in Europe .
We suggest that the pharmaceutical industry should receive six months ' additional patent protection for another medicinal product which it places on the market , if it develops a remedy to treat an extremely rare disease .
I hope a majority of the House will back this amendment , and I would welcome Mr Bangemann 's opinion on it .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Cabrol , on the excellent work he has done on this subject .
Secondly , I want to say that I am particularly pleased about the creation of a Committee for Orphan Medicinal Products .
However , questions may arise as to the composition of this committee , the way it operates , and the real weight it will carry , in other words , at the end of the day , what resources will effectively be made available to the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products .
There is one other point I need to mention . There has been an attempt to float the idea of unreasonable profits .
I am no fanatical defender of profits for pharmaceutical industry multinationals .
All the same , I find this idea utterly arbitrary . As regards the planned ten-year period , if there is a review at the end of the fifth year - which seems appropriate - then rather than assess the profits it should check that the therapeutic indications have not been extended and that the prevalence has not changed .
If these two factors are taken into account our group will vote for this resolution .
Mr President , there has been no willingness to invest substantially in pharmaceutical research into some 500 diseases , afflicting a limited number of people , or to comply with the existing procedures , because it is well known that the end product - which is subject to various evaluations and must absorb high manufacturing costs - will be of relevance only to the few people who suffer from a rare disease .
As the United States is now at the forefront of clinical and pharmacological research , it has become a model of contemporary society in several respects . That country has had extremely successful legislation on orphan medicinal products since 1983 .
The EU is now hoping to follow suit , through Professor Cabrol 's report .
No fewer than 837 drugs have been designated ' orphan medicinal products ' in the US over the past decade . Research and experimentation on these products - which we are discussing today - has been facilitated in various ways , contributing to the identification and knowledge of previously unknown etiologies and hence their treatments .
The question is what incentives to offer the industry ; the main one offered by the US authorities seems to me to be tax relief , which covers almost 50 % of clinical research .
Unfortunately , rare diseases are in fact well-known diseases , although their low incidence of morbidity on the population places them in a limbo of unanswered questions .
We support Professor Cabrol 's attempt to get things moving and put the uncertainties behind us .
Moreover , on the threshold of the third millennium , it is distressing to think of patients being prevented by the market from obtaining appropriate treatments .
If this society of ours cannot express proper solidarity under such circumstances , then goodbye Europe !
Mr President , first of all , and most importantly , I should like to add my strong support for both the Commission proposal and particularly Mr Cabrol 's excellent report which is well drafted and pertinent , as his reports always are .
As my colleague Mrs Marinucci has set out , we , on this side , will maintain our approach taken in committee .
Providing meaningful incentives to ensure development of products to tackle some of the most debilitating and upsetting conditions in the world is clearly a job for a new kind of innovative , public / private partnership .
To succeed , progress must be based on epidemiological and economic criteria which have been worked out in the rather difficult passage of these proposals to this stage .
The Commission has rightly made provisions for unreasonable profit-taking to be avoided .
Although some within the pharmaceutical sector protest at the very thought that there might be any risk of that , it seems reasonable to myself and many others that the use of public resources and legal support should be absolutely transparent .
Therefore I hope that Parliament and the Council will vote to maintain the concept as part of the partnership with research and development sectors and will include the practical means for the programme decision-makers to reach fair , just and accurate conclusions which also bear in mind the generic development industry .
This is an important development in the context of the many exciting advances being made in genetic identification , treatment and , best of all , prevention of diseases .
Some of this work I saw for myself just last week in my own region .
Together with the forthcoming programme on rare diseases , plus what I hope will prove an effective new framework for public health policy over the next five years , this initiative offers realistic new hope to those who suffer pain and misery .
Credit is therefore due to all those who have worked so hard to bring this proposal before us today .
Now it is up to all of us to take responsibility for ensuring its future success on behalf of those patients who suffer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the present proposal for a regulation is certainly to be welcomed .
The hopes of many patients suffering from rare diseases rely on our obtaining a regulation on orphan drugs in Europe too as soon as possible .
We should be guided by the experiences of the USA and Japan .
We should also learn from experience .
In that sense , Mr Cabrol 's report proposes a series of improvements to the Commission proposal , although I do have problems with some of the proposed amendments .
I believe it is most important that we also include tropical diseases in Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
It is important for Europe to look further than the end of its own nose and also to consider people suffering from tropical diseases .
That is not necessarily the case under this regulation , but we must create an instrument to do so very quickly .
I have problems with the amendments that impose additional obstacles on industry in regard to obtaining orphan drug status for a particular medicine .
This applies , for instance , to Amendment No 18 , on which I would be interested to hear the Commission 's view .
My impression is that if we siphon off the revenue obtained by industry after the ten-year period , that will in turn reduce the incentive to invest in the first place and I would be interested to know whether things really work in the USA in the way suggested in that amendment .
Personally I doubt it .
Finally , I want to raise the question of diagnosis , which we have already had occasion to consider in committee .
I believe I can say from my own experience that particularly in the case of genetically-related diseases - which after all means most of the rare diseases - the patients are waiting for prevention and treatment while we , if we only have diagnosis but no corresponding prevention or treatment , sometimes actually produce problems .
That is why I personally am in favour of giving priority to treatment and only supporting diagnosis if treatment or prevention are also available .
For the rest , however , we should certainly support Mr Cabrol 's report and the proposal for a regulation and should not jeopardise the entire project by quarrelling about details .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a German proverb that fits the bill in the EU as regards orphan drugs . It goes as follows : if you go on long enough , it will be alright in the end .
It took the Commission long enough to present a proposal for a European orphan drug act .
What I expect of this regulation is that it will provide a strong incentive for the development of these medicines and therefore for research into molecular biology .
Unfortunately , the Commission felt it was unable to follow the US model in regard to providing additional tax relief , tax relief at least in the sense of definite recommendations for action on the part of the Member States .
I would certainly be interested to know whether the Commission sees any possibility of doing so .
But experiences in the USA show that tax advantages offer the most effective stimulus for investment in orphan drug development .
In general terms , the reasons for EU-wide tax harmonisation are accumulating by the day and the orphan drug regulation is another reason .
It would also be a good idea to set up a special fund for additional support for the development of these medicines .
There are no bounds to what we could imagine here , even if a certain amount of state dirigisme is required to achieve our aims .
Mr President , we are very happy about the very positive response to our proposal .
The rapporteur has done much towards achieving this , thanks to his very careful work .
Since we are now at first reading , I will not go into all the amendments tabled . Instead , I will take up the most important ones that were raised during the discussion and explain why the Commission does not regard some of them as very useful .
First of all , everyone realises - and this became clear during the discussion - that we need this proposal because market mechanisms alone cannot produce useful results in the cases we are dealing with here , the so-called orphan drugs .
And that is perfectly understandable .
The fact is that research in particular is becoming increasingly expensive and if by definition this expenditure cannot be recouped at all , then of course nobody working in the private sector can be expected to take it on board .
For the rest , we have been trying for many years to control and counter this situation .
It is not the case that nothing has been done in past years .
We have made quite substantial funds available for research in these areas in the research programmes , in the third and fourth framework programmes of research .
The fact that we are only now proposing this regulation - I believe the American legislation has existed since 1983 - does not mean that we have done nothing since then .
But it is clear that with the experience we have gained from America we can perhaps present an improved proposal now .
The problem is easy to describe .
Since there are no economic incentives , we have to compensate for this .
Of course we can do so directly through support for research , and we shall continue to do so in future .
Even more emphasis has been put on this kind of research in the fifth framework programme .
In that respect the situation there has not changed , and if it has , only for the good .
But we also want to create a range of additional incentives , for instance through the ten-year market exclusivity right .
This kind of market exclusivity right does of course offer an additional opportunity to make profits , but since this market is by definition very small , nobody can in fact count on making enormous profits .
On the contrary , the opportunities to do so will be fairly restricted .
Nevertheless , these ten years are a key element and cornerstone of our system of incentives for research and development in the area of orphan drugs , which indeed are also found in a very similar form in the other existing legislation .
We cannot propose any tax relief , at least not at this stage , because it is not up to us to decide this . The Member States would have to do so .
At this point we want to wait and see what the effects are of these experiences .
Tax relief is always a very convenient way of creating incentives .
Here we have a whole range of options that are at least equally effective .
Access to the centralised procedure , in particular reduction of the fees - and here I agree with Mrs Heinisch - is of crucial importance to small and medium-sized enterprises , who often complain of these fees .
The fees can be waived in part or in whole .
The Agency in London can also be of assistance in developing a protocol for trials and we believe this can certainly lead to useful support .
I am very glad that some Members also spoke in favour of a special committee , during the debate .
We believe that this is such a specialised problem that we need this kind of committee and cannot and should not use the committees normally available .
We have proposed two kinds of criteria .
Of course you can always try to formulate others .
But then you must remember the aim of our proposal .
We want to support research .
We want to make it more attractive , which is why we believe that the right criteria are epidemiological criteria , because they are objective and in particular because they can easily be applied at an early stage of product development .
There are problems with economic criteria .
Forecasts and projections can hardly be made before the expiry of the ten-year period .
Of course we would have to call for considerable transparency on the part of the undertakings , which they are not always prepared to agree to , in order to be able to make these forecasts and projections .
As I said , we are at first reading .
Let me begin by telling you which amendments we can accept .
There is a whole series of them : Nos 4 , 5 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 17 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 29 , 32 , 38 and 9 in part .
Then I want to make a few comments on the amendments we cannot accept , beginning with No 6 , which sets out an additional economic criterion .
I already said that it is not very attractive , it makes the whole trial procedure more difficult and after all we have learned from the American experience .
The USA had a similar criterion , which did not prove successful .
It did not work .
That is why we want to support research rather than make it more difficult .
That is why we do not want to accept that amendment .
I will now look at the second group , concerning diagnosis , namely Amendments Nos 33 , 34 , 35 , 41 and 42 .
They all aim to exclude medicines for diagnostic purposes where no procedure exists for the treatment or prevention of the disease to be diagnosed .
That could mean that we were preventing access to diagnosis , with the result that no appropriate treatment could be developed .
We believe that is a risk we should not necessarily take on .
Then we come to the question of the fund , which has also been raised during the debate .
It concerns Amendment No 18 .
In our view , the idea of a special fund that could be set up from the proceeds from the sale of orphan drugs following the expiry of the ten-year period of market exclusivity could reduce the potential interest of undertakings , which would mean that we would still not have enough resources available in the fund , because the proceeds would not be enormous .
For by definition an orphan drug is precisely a drug that offers very limited prospects of making a profit .
I will turn now to the measures for tropical diseases , which have also been mentioned .
Of course we support the view that specific measures to support research in developing countries are useful .
But we do not take the view that including a corresponding reference to this in a recital can produce that result .
It would mean that , as unfortunately happens so often when we submit a detailed proposal , its scope is broadened because people want to take the opportunity to include a whole lot of other problems .
But that is not a very logical way to make legislation .
That is why we hope we can come back to this question of tropical diseases .
For the rest we can say that research into and consideration of tropical diseases is traditionally in the very best hands in the European Union .
It is not the case that we have not lived up to our obligations here to date .
But if Parliament so wishes , we can of course take another look at the question of how we can further improve this specific area of research into pharmaceutical products .
Mr President , may I have an answer from Mr Bangemann to the question I asked concerning his thoughts on Amendment No 30 which I have tabled with Mrs Dybkjær .
This asks for a pharmaceutical company to be given an additional or extended period of six months ' protection on a patent if it develops an orphan medicinal product - in other words , a further six months ' protection for another product already introduced or marketed .
I did not go into this matter directly .
As I already said , this is the first reading .
That is why I did not want to go into all the amendments .
That is more or less the same argument I put forward in regard to tax relief and against the fund in general .
I have already spoken against the fund .
If additional patent protection is to be introduced , for instance in the event of the development of treatments or of the returns flowing back into a special fund , we would virtually be precluding competition from generic drugs .
After all , that is what always happens .
Once a medicinal product has been developed , researched and authorised , the ten-year market exclusivity , which can in addition become a patent protection period , applies in all cases and the result is that during that period of protection no generic drugs can come onto the market .
But if this period were further extended , that would have adverse effects .
For generic drugs at the end of a patent or other protection period are of course useful .
They may have additional effects , but at any rate they tend to be a little cheaper .
That is why we do not regard this amendment as useful , because it would preclude the supply of generic drugs once the protection period has expired .
In our view that cannot be the purpose of the proposal .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
Electromagnetic fields
The next item is the report ( A4-0101 / 99 ) by Mr Tamino , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Recommendation on the limitation of exposure of the general public to electromagnetic fields 0 Hz - 300 GHz ( COM ( 98 ) 0268 - C4-0427 / 98-98 / 0166 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , no one can have missed all the press coverage of electromagnetic pollution over the past few years ; public opinion is very alive to this issue .
The reason why electromagnetic pollution is currently attracting public attention is that , unlike other forms of pollution , it cannot be seen and does not smell .
People are not aware of it ; they can just see appliances which could be the cause of such pollution .
It was established 20 years ago , thanks to the work of Nancy Wertheimer in Colorado , that electromagnetic fields could have not only direct effects , causing damage due to heating - acute thermal effects , as they are called - but also long-term effects , leading to leukaemia and cancer .
It was partly because of these concerns that , during the last parliamentary term , Messrs Vernier , Santos and Pimenta tabled a resolution which then became the report by Mr Lannoye , adopted on 5 May 1994 .
Parliament established certain facts in that report , including the need to apply the precautionary principle to EMF effects on the population .
In response to Parliament 's report , the Commission saw fit to present a recommendation - now under discussion - concerning the entire radiation spectrum from 0 Hz to 300 Ghz .
As was pointed out in our Environment Committee , this recommendation lays down limits for acute thermal effects only .
With regard to long-term non-thermal effects , however , it is considered on the basis of opinions from certain international bodies that there is insufficient evidence to lay down limits for such exposure .
Clearly , in a formal sense , most of the evidence could be said to prove incontrovertibly that electromagnetic fields cause thermal effects ; after all , everyone knows that microwave ovens are used for heating food .
But as regards long-term effects , the current wide-ranging debate has brought to light many scientific investigations , some epidemiological and others related specifically to cells and tissue , in vitro as well as in vivo , which indicate a probable EMF effect on cellular connections .
This could cause the epidemiological effects which have resulted in leukaemia and cancer , as well as several other forms of long-term damage , such as nervous disorders , amnesia and so on .
The public is concerned not only about fixed installations such as electricity transmission lines , television transmitters and mobile phone antennas , but also about the fact that we are continually in contact with domestic appliances and other devices which emit electromagnetic fields ; the best-known one at present is perhaps the mobile phone , currently the subject of much debate .
For these reasons , Parliament 's Environment Committee decided to table various amendments to the Commission recommendation , so as to take long-term effects into account .
First of all , the committee proposes taking into account the health of workers and consumer protection , by introducing the precautionary principle and the principle that the best available technology should be used so as to keep radiation as low as possible .
Next , the committee draws attention to the large existing body of scientific documentation on the application of the precautionary principle and , hence , the need to review the data and to keep it under regular review , as well as the need for reporting to the European Parliament .
It also calls for higher levels of protection in areas where the public spend significant time , and for minimum distances from fixed installations and appliances to be laid down .
It is however also true to say that the Environment Committee did not come up with any clear or precise data on ways of protecting the public from long-term exposure .
That concludes my presentation - which is also on behalf of my group - of certain amendments which take account of long-term effects and others , on the basis of the precautionary principle and of safety levels adopted in some countries , such as Italy and Sweden .
This is the thrust of Amendments Nos 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 21 and 22 .
Mr President , this is a recommendation and not a directive .
As such it may not be transformed into a more serious piece of legislation for some years .
The main emphasis that Mr Tamino has quite properly laid in his report , which is entirely endorsed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , is that the precautionary principle must apply .
And here this principle inevitably means scrutiny , scrutiny and scrutiny .
It is a powerful infant industry we are dealing with , in particular when we consider many of the reservations about mobile telephones .
We appreciate its economic importance .
Speaking not only for my group but for the majority of the Committee on the Environment , I can say that we did not think that the levels set by Mr Tamino were practical at this stage .
They would , in effect , have meant the elimination of many electronic devices which are used in the home , as well as taking a major stand against electricity pylons and the industry as a whole .
However , we believe that it is absolutely necessary to monitor these devices and the Committee on the Environment 's amendments have attempted to set out precisely why and how .
I will read Amendment No 9 to the House .
If anything carries the spirit of what Mr Tamino is attempting to do and what we endorse it would be Amendment No 9 as adopted by the Committee on the Environment .
It says that Member States should ' lay down minimum safety distances from electrical equipment and minimum distances from public buildings , housing and workplaces for the siting of high-voltage transmission lines , radar equipment and broadcasting and rebroadcasting transmitters , including cellular phone base stations and shall set down the recommended safety distances for use ' .
Such recommendations should be ' displayed on the product concerned , paying particular attention - because of the proximity and length of exposure involved - to mobile telephones ' .
These measures have to be taken immediately and the process of monitoring should thereafter be continuous .
All of us would wish to see by 2001 - not in four or five years ' time or ten years ' time but within the space of 18 months - a further review of the safety measures used and of these instruments themselves .
There are widespread public misgivings .
There are a number of studies now which begin to suggest further cause for concern .
When we referred this matter to Dr Michael Repacholi who carried out one of the original studies in Australia on the possible inducing of cancer in rats , he said that he believed that the standards now set down on the WHO guidelines were sufficient .
However , I believe we should further monitor this situation in the interests of the public , consumers and public safety generally .
We shall adjourn the debate at this point for voting time .
It will be resumed at 3 p.m.
VOTES
Madam President , Amendment No 1 tabled by the Europe of Nations Group states that ' young people still consider the family as their main reference framework ' . I would like to amend this orally to read ' young people still consider the family as part of their main reference framework ' .
Madam President , we have no objection to this oral amendment . We accept it .
I would just mention that in our amendment we merely followed Mrs Hermange 's wording .
Parliament adopted the resolution
Madam President , in yesterday 's debate I ended my introduction by asking the Commission to give a clear and firm commitment , before the vote on the legislative proposal , to accept the two paragraphs of our draft legislative resolution .
First there is the paragraph inviting the Commission to withdraw its proposal .
We are sorry to hear from Mrs Gradin that Mr Flynn cannot be here , but she has explained that he intended to propose withdrawing the proposal to amend the 1976 directive .
I do not know whether that formula is to do with the internal organisation of the Commission .
Is Mr Flynn required to propose withdrawal of the proposal to the Commission , which we know to be a college after all the debates we have had on the subject ?
If he does so , can we be sure the college will back him ?
It is very important for us to know that .
If the Commission had told us it was withdrawing the proposal , that would have been fine . But it is telling us it is going to propose - I do not know to whom , to itself , I suppose - to withdraw the proposal to amend the 1976 directive , which we consider dangerous for positive action , and I want to know whether the Commission is effectively going to withdraw this proposal .
Is it going to back Mr Flynn ?
Secondly , ...
Mixed reactions
I am sorry , but this is very important .
You may think issues of equal opportunity for men and women do not matter much . Well , I want to point out to the male majority here that they will soon need positive action too , because the professions are becoming more predominantly female .
In my country there are hardly any male teachers in primary schools and hardly any male magistrates left .
So positive action is not just for women . It is for under-represented sexes and you will soon be an under-represented sex .
So you need to realise that positive action is for you as well .
Applause
Mrs Lulling , I think that Commissioner Pinheiro has heard you loud and clear and that he will be able to enlighten us not on the state of mind of Mr Flynn , but simply as to whether , in accordance with Rule 59 , the Commission will or will not withdraw its proposal for a directive .
I would therefore ask Mr Pinheiro to enlighten us , if he can , on this specific point .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am able to announce that the Commission will be withdrawing its proposal as requested by the Committee on Women 's Rights .
I am also able to tell you that my colleague , Mr Flynn , intends to legislate under Article 141 and will obviously do so in a spirit of greater cooperation with the European Parliament .
Madam President , in that case we will trust the Commission to withdraw its proposal and put forward a proposal for a directive on the basis of Article 141 .
Mrs Gradin still had some qualms and reservations but we now think this proposal for a directive will come to us on the basis of Article 141 .
I can therefore propose that Parliament vote not on the three articles , but on the draft legislative resolution as a whole .
Parliament adopted the legislative resolution
Madam President , in the Swedish version of Amendment No 4 there is an unfortunate mistake .
It reads ' uppmanar medlemsstaterna att ... under vissa omständigheter ... '
We have requested that these last three words ' under certain conditions ' should be deleted .
It is therefore very odd that the original text has been retained in this amendment .
I would like to draw this to the attention of all Swedish Members .
We shall see .
If the amendment is adopted , then of course we will make the correction .
We shall take care to do that .
Madam President , this is very important .
The French text states that Parliament calls on the Member States to legalise induced abortion ' under certain conditions ' , and we are asking for a separate vote on the phrase ' under certain conditions ' .
The English text has ' in certain circumstances ' , which is quite different .
There is a difference between ' in certain circumstances ' and ' under certain conditions ' .
The authentic text is ' under certain conditions ' .
That needs to be made very clear .
Obviously we do not want to legalise abortion wholesale , without conditions , at least not in my group .
So it has to be ' under certain conditions ' .
Normally , the version deemed authentic is that in the language of the rapporteur , who is Mrs Hautala , unless she drew up her original text in a language other than Finnish .
We shall of course carry out a check , when the vote has taken place , so that everything is brought into line with the original text .
Parliament adopted the resolution
We have voted against the report for the following reasons :
1.Negotiations between the governments on the reform of agricultural policy are still in progress and will be resumed today .
There is no reason for Parliament to comment on individual sections of agricultural policy in the current situation.2.Special decisions which benefit some Members States pose a threat to the reform process as a whole.3.Parliament should not make pronouncements on increased assistance for some countries when the objective is to lessen the heavy burden imposed on the Union 's agricultural policy .
In this report , the rapporteur describes the future harmonisation of taxes and tax systems .
Through this explanation of vote , we wish to make it clear that taxation is a national responsibility and therefore does not come within the EU 's field of competence .
Members of the Europe of Nations Group are particularly interested in small and medium-sized enterprises . They are a central factor in development and the keystone of employment in European Union countries .
In the European Union 99 % of companies have fewer than 250 employees and they represent 66 % of total employment .
Almost all of them contributed to net job creation during the period 1988-1995 .
At some stage in their development all SMEs experience problems arising from their weak capital resources . So risk capital needs to be developed .
If we take the United States as an example , of seven million jobs created in that country between 1991 and 1995 , six million were the result of new SMEs starting up .
Some of them have become large companies , even world leaders , in the high-technology sector .
In the United States it is easy for an SME to obtain access to risk capital .
Things are very different today in European Union countries , where SMEs with competitive advantages in terms of high technology are penalised in this respect .
So entrepreneurs must be able to access start-up capital , then intermediate and development capital as the company expands , and , finally , they must be able to access institutional and private investors supported by a sizeable European financial market .
At Community level , the absence of legislation on venture capital funds is an obstacle to the operation of the market .
Existing Community financial regulations are too fragmented and are lacking in terms of both readability and consistency .
We might do well here to draw on the experience of the United States , which created a national control body - the Security and Exchange Commission - by establishing a regulatory body responsible for harmonising the provisions of national regulations so as to allow secondary financial markets to develop .
In addition to the finance that venture capitalists can mobilise , there is also a vital need for mentorship in terms of management .
Finance and mentorship should go hand in hand .
A simple but effective way for the investor to reduce risk is to be directly or indirectly involved in the daily management of his or her investment and to give the entrepreneur real support .
But the Europe of Nations Group would like to highlight the contradiction we face .
We are all aware of the role of SMEs , and we often boast of their economic success and the major role they play in creating jobs , but when we are dealing with environmental standards , technical standards and administrative measures , the majority in our Parliament does not pay enough attention to the concerns of entrepreneurs and their special responsibilities .
Entrepreneurs take major risks with few guarantees , either in terms of welfare payments and or in terms of retaining their family property .
A long process of contacts and consultations with the arts world in a good many European countries ( not just the 15 Member States ) is coming to a close .
The ground had barely been explored previously .
Not even the Member States seem to be aware of the potential contribution by their artists to their own quality of life and nor do the artists themselves seem eager to emerge from their own circles and discover other practices and other countries .
Not only are the various national laws on the status of artists diverse and incomplete , but also the Member States have not made the slightest effort to work together to make it easier for artists , their works and productions to circulate .
At least now an attempt has been made to pinpoint the problems and outline possible approaches for political action in the future .
By taking the initiative to produce this report , the Committee on Culture set out to equip the European institutions - at the vital moment of enlargement and the definition of a new political and financial framework - with a political instrument that will have a huge impact if only they know how to use it .
An ongoing coordinated policy supporting and promoting artistic creation and education may be the missing factor needed by European society to make the leap into the 21st century .
The fight against violence and exclusion relies upon it .
This report by Mrs Guinebertière , as amended by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , lays the foundations of a genuine integrated and comprehensive youth policy .
Community cooperation policy for youth has undeniably achieved a great deal in terms of education , vocational training and exchanges through the Socrates , Leonardo and Youth for Europe programmes ( and we should add the European voluntary service initiative to that ) . But these achievements are still not enough to meet the specific needs of young people .
Highlighting the need for education and training for all , however essential that may be , is not sufficient to create a youth policy .
Complementary issues need to be considered , such as creativity , civic education , learning about tolerance and democracy , health and housing .
Our rapporteur sets out these objectives very clearly , while respecting the necessary complementarity and added value that Europe brings to the ' plinth ' formed by the Member States .
Hence her appeal to the Member States to draw up ' national plans for young people ' , similar to those they drew up for employment .
The Commission 's role , after evaluating the national youth policies , is to disseminate information about best practice and the most successful examples within the European Union .
All of this can assist the creation of innovative projects , by and for young people , and encourage young people 's spirit of enterprise .
Youth policy at Union level must be designed to pay greater attention to young people and involve them more in decisions through youth groups . I will therefore be voting for this report , which gives us an overall view of what that European policy might be at the dawn of the 21st century .
Madam President , I voted against the Hautala report , or rather against all the amendments except those tabled by the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , out of inner conviction .
As Christians we cannot pronounce against life and the unborn child is just as alive as the child that has been born .
This is something we find quite simply intolerable , which is why I voted against out of my innermost conviction .
Today we are in the minority .
Perhaps we will be in the majority one day , for in the long term this situation will be a great disaster for our population .
Let me also say that I am not against women , for whom I have infinite respect .
I have seven children and 18 grandchildren .
So you can imagine how much I respect my wife . All I want to say here is that this is precisely why I voted against the Hautala report .
Madam President , there are many aspects of this report which I support because it addresses serious problems in relation to women 's health .
However , I cannot support the reference to abortion .
The European Union has absolutely no competence in this area .
It cannot interfere in the policy of individual Member States in this sensitive area , nor , I believe , would it wish to do so .
This is formally stated in the Treaties in reference to public policy , which is reserved exclusively for the Member States .
Member States have an absolute right to legislate in matters of public policy .
As far as my own personal position is concerned , I have voted in accordance with my own conscience , which is that I am opposed to abortion .
However , just as I am guided by my own conscience , I do not presume to pass judgement on how other people will act in relation to their own consciences and in very difficult circumstances .
I have also supported paragraph 10 , simply because if one wants to reduce the number of abortions , one should recognise the right of individuals to avail of counselling about sex education , including counselling about responsibilities in relationships and information about contraception .
I was guided by these particular principles when I voted on this important report .
Madam President , I greatly regret that the Hautala report was debated yesterday , on International Women 's Day , because I do not believe it really contributes to the dignity and honour of women ; it is in fact a disgrace .
It is surely rather curious for a report on women 's health to call for the alleged right to abortion .
For me , health policy means saving lives and not destroying them .
If a report on women 's health does refer to abortion in the first place , then in my view there should also be some discussion of the effects of post-abortion syndrome .
But the harmful psychological effects that abortions have on women are deliberately and constantly concealed .
Pregnancy is not an illness !
It is absurd to posit a so-called women 's right to go against the right to life , which applies to everyone .
Demands of this kind abuse the dignity of women and create a culture of death , which in the final analysis rebounds against women and harms them .
For these reasons I had to vote against the Hautala report .
This excellent report throws some more light on gender-related health issues .
Furthermore , the report contains a number of specific ideas which should lead to a breakthrough as regards the status of gender in health .
However , there is one issue , outlined in paragraph 11 , which clearly detracts from the report 's otherwise good intentions .
Entitlement to free abortions equates with women having the right to manage their lives and make decisions about their own bodies .
It should always be the woman 's choice as to whether she wishes to terminate her pregnancy .
Every day , 500 women die from the complications that arise as a result of illegal and risky abortions .
The only way to deal with the problem is to give women access to contraceptives and safe , legal abortions .
In our view , the right to free abortions should be unconditional .
Generally speaking , we think that Mrs Hautala 's report on the state of women 's health is a good one .
It points out some of the illnesses faced by women and also puts forward some proposals about how certain policies could be adapted so that consideration is given to women 's special needs .
However , we have problems with some parts of the report , for example the sections where the Commission is called upon to ensure that regular check-ups for breast and uterine cancer are free and repeated at intervals , where attention is drawn to the benefits and side-effects of hormone replacement therapy in connection with menstruation problems , and where the demand is made for the sexual rights of women to be safeguarded .
We believe that these are matters which should be dealt with by the Member States .
However , we can fully support these measures , as long as they are carried out at national level .
On the basis of the above considerations , we have decided not to vote against the report .
By means of the Hautala report the European Parliament has expressed its legitimate interest in the state of women 's health in the Community .
Given the stresses of contemporary society and the increasing responsibilities women rightly have within it , it is important to recognise in this way the specific health problems women are facing , or are liable to face .
Unfortunately , the Committee on Women 's Rights and the European Parliament thought fit to include abortion in the list of problems .
In chairing the meeting , Mrs Fontaine herself recognised that this was a ' sensitive ' issue .
Is it right that the life of a child in its mother 's womb should be dealt with surreptitiously , as one point among so many others , in a report examined between a request for waiver of immunity and a communication from the Commission ?
There is no easy answer to the painful issue of abortion .
Respect for all life should make us act responsibly when faced with the distress some mothers suffer , as well as welcoming life which only women have the joy of giving , though not without the intervention of a man ; this is a fact that we must unfortunately point out , since the affirmation of women 's rights can lead to the rights - and duties - of fathers being overlooked .
At any rate , this subject should at least be dealt with more objectively and seriously than has been the case today .
Finally , I am sorry to find some on the left applauding this text , just as they applaud the liberalisation of the ' drug market ' or the recognition of euthanasia , seeing this as progress in our society while in fact only a terrible culture of death is gaining ground .
I am equally sorry to find some on the right again showing disdain for convictions so often proclaimed ... in the corridors .
What emerges from Mrs Hautala 's report is that men and women are not equal when it comes to illness .
This means a specific health policy for each sex is absolutely essential .
The report deals with work by the European Commission which takes account of this requirement for the first time . That can only be a source of satisfaction .
The European Commission must continue to forge ahead , paying special attention to the problem of women 's health in its new action programme on health .
Some health problems concern only , or mainly , women .
Specific measures are therefore needed .
I would also like to highlight the new eating disorders which are wreaking havoc among adolescents .
It is deplorable that the European Commission 's report does not give them higher priority .
Women live five years longer than men on average and are more affected by physical and psychological problems linked to ageing .
As a member of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , I would like to mention that the fifth framework programme provides funding for research to meet the challenge of ageing population .
Finally , we must take account of the fact that unemployment , which is more frequent amongst women , job insecurity and poor social security cover have repercussions on women 's health .
It is well known that health care is virtually a luxury for people with limited means .
That is absolutely intolerable .
So we must implement a global approach that includes both a specific health policy for women and employment and social security policies which incorporate a health dimension .
I will conclude by giving the rapporteur my full support on making domestic violence against women a criminal offence .
We naturally welcome the fact that the Commission has chosen the state of women 's health as the subject of its first specific report .
Too often , in fact , the issue of health is approached globally , disregarding the specific needs of each sex .
So I fully support the demand for regular assessment of the gender impact in all health budgets , programmes and projects .
I think it is particularly important to emphasise how much the state of women 's health may depend not on the specific physiology of their sex but on socio-economic disparities that are objectively quantifiable and verifiable . Member States need to recognise this and remedy the situation by means of appropriate policies and measures .
Domestic violence - including marital rape and sexual mutilation - also constitutes a particularly worrying attack on women 's health and we need to put maximum effort into combating it .
In fact this must be a fundamental dimension of Community-funded campaigns for combating violence against women .
In the same spirit , I share the rapporteur 's conviction that Member States must implement all necessary measures , including criminal prosecution , to eradicate this evil and help the women who are victims of it .
In conclusion , and more generally , I want to stress the importance of prevention as a means of fighting early deterioration of health in general , and the consequent importance of the kind of society we want for ourselves and our children .
As a Danish Conservative , I have abstained from voting on this report because in principle I take the view that the subject primarily concerns matters which should be decided by each of the Member States individually .
If the principle of subsidiarity is to have any meaning , it must be applied to matters of this nature .
I am thinking here , amongst other things , of issues such as the law on abortion .
Every woman should have the right to decide under national legislation .
It is the women themselves who should decide whether or not to have an abortion .
The rapporteur starts by observing that the Beijing Conference , the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Commission communication of February 1996 , the Luxembourg European Council in 1997 and the Cardiff summit in June 1998 have all stressed the need to ensure equal opportunities for men and women .
This involves bringing about fundamental changes of both an external and internal nature to and in the existing institutions . ' Quite simply , what is involved is a power struggle .
A redistribution which is as difficult for those with power to accept as the struggle to redistribute economic resources from the haves to the have-nots . '
This objective requires a comprehensive approach to policy making and the mobilisation of all policy actors .
It involves a systematic rather than an individual approach , which is why the rapporteur is calling on the Commission to develop an evaluation method to identify the impact of all Community policies and measures on gender equality .
She also asks for gender relevant statistics and for the Member States to act in a similar manner .
The rapporteur also calls on the Commission to identify the circumstances and reasons why , for equal work , women are valued lower than men in terms of pay .
In addition , she gives specific examples of how to promote gender equality in various policy fields , in particular by setting aside a percentage of the Structural Funds for measures specifically for women or by treating social services which provide child care and care for the elderly as infrastructural requirements .
Similarly , in public contracting , tenders should indicate how many jobs per year the project will create and how these jobs will be divided between women and men , and so on .
Finally , the rapporteur calls for a working party to be set up between Parliament and the Commission to promote the objective of equality in all spheres of activity of the institutions .
There are therefore plenty of reasons to vote for this report .
Mrs Eriksson 's report is intended to follow up the communication on ' Incorporating equal opportunities for women and men into all Community policies and activities ' .
As may be expected , this involves underlining the current shortcomings and the subsequent requirements .
The rapporteur 's requests include the following : an evaluation method to identify the impact of the measures taken ; the implementation by the Member States of the recommendation on the balanced participation of women and men in the decision-making process ; the identification by the Commission of the reasons why women with equivalent qualifications are valued lower than men in terms of pay , and the setting up of a working party between Parliament and the Commission to promote the objective of equality between women and men in all spheres of activity of the institutions .
Mrs Lulling 's report on the ' proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 76 / 207 / EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions ' is radical , and rightly so .
It rejects the Commission proposal which is based on the European Court of Justice ruling on the Kalanke case and it calls for a new proposal for a directive based instead on the Treaty of Amsterdam and on recognition of the collective nature of the positive action measures needed in order to achieve equal treatment and opportunities for men and women .
On the basis of the Kalanke and Marschall rulings , the rapporteur rightly concludes that ' only rigid , inflexible and automatic positive discrimination granting the absolute and unconditional right to appoint or promote women where they are under-represented would be incompatible with Community law ' .
She consequently calls on the Commission to await the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam which requires the Community to eliminate all inequalities and to promote equality between men and women and which allows Member States to maintain and adopt positive action measures in favour of the under-represented sex .
The Commission must withdraw its now outdated proposal and present a new directive which clearly must be based on the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Only constant vigilance on our part to ensure that our equality requirements become reality will allow us to fight against the ever-prevalent spirit of conservatism .
To a certain extent , ensuring equal opportunities for men and women is like trying to attain the unattainable .
However , equal opportunities cannot just remain an ideal but must become an objective which must be achieved .
In this respect , we welcome the fact that this objective was incorporated into the European employment strategy , as agreed in Luxembourg in November 1997 , and that the Vienna European Council called on the Member States to make tangible progress on this issue .
We clearly have a long way to go to achieve real equality as so many sexist prejudices and attitudes are still so ingrained in us and in our actions that we are not even aware of their profoundly discriminatory nature .
Without underestimating the extent and difficulty of an evaluation task which is uniquely complicated by the diversity of our cultures and traditions , I share the rapporteur 's belief that the Commission must strive to define accurate indicators and common criteria which will enable the progress made in equal opportunities to be regularly evaluated .
This work must be based on specific objectives and clear and predefined accountability mechanisms .
To change society is an ambitious objective and we must therefore firstly make sure that our own ' house ' is in order .
This is why I totally support the rapporteur 's proposal calling on Parliament and its political groups to take certain initiatives to effectively promote genuine equal opportunities for men and women within the European Parliament .
Yesterday was International Women 's Day .
We all know that the future of society depends on women and so everyone is in favour of equality , parity and justice .
The situation in India is appalling as 50 million women are missing because they are eliminated right from the stage of conception .
Yet this legitimate defence of dignity , equality and freedom is hypocritical !
How can Europe allow the immigration of Jews , Muslims and those with diminished legal status while defending the rights of women enslaved by countries , religions and ' civilisations ' supported by us ?
In Belgrade , we are threatening to bomb a people who refuse to hand over the region of Kosovo to a culture which practises concealment and confinement .
In Baghdad , we are bombing a secular people where the women teach and work , and yet we are supporting the interests of countries where women are veiled , confined and demeaned .
You should realise that the defence of women is simply rhetoric when not confirmed by the facts .
But it gets worse .
Are we really sure that blatant injustice is based on gender rather than society ?
Are women marginalised because they are women or because they are members of a disadvantaged social group ?
When Indira Gandhi was Prime Minister of India , it is well known that women were not victimised among the Brahmins .
It was among the poor , the untouchables and the working class that women were victimised .
This is the cynical part of the Left 's feminist rhetoric as it uses gender to classify discriminations which are actually social .
It is not because she is a woman that the female worker in the textile industry is in a sorry situation , it is because she is working class .
What is appalling is not so much that the number of women in parliament is small but that the number of working-class women , female employees , women who are socially of low birth and women of modest income is played down .
Where is the progress in replacing a male MP from the upper middle classes with his privileged wife , sister or daughter ?
This is even more pertinent given that those supervising the political leadership will always replace elected males from modest backgrounds with elected females from privileged backgrounds .
What a deception the Left is practising !
It is forgetting its working-class roots .
It is forgetting the poor , the disadvantaged and the marginalised in order to protect one more advantage of the social category which already has everything , even a clear conscience .
We have already had to suffer the anti-racist rhetoric which would have us believe that social discrimination is based on colour . In fact , the basis of racism is social .
The top universities , the highest circles , the magical places of power are not closed to blacks or to women , but to the poor .
From now on we will have to suffer even more of the anti-patriarchal rhetoric of Mrs Eriksson in particular and of the Scandinavians in general or of Swedes .
It was in Sweden under a Socialist government that 60 000 women from modest backgrounds were sterilised .
The descendants of that government are here today claiming to be defenders of freedom and dignity .
The revolution in our societies will not occur by changing the sexual order as this is only a reflection of other greater inequalities .
Now and in the future , the revolution to prevent actions which injure , humiliate and destroy will occur by changing the social inequalities which Europe has simply aggravated .
The fate of the poorest , of those at the bottom of the wage , income and asset scales , still depends on the goodwill of those at the top of the tree .
This is what is appalling and this is what feminism , like anti-racism , makes us forget .
It is clearly not by chance that feminists and anti-racists are by profession from the privileged classes .
Agenda
Ladies and gentlemen , would you agree to bringing forward the Commission statement on bananas to this afternoon , and taking it before the Haug report ? That would enable us to benefit from the presence of Sir Leon Brittan .
Parliament approved this proposal
Madam President , in an atmosphere of general confusion you proposed bringing forward the report to enable Sir Leon Brittan to attend .
This has been approved .
However , this means that Mrs Haug 's report , on which I and Mr Fabre-Aubrespy are due to speak , has been postponed until the 9.00 p.m. sitting .
Unfortunately , tonight we should both be attending a student debate at the Political Studies Institute in Strasbourg .
In my opinion , the casual manner in which the agenda of this House has been changed is open to criticism as this change was approved in an atmosphere of complete confusion .
I believe that the students of the Political Studies Institute deserve as much consideration as Sir Leon Brittan .
I would like this to be recorded in the Minutes .
Mr Giansily , I would say quite simply that I shared your reservations when I was given this piece of information at the last minute , as you too will have seen .
Having said that , the only point on which I disagree with you is that I have the impression that there was a very large majority in the House in favour of this proposal , as you are well aware , that Members were not at all confused when they voted , that they understood quite clearly what was involved , and that if this change had been put to the vote before , it would have been unanimously accepted , Mr Giansily , as you well know .

However , I am very sorry for the inconvenience which may have been caused to some Members who will not be able to speak on the Haug report .
Once again , I share your feelings , but I cannot agree with you when you say that this was decided in confusion and that Members did not understand what was involved .
They understood that very well , as you and I both know .
The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.

Electromagnetic fields ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0101 / 99 ) by Mr Tamino , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Recommendation on the limitation of exposure of the general public to electromagnetic fields 0 Hz - 300 GHz ( COM ( 98 ) 0268 - C4-0427 / 98-98 / 0166 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , this report is a very important and interesting one .
In my opinion , the important thing when we discuss legislation at European level are the reports and scientific evidence which underlie this legislation .
It is very important that the quality of legislation is right .
We talk about this a great deal in the individual Member States , and we should also be aware of it when we are creating European legislation .
On behalf of the Liberal Group , I would like to say that many of the amendments proposed by the Greens make the Commission 's proposal far more restrictive than is necessary .
I would very much like to know on what kind of scientific evidence the Greens are basing all these amendments .
If I may take the liberty of referring to my own country , Denmark , where the Anti-Cancer Association has carried out analyses of risks in this area , it has been found that there is no connection between electromagnetic fields and cancer .
Children and workers at power stations were both studied .
With children there was a very small risk , and with power station workers there was no risk .
That was , of course , a Danish study .
But I fail to see how studies from other countries would justify the requirements being proposed by Mr Tamino .
I would therefore like to ask the rapporteur , and not least the Commission , what scientific basis there is for these very restrictive demands from the Greens , because if the Greens ' amendments are adopted , there would be very serious economic consequences for power stations and , not least , for general consumers .
The Liberal Group is therefore opposed to the Greens ' amendments , and I would ask the Commission on behalf of the Liberal Group what it has to say about the scientific studies to which Mr Tamino refers .
I must say that on the basis of the national and international studies which have been carried out in this area , I have difficulty in recognising the assertions which have been made .
Mr President , I on the other hand believe that the report by Mr Tamino is very important as it makes reference to very specific scientific studies , carried out in Sweden and elsewhere , and includes names and a bibliography .

This is a significant problem that is very familiar to people living in Greece , where we are literally drowning in a sea of television transmitters . Just recently hundreds of transmitters for mobile phones were erected in Pefki , which is just outside Athens , and we have high voltage transmission lines and so on .
We have evidence , Mr President , but we apparently do not have proof .
However , three Member States have much stricter legislation than what is being called for here .
We also have the precautionary principle , which we are obliged to implement .
This is why I believe that , until further studies have been carried out and the facts have been observed further , as Mr Whitehead said , we must abide by the recommendations made by Mr Tamino .
There are very significant issues at stake regarding public health on a long term basis .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal for a recommendation on limiting exposure of the general public to electromagnetic fields was formulated against the background of increasing public concern over possible links between electromagnetic fields and health problems .
This is an issue which affects aspects of everyday life .
The fields concerned are created not only by high voltage lines and broadcasting transmitters but by ordinary household appliances that we are all in regular contact with , such as mobile phones and television screens .
Naturally there is a need to reassure customers by providing adequate protection from real and proven risks and by keeping them informed .
What we do not need is irresponsible misinformation and scare tactics .
The Commission sought to take into consideration all well-founded scientific and experimental evidence in preparing its proposed recommendation .
The guidelines and exposure proposed by the Commissioner are based on those recently published by the International Convention on Non-Ionising Radiation Protection . This is a formally recognised organ of the World Health Organization .
Thus there is a solid scientific basis for the proposed limit values .
Furthermore , this WHO body takes the added precaution of incorporating large safety factors into the limit values to public exposure .
In fact , we are talking about a safety margin at least 50 times lower than the levels for which possible health effects have been established .
The national authorities in most EU states have already accepted the health basis from which the WHO body derives its guidelines .
These are enforced in the Member States which ensure compliance by industry and are vigilant in protecting the health of their citizens .
Mr Tamino 's proposals are therefore greatly disproportionate .
They seek to impose exposure limits which go far beyond what the Commission is proposing and what are scientifically shown to be necessary .
If such exaggerated proposals were to be approved they would have a serious socio-economic impact with no health benefit .
Furthermore , the report fails to address the basic problem that there is no common European measurement system .
This allows different national limits which create barriers to trade and distort a single market .
The differences in standards have also contributed to public anxieties - consumers wonder why their countries have a different limit to another country .
My group and I are calling for a European research project aimed at harmonising calculation methodologies .
Mr President , there seems to be a great deal of confusion in this debate on Mr Tamino 's report .
In particular this is because the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and some of our colleagues are proposing to lay down limit values for the distance between certain installations generating electromagnetic fields and people living close by , and also because they consider that the Commission 's proposals are acceptable .
I would draw your attention to the fact that the Commission 's proposals do not strictly change current practices in any way .
In actual fact , these proposals endorse the activities of industrial groups which , with regard to the transport and distribution of electricity or telecommunications , are exposing people to significant electromagnetic fields .
For example , there is a magnetic field of a few micro tesla in a vertical line from a high-voltage power line of 380 000 volts .
The Commission 's proposal fixes a limit value of 100 micro tesla which means that it is endorsing what is already in common practice .
This is unacceptable because numerous epidemiological studies and several laboratory studies have shown that effects on health involving the nervous , endocrine or immune systems start to be detected from values which are up to 1 000 times smaller .
Limiting the problem to the appearance of cancer is a simplistic approach which will cause us to make serious mistakes in terms of public health .
On the basis of what is already occurring today in one of the Member States , namely Italy , we therefore believe that it is possible to recommend much lower limit values , with which Mr Tamino agrees .
These certainly do not threaten the various current economic activities but they do prevent people being exposed to electromagnetic fields which may endanger their health .
I therefore propose that everyone thoroughly reviews this dossier in order to avoid falling into the trap of saying that Mr Tamino 's proposals would cause excessive economic damage .
This statement has already been made three or four times but has not been proven by any argument .
Mr President , electromagnetic fields can be a danger to public health . According to various scientific studies , they can lead to the development of cancerous cells .
Although the findings of these reports are not totally conclusive , it would be wise for the Commission to take account of the two basic principles of risk prevention : the safeguard principle , that is , avoiding risk in cases of doubt ; and the ALARA principle , in other words , that exposure to radiation should be as low as may reasonably be achieved .
In this context , I should like to draw the attention of the House to a project currently under consideration : the connection of the French and Spanish electricity grids through a high-voltage line of 400 000 volts across the Pyrenees .
This project was approved at Essen .
Citizens likely to be affected by the line have been campaigning against it for more than 15 years on account of its environmental impact and the electromagnetic fields that would be generated .
This is a good opportunity for the Commission to adopt a common sense approach and look for alternative solutions in order to ensure that we have no regrets in the future .
The Commission needs to establish a common framework to safeguard public health . This should stipulate that minimum safety distances and an environmental impact assessment are essential preconditions for the construction of power lines .
It should then be possible to avoid the electromagnetic fields generated .
Mr President , there should be no doubt that the June Movement in general is a great supporter of applying the precautionary principle .
This means that the consumer should be given the benefit of any doubt , even if there is only a hint of risk in using modern techniques .
That could quite easily be the case , and GM foods are only one example of it .
But today we are considering the short-term effects of exposure to radiation from electromagnetic fields .
The Greens ' amendments in the report , on the other hand , concern the long-term effects , and they have not yet been adequately studied .
We therefore think that the very restrictive advice which would result from supporting the amendments is untenable .
We cannot get round the fact that electricity is a fundamental cornerstone of modern society .
It is also clear that all scientists agree that the short-term effects of being exposed to radiation are very small , and to hinder or even prevent the supply and consumption of electricity would be like using cannons to shoot sparrows , as we say in Denmark .
In this context , I have also stressed the fact that , after extensive research , the Anti-Cancer Association came to the conclusion that it would be quite irresponsible to make people afraid to use various electrical appliances which are part of every household , such as kitchen equipment and shavers .
One cannot of course rule out the possibility that the long-term effects might be different .
This is being studied at the moment by the World Health Organisation , and if they should come to a conclusion which reflects Mr Tamino 's amendments , then we in the June Movement would of course fully support the amendments which we are rejecting today .
Mr President , electromagnetic fields are increasingly present in our environment .
High-voltage power lines , GSM radio transmitters and many domestic appliances are disrupting the natural balance .
The 1994 Lannoye report demonstrated the harmful effect of these electromagnetic fields on health and in particular the risk of the development of cancers , leukaemias and diseases of the nervous system and brain .
However , just because scientists do not yet understand the mechanisms of these attacks on the human body , this must not be used as a pretext to stick our heads in the sand .
On the contrary , we must use the precautionary principle and prohibit or at least limit any equipment , even any technology , which endangers human health .
The current situation gives the consumer the responsibility of proving that a device is dangerous .
The burden of proof must be reversed and manufacturers must be required to prove that their goods are harmless .
A Commissioner said that the best way to validate a product is to place it on the market .
In the case which concerns us today , major suspicions exist about the harmfulness of these electromagnetic fields to the human body .
It is therefore high time to act and we must not put off implementing limit values on the effects , whatever they may be , and not just the thermal effects .
If over the five years since the Lannoye report there has not been enough sufficiently convincing scientific research , this is precisely because some people had much to lose from this .
In any case , it is scandalous to say that this report would harm industrial development , firstly because this is false and secondly , and in particular , because public health must come before any economic considerations .
Mr President , with the advent of modern telecommunication systems , the large-scale expansion of electrical and electronic equipment and the proliferation of high-voltage electricity transmission lines , interest in and concerns about the effects of electromagnetic fields have increased considerably over the last few years , amidst repeated calls for measures and standards in this area .
And yet the precise effects on the organism of exposure to electromagnetic radiation are not known .
Worrying theories have been put forward on the possible harmful health effects of exposure to artificially produced fields , and a debate is under way concerning the existence of possible long-term effects , first and foremost cancer , and particularly cancer of the blood , leukaemia .
At the present time , however , there is no conclusive scientific evidence that electromagnetic fields can directly cause cancer .
In most Member States , the authorities are constantly being questioned about such effects , revealing considerable concern among the public .
Experiments have proved only that prolonged exposure to high frequencies may cause pathologies .
As draftsman of the opinion of Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , which I chair , on the limitation of exposure of the general public to electromagnetic fields , I believe that it is crucial for Europe to create a single , coherent body of legislation enabling all the Member States to protect their inhabitants from these potentially harmful effects .
Such limits should not however exceed the bounds of knowledge and reasonableness , causing severe economic damage both to industry and to employment .
The recommendation introduces , throughout Europe , a proper level of protection against EMF health effects .
It is rightly based on well-established health effects , the acute ones , while stating that there is currently no convincing evidence that these fields produce long-term carcinogenic effects ; the available data cannot be used as a basis for developing exposure guidelines .
In conclusion , Mr President , I believe that it is absolutely crucial for further high-level studies to be conducted on long-term exposure , on the one hand so as to protect the public and , on the other , to avoid panic and unemployment .
Mr President , Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has done some excellent work on this report .
I have no doubts at all about the rapporteur 's well-meaning proposals for limit values , but the committee was unable to accept them on the basis of the facts presented here .
This in now way implies that the principle of preparedness should not be vital for everyone , for example , in the elimination of the adverse effects of non-ionising radiation .
The basis here must , however , be the results of research and the WHO recommendations , as well as the principle that the degree of exposure to electromagnetic radiation must be kept as low as is reasonably possible .
Member States must also introduce minimum values for safe distances from electronic equipment and minimum distances in general which must be complied with in the vicinity of people 's homes and places of work .
This a very new subject area , and research into possible problems and their prevention must continue .
This will be one of the sections of the Fifth Research and Development Framework Programme .
Responsibility for the research will lie with the equipment manufacturers as far as product development is concerned , but to ensure impartial results the source material will have to be as broad in scope as possible and independent of any bias on the part of the researchers .
While there are calls for an increase in research into the possible problems of non-ionising radiation we have to ensure that resources are used effectively in the health sector as a whole .
There are limited resources for public health and we must see to it that they are exploited effectively . We have to consider what social costs are worth paying so that public health can expect a good return on its investment .
Assessment of the social costs is the job of politicians , and acquiring information on the possible risks is that of researchers and scientists .
Politicians have a responsibility in all this .
Mr President , for some twenty years now there has been research into the effects on health of electromagnetic fields produced by low-frequency electronic equipment and the electrical power network .
The Commission 's estimates of what would be health-endangering values reflect the outcome of the research carried out .
Certain MEPs , however , have suggested values which are considerable more stringent than the Commission 's recommendations , in recognition of the possible health impact .
This method of investigation , where conclusions are based on vague estimates and the policy is to ignore other research data , cannot have any real meaning .
Furthermore , we also have to take into account the relationship between the desired recommendations and the tangible effects on health as well as the cost of any action that needs to be taken .
In recent years one subject of debate that has quickly assumed prominence is the possible effect on people 's health of the increasing use of mobile phones .
Hopefully , we all appreciate the need for a closer study of the effects of these on users , and the possible need to take action when we have some real facts before us .
I do not believe that anyone wants to start restructuring the electrical power networks in heavily populated areas , preventing the use of mobile phones in cities , or replacing household appliances as a result of possibly unfounded restrictions .
We must respect the precautionary principle , but excessive caution must be substantiated by the results of research .
Mr President , most people speaking here today talk about how ' the precautionary principle must be respected , but ... ' .
There is a total contradiction there .
If the precautionary principle is to be respected , then we need to ensure that we have definite evidence that this kind of radiation is not dangerous .
We do not have that evidence .
One of the major failings in the Commission 's proposal is that it does not take the precautionary approach .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has been a complete disaster on this .
It has completely diluted the rapporteur 's proposal .
It has failed to protect public health and the environment .
This issue has come up again and again and the Commission has done nothing about it .
Even Member State governments have done nothing about it .
In my own country mobile phone masts are erected close to people 's houses and right beside schools .
The central nervous system bioeffects - which the Commission does not refer to - seem to be occurring where mobile phone masts are located close to people 's homes .
There are reports of headaches , sleep disruption and a number of other effects , which are not referred to by the Commission .
As the rapporteur has pointed out , there is a suggestion that exposure to electromagnetic fields could lead to an increase in occurrences of cancer and other serious threats to human health .
We need to ensure that the precautionary approach is taken .
The Commission seems to base its findings on certain research but to ignore other research that is available .
We need proper research centres to be set up to ensure that the real effects of this kind of non-ionizing radiation are properly examined by independent assessors .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that this is an important matter .
We obviously have to regulate the amount of radiation that people are exposed to .
However , it is essential that the rules should be reasonable .
We cannot have a situation in which a single political group claims a monopoly of the scientific knowledge ; instead , we take it for granted that the Environment Committee and the House will do their best to reach a satisfactory decision .
Electromagnetic fields and their effect on people are subjects that have come up for debate with increasing frequency in recent years .
In point of fact , we still do not have any precise answers to the questions which they raise .
We do not know how ordinary electric currents and magnetic fields affect us .
What we do know , however , is that more and more people are becoming hypersensitive to electricity .
We should be establishing limit values on a Europe-wide basis , but they should be reasonable as well .
Sweden has been mentioned in the discussion as one of the countries with satisfactory limit values .
All I can say about this is that the limit values are well above the levels proposed by Mr Tamino .
The values are 100 micro tesla in normal daily life and 500 micro tesla in industry and places of work .
That is substantially different from those proposed by Mr Tamino .
Mr President , when we talk about radiation damage , we must make distinctions .
First of all there is low-frequency radiation from high-tension cables and frequencies generated by them .
All the experience from all the new research carried out by our governments shows that nothing can be proved .
In Denmark , we have a cancer register in which all cancer cases are recorded , and the central register of persons shows where people live .
All the 30 000 people who work in the electricity supply industry were examined in a major study carried out in 1998 , and no connection was found between their work in the electricity supply industry and cancer .
The claims that extensive studies have not been carried out are incorrect .
Then there are mobile telephones .
More or less everyone in this Parliament uses a mobile telephone , sometimes a great deal , although there are some who believe that mobile telephones are dangerous .
I agree that not enough research has been done on this question to know whether the vital parts of cells or the basic building-blocks of human life are being destroyed by this radiation .
Considering how many children in their teens and younger use mobile telephones , it is important that such research is started , so that we can have some specific conclusions .
However , I am not aware of suggestions that there is any danger from the base stations which are being set up or the DECT stations in supermarkets .
And of course no one stands in front of a radar beam or rays from a microwave source .
These are concentrated rays , but they do not penetrate down to where we usually are .
Many of the amendments , in other words Nos 14 to 24 , are only designed to create unease and are not based on the necessary scientific research .
Mr President , it is really important that we produce a recommendation for minimum distances from people 's homes for mobile phone masts .
These are proliferating in my own country .
If , as the companies producing them say , there are no health risks , why should we not have a mandatory health indemnity ?
The vested interests that produce these should be legally liable for insuring people 's health if something goes wrong .
That is something that we should be considering seriously at European level .
If they are not dangerous , then there is no risk .
So why should we not insure people against the problem ?
A recent conference in Vienna concluded that the biological effects from low-intensity exposure are scientifically established , so it is no longer acceptable for Member State governments or the Commission to say that more research is required before setting standards .
People deserve to have their health protected and not have the ball kicked into touch for a scientific investigation that may take years .
Then we will be in the same situation as with the tobacco companies where millions could be paid out to people whose health has been put in danger .
I am very shocked that my own government has made several attempts to water down EU proposals to regulate emissions of electromagnetic radiation from mobile home masts .
It is scandalous that these attempts by the Irish delegation to delete clauses are claimed as being in accordance with the precautionary principle .
There is sufficient evidence to warrant a whole re-think on the health implications of these masts .
Mr President , I am very pleased to be able to speak on this issue , which I think everyone agrees is of major public concern .
In my own country in the last three days there have been front-page articles about the effects of mobile phones and in my local newspapers stories about power lines and their effects on people .
Some of these reports are alarming and some are worrying and it is not surprising that the public are confused and do not really know what to think .
So the Commission proposals are very timely .
We need some form of European-wide action on this issue .
The approach of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is also very balanced .
I want to stress two amendments which are important .
The first deals with the application of the precautionary principle , based on the ALARA proposals from the World Health Organization .
My second point is that we must keep this under constant review .
It is not enough to set standards now and then never come back to them .
People are increasing their mobile phone usage ; parents are buying mobile phones for their children ; people are switching to mobile phones .
So I hope the Commission will take into account some of these amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report before us concerns limiting the exposure of the general public to electromagnetic fields 0 Hz - 300 GHz , which is the entire spectrum of possible effects . This is no doubt a good approach , but it does not allow for detailed rules at European level so that in my view the subsidiarity principle should be applied in some areas .
Overall , it is to be welcomed that the Committee on the Environment did not accept the doubtless well-intentioned proposals from the rapporteur , on the grounds I referred to above .
But well-intentioned does not always mean good .
Moreover , the rapporteur 's proposals could not be justified scientifically - as many speakers have mentioned today - and would in practice have led to low limits that could not have been adhered to .
Or should we go so far as to get rid of mobile phones and emergency telephones ?
I do not think that can do us much good .
Let me raise another point .
The discussion between experts has shown that laying down safety distances from fixed installations , for example high-voltage transmission lines , is of extremely questionable use in protecting against radiation because , apart from the distance as such , numerous parameters specific to the installation can have quite a determining effect on exposure .
In the case of electrical devices , laying down minimum safety distances is even more of a problem .
As a rule the distance between such devices and the public is surely determined by whether they are used as they should be .
In this case I think it is confusing , unhelpful and inconsistent with the aims of adequate protection against radiation to lay down additional safety distances .
The situation is different in the case of equipment that is designed to produce fields , such as broadcasting transmitters .
Here , safety distances can no doubt simplify matters .
I would ask you to consider this at the vote .
I have tabled the corresponding amendments .
Mr President , the Commission would like to begin by warmly thanking the committee and also the rapporteur .
Of course this is a subject on which opinions can differ , as they do here in the discussion too , for not every individual issue has undergone adequate scientific investigation and been supported by unequivocal findings .
Nevertheless we wanted to take a first step with our proposal .
For one thing , there is increasing concern - and that is undoubtedly true - on the part of experts too .
There is a wide debate , particularly among the public , which is not always very objective but which does of course create doubts in the public mind .
That is why we believe it is right , given also that the Maastricht Treaty commits us to aim for a high level of public health , to propose a common framework of basic restrictions and reference levels under this recommendation .
One thing I want to say quite clearly here , since Mrs Riis-Jørgensen also put this question to the Commission - even if she has gone now ; indeed it is sadly becoming increasingly common for Members to put questions and then to disappear - is that even if you raise the question of scientific findings , our proposal is based on the recommendations of the International Commission on Non-Ionising Radiation Protection and on the positions of the Commission 's Scientific Steering Committee .
So it is not the case that we have not taken account of these scientific positions .
I could now discuss all the amendments , but that would be going too far , given also that this is a recommendation .
But let me say that we can accept in whole or in part Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 10 and 13 .
Other amendments go far beyond the recommendation , for instance in assuming that this kind of recommendation also has legal implications , which is not the case .
By definition a recommendation is addressed to Member States and they may follow it but are not obliged to do so , which means that this kind of recommendation cannot lay down other legal commitments .
That applies in particular to the question of minimum safety distances .
Mr Schnellhardt made a few comments on this question that are worth considering .
But I must say that even if everything he says is right - and basically I have no doubt it is - we cannot lay down any binding minimum safety distances in the recommendation .
Then there is Amendment No 12 .
We have already made provision for a review system .
That means that we will of course ourselves draft a report for the Union , on the basis of the Member States ' reports , and naturally we will take account of all the new scientific findings as they become known .
If necessary , the Commission will act at once .
But it is also certain that we cannot act according to the principle that this is a matter of health and that we must therefore discontinue all our activities , even if that cannot be justified on scientific grounds .
We cannot proceed according to that kind of principle .
I am saying this with particular reference to some of the comments made by the Greens .
If , for instance , we switched off the entire electricity network , I wonder what the public would say to that .
Heckling
I did say ' if ' .
So if we want to proceed in a sensible manner here , we can only do so in the light of and on the basis of scientific findings .
Any other approach would be arbitrary and not right .
That could not be justified in a constitutional state !
What is called the precautionary principle relates to very restricted exceptional cases in which it allows us to do something when we do not yet have the relevant scientific findings .
And the Commission does apply that principle .
For example we introduced very strict limits for baby food , even though there are no scientific findings , because in that case it was justified , even in terms of the expenditure involved , to do something although we did not know whether it was necessary .
But obviously we cannot make that a general principle .
If we were to proceed according to this principle , the end results really would be totally absurd .
And you cannot expect that of the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Public health policy
The next item is the report ( A4-0082 / 99 ) by Mr Needle , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the development of public health policy in the European Community ( COM ( 98 ) 0230 - C4-0393 / 98 ) .
Mr President , the development of the European public health policy has now reached a very important stage .
This welcome Commission communication identifies the strengths and weaknesses of the first framework period , which is now coming to a close , and points to both the challenges and opportunities which can be foreseen , offering a positive and clear new framework .
This Parliament has a strong reputation for promoting the protection and improvement of public health and , as I will indicate later , we ourselves can still improve .
Many distinguished Members of this House have been prominent in ensuring that the European Union has a role in health policy , to say nothing of the established and growing part it now plays in research or food safety , environmental policies , for example .
The first point to make is that the Amsterdam Treaty thoroughly enshrines that role by declaring in the new Article 152 that a high level of human health protection shall be ensured in the definition and implementation of all Community policies and activities .
The rest of the article is far from perfect , but provides the basis for some serious work over the next five years .
How should that work be organised ?
I am delighted that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has achieved a broad consensus that the way forward is via clearly focused priorities which offer added value to the work of partners in Member States , agencies such as the World Health Organization , and non-governmental organisations .
That will require the Council , the Commission and Parliament to do two things at the crucial next stage , when the three newly identified strands of information , rapid response , promotion and prevention are translated into new horizontal action programmes .
Firstly , it is time for bold thinking .
The interpretation of the draft Treaty will be vital and , if the benefits of new technologies , skills , knowledge and freedoms are to be realised by European citizens , there will have to be a political and administrative willingness to move forward .
In this I refer particularly to the need to share information on best practices - we have to be prepared to address common and specific problems transparently and honestly - and to the recent judgments in the European Court of Justice regarding cross-border access to medical products .
I also have in mind the need to address health factors which are exacerbated by decisions within the EU .
A great many of our citizens regard the situation whereby we introduce anti-cancer or cardiovascular disease programmes alongside support for tobacco producers to be nonsensical .
I fear we are going to repeat that error in another report later this week .
We must work to end that in a sensible way .
I would ask the Commission today to tell us of its strong support for proposals which are imminent on combating tobacco consumption .
We also need to make sense of often conflicting information on diets and nutrition - I suspect that is of interest to the Commissioner and myself in particular - and to develop coherent new food policies on that basis .
That leads to the second requirement , which is one of responsibility .
At the very time we are seeking these steps forward , the non-governmental organisations which play a leading part in sustaining and nurturing public , professional and political awareness of health issues are being faced with potentially damaging budget cuts .
It is not acceptable for the budgetary authorities to be so out of step with previously agreed commitments , but it also demonstrates that we must all face up to some tough choices .
That is why clear and decisive prioritisation of future programmes will be essential , matched by a clear and certain simplified budgetary procedure .
That is why we not only support the move away from small vertical programmes to horizontal strands but also seek a vastly more integrated approach , based around an identifiable single health directorate so that health truly becomes an integral part of the EU process , at its very heart .
That means appropriate health impact assessments , starting with the Commission 's own programmes , and proportionately more officials with the appropriate expertise , as identified in the excellent study carried out by Parliament 's services in support of our well-received public hearing last October .
It means partnership at all levels to tackle the greatest public needs and health inequalities most effectively , not least in the current process of enlargement of the Union , where a much-needed further Commission text is imminent .
With its report , Parliament has responded thoroughly , responsibly and with vision to help establish a sound framework for progress .
In 13 tightly-argued recommendations , we have made a cogent case for a new priority for health as part of a European decade for health , which will truly begin to meet the real needs of our citizens .
But it is the next step in the new Parliament which will determine whether we have the courage and determination to turn those aims into reality by ensuring the major chronic diseases of this century do not bedevil the next .
I finish by thanking all those who have contributed to the communication and to the publication of this report and have worked so hard to take EU health policies to this stage from where we can look forward confidently to the road ahead .
Mr President , one of the hardest things to explain to Europeans , when one meets them privately or at public debates , is that the Community has no real competence over health .
The public wonder how it can be that a supranational entity , which has equipped itself with a single currency and been extremely successful in securing peace , progress and well-being for its citizens , does not concern itself with health and is confined just to the limited scope offered at long last by the Maastricht Treaty and reinforced by the Amsterdam Treaty .
As we all know , the Treaty of Rome made no provision at all in this area .
It is hard to explain .
It is also hard , on the other hand , to expect countries to surrender sovereignty over their national health systems .
So what should be done ?
We must ensure that the limited scope that does exist , in terms of both competence and resources , is harnessed to achieve maximum results in terms of cooperation , information exchanges , identification of best practice , and health education - as has already been done under the various specific programmes and the 1993 framework programme .
The Commission 's presentation of this communication is most timely : in a sense , it establishes a transition between the final phase of that programme and the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty , when there will be a new framework programme .

Mr Needle 's excellent report makes a series of timely and practical proposals .
There could be others too , and I believe that this debate should continue outside this House : health researchers and operators should provide the Commission with information and proposals as to how maximum benefit can be drawn from the meagre powers and resources available . How , for example , can we act rapidly in response to an unforseen disaster such as BSE , or cope with inevitabilities like population ageing , dwindling public funds and rising health costs .
Yesterday this House discussed a document on women 's health ; in both that report and this one , we call for separate statistics on and specific programmes for women .
Finally , for the sake of Europe 's women and men , we call for a Community presence in the health arena which offers real protection .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the communication on the development of public health in the European Community will probably be the last major health policy issue on which Parliament expresses an opinion before the end of this parliamentary term .

Mr Needle has produced an excellent and most welcome report , and has made considerable efforts to amend the Commission 's text .
The communication takes stock of what has been done over the past five years , but above all it outlines a new global public health strategy for Europe in the twenty-first century , which will very soon be followed by specific measures , once the Amsterdam Treaty enters into force .
I would recall that the eight existing health programmes - ' Europe against cancer ' , AIDS , drug addiction , health monitoring , the epidemiological surveillance network on communicable diseases , and so on - will lapse in or around the year 2000 .
The EU 's citizens , who enjoy the advantages of a single market and are about to acquire a single currency , also have a right to a high level of health protection , as stipulated in the new Article 152 of the Amsterdam Treaty .
But if this objective is to be attained in practice , public health must stop being the Cinderella of Community policies : it must be funded much more generously than to date .
Whilst fully respecting the principle of subsidiarity , the Union can do a good deal to improve information in this area , to react rapidly to health threats and , above all , to confront the main causes of diseases through prevention .
We therefore welcome the rapporteur 's suggestion of a single operational unit and enhanced administrative structures within the Commission , in order to equip DG V-F with sufficient staff and resources to manage effectively all aspects of health policy .
It is crucial , however , that the Commission should present as soon as possible detailed , concrete proposals for the next five years , taking Parliament 's wishes into account .
We very much regret that not all the recommendations contained in the 1993 resolution on health policy after Maastricht were acted on , and that inadequate follow-up was given to three important resolutions adopted almost unanimously by this House in 1996 , concerning the European health passport , blood self-sufficiency in the Community and , especially , Alzheimer 's disease .
Ladies and gentlemen , the period 2000-2010 has been declared the European Decade for Health .
It is our duty to fulfil the expectations of 375 million people who aspire to live in peace and prosperity , but above all in good health .
Mr President , my compliments to Mr Needle on this excellent report , in which he rightly notes that the Amsterdam Treaty offers new opportunities for greater weight to be given to public health in the European Union .
The current policy is ripe for review and the financial resources are regrettably very limited .
The Commission , and I am looking to Mr Bangemann here , must do something about that .
I am keen to see what initiatives the Commission will take to meet the growing need for public health policy in the early years of the next century .
As rapporteur on the 1999 budget for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , I advocated increasing public health spending to EUR 50 million .
By way of comparison , that is just 5 % of the total budget for premiums to tobacco growers .
It is obvious to me that an effective public health policy in Europe is not just a matter of more money . What we have to do is integrate public health aspects more effectively into other areas of policy .
Take agriculture and transport , two areas where there is much to be gained .
I do not need to spell it out : BSE , the countless deaths on our roads and the pollution caused by the transport industry have everything to do with public health policy .
One final point on enlargement to include Central and Eastern Europe .
The public health problems there are huge .
It will take a great deal to bring their standards of public health up to our own . And their standards have great implications for ours .
So I hope the Commission will put a good deal of energy into solving the public health problems of Eastern Europe .
Mr President , my group supports Mr Needle 's report because by taking the Treaty of Amsterdam as a starting point to promote a high level of public health protection , it deals with all the issues that are crucial to achieving such protection .
Funding comes first and foremost , and Agenda 2000 is currently under discussion .
We do not yet know how European Union funds will be distributed between 2000 and 2006 ; it remains to be seen how much will eventually be available for the health sector .
Secondly , cooperation with Member States and with international organisations involved in health protection must be strengthened .
Thirdly , we need to integrate our health policy with all other European policies .
The memory of the consequences of a misguided agricultural economic policy , namely the BSE problem , must surely be fresh in all our minds .
Fourthly , the need for prevention must be emphasised . We must remember that although responsibility for the provision of health care rests with the Member States , the European Union and the Member States can cooperate on issues concerning prevention .
The European Union is in a position to promote and develop cooperation and information networks at all levels .
Previous health programmes experienced problems relating to transparency , inadequate assessment and insufficient funding .
Mr Needle proposes eliminating the shortcomings of previous programmes during what ought to be the decade for health , between 2000 and 2010 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this Commission communication on the development of public health policy in the European Community expresses the Union 's concern to increase the competence which it has acquired in this area due to the Maastricht Treaty being ratified and which has been confirmed by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
However , with regard to this public health policy , it is proving somewhat difficult to gain the acceptance of certain principles to which all the Member States should adhere .
For example , I could mention the European epidemiological monitoring centre which is particularly needed and which my various reports on health have called for over the last four years .
However , this has encountered resistance from both the Commission and the Council .
Yet , as indicated by the Commission , this centre would allow us to react rapidly to threats to health .
The other two principles proposed by the Commission for a future health policy are an improvement in information on public health and effective actions for health promotion and disease prevention .
These principles and the issues which they raise are genuine problems which the Union must solve in the future .
Their main priorities will be nutrition , obesity , cardiovascular disorders , Alzheimer 's disease and so on .
In this respect , I must forewarn you about the new scares which might arise due to the progress needed in order to allow this health policy .
These scares might lead to this progress being blocked as a result of the misuse of the sacrosanct precautionary principle .
It is true that all progress involves risk .
This is where we must apply the cost / benefit principle by weighing the advantages against the disadvantages .
It is only if the disadvantages equal the advantages that we should use the precautionary principle .
In this respect , public information must be clear and objective without being distorted .
This is why I must congratulate the rapporteur and this is also why the Commission 's communication is an excellent initiative which is along the lines intended by the European Union .
We will therefore vote in favour of this .
Mr President , this report gives the European Parliament another opportunity to draw attention to the importance of health policy which , thanks first to the Maastricht Treaty and then to that of Amsterdam , is at last no longer subordinate to economic policies but has its own dignity and independence .
Not only projects , programmes and research can now be pursued in this area but so can directives , and - thanks to the inclusion in the Maastricht Treaty of the precautionary principle - prevention has become the cornerstone of European health policy .
This does not however mean in practice that these statements of principle are applied unreservedly .
Colleagues have already referred to the lack of action over the European health passport , the fact that health funding remains utterly inadequate , and that even after the BSE scare , insufficient attention is being paid to the linkage between health and food .
In general terms , it can be said that the public is still not being properly informed about health issues , assuming that public health should not be subject to the interests of economic lobbies .
Regrettably , the opposite was likewise demonstrated in the previous debate on electromagnetic fields .
Mr President , what we have just heard about public health policy in Europe raises two issues .
Firstly , we need to take into account all the inhabitants of this continent , both the sick and the healthy .
The sick must be listened to individually by doctors , which is precisely the latter 's role , but they must also be listened to collectively by politicians , particularly through associations for the sick .
It is AIDS which has taught us these lessons in recent years .
By bringing these people together we can promote a dialogue between the public authorities , as the responsible authority , the experts , led naturally by the WHO , the medical profession , which must not be forgotten , the NGOs , industry and the trade unions .
Everyone must have two objectives : firstly , to identify priorities and concentrate resources to combat epidemics which will be accurately identified , and secondly , to fight against inequalities among the people of this continent with regard to the protection of their health .
Mr President , people in the European Union are amongst the healthiest and longest-lived in the world .
The Needle report on the European Union 's new public health policy seems to ignore this fact completely .
The Commission notes it , but talks of a large number of ' premature deaths ' in Europe .
What , I ask myself , is premature ?
In the Commission proposal , the age of 68 is the critical threshold .
But we are forgetting that elsewhere in the world , life expectancy is far shorter .
We also have to accept that we are mortal and that European citizens , with or without a European policy on public health , cannot be absolutely sure of surviving past 68 .
I would also make the point that Article 153 of the Amsterdam Treaty clearly aims merely to complement the public health policies of the Member States .
Only if there is a clear benefit for Europe as a whole can we make budget funds available , for example to fund the exchange of knowledge of new medicines and therapies and the development of orphan medicinal products .
I would therefore like to see a limited budget , and I regard a separate directorate-general for public health as unnecessary .
If we are going to spend more on public health , let us show solidarity and support the public health policies of the Central and Eastern European countries , rather than giving greater priority to health-related obligations , as the rapporteur would like to do .
Mr President , one of the greatest dangers to our health comes from air pollution .
Emissions into the atmosphere are catastrophic to health .
Up to 24 000 people in my country die prematurely each year due to this major hazard .
Already in Northern Ireland , a product - Soltron - is in use which has had immediate results in combating poisons emitted .
If we are to make progress as fast as possible in our efforts to improve Community health , we should be creating an incentive for the use of this product in order that a major health gain can be made .
We must harness the field of science to deliver rapid and affordable solutions today .
In Northern Ireland it has been discovered by the largest transport operation called Translink that 60 % of black smoke and 40 % of carbon monoxide has been wiped out by using this product .
This technology is available now .
It is our duty in the quest for improved public health to put it to use .
I regret that both my colleagues and myself who met with Commission officials many months ago have not heard from them or seen any action taken .
Mr President , as has been pointed out , Article 152 of the Treaty of Amsterdam decrees that a high level of human health protection shall be ensured in all Community policies .
The Treaty makes people 's health a more binding policy aim than previously , not only at Community but also at national level , and it is important to focus attention on how we can acquire that Community added value , so that it is visible at both Community level and national level .
I do not intend to repeat the praise that has already been heaped on Mr Needle 's excellent report .
I would like to go a little further and make a few remarks on the fact that public health must be seen from a very broad perspective .
Of course it is already very broadly based at the present , but it must be said that employment is an important basis too for public health .
We have discovered from various sets of statistics that unemployment is one reason for deteriorating public health ; exclusion in particular , stemming from long-term unemployment , for example , is a clear risk to health .
We obviously have to act against this , taking advantage of the Treaty of Amsterdam , in which employment was placed at the centre of Community policy .
Public services , universally available health services and effective social networks are the factors which ensure we have a standard of public health that is as high as possible .
Furthermore , consumer and environmental policies are extremely important , as is the fact that public health should play a clearer role in the enlargement strategy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Needle has gone to great trouble with the hearing in committee .
Of course many wishes and desires were voiced about all the things Europe could do .
Naturally I agree with Mr Needle that we must devote a great deal of attention to health , but unlike many previous speakers I do not believe that this can all be done in Europe
I believe that the Member States have a very major responsibility .
There is a short phrase in one paragraph to the effect that a future revision of the Treaty should provide for greater involvement of the Community in matters relating to health protection .
In my view only the Member States can take on this responsibility .
If we keep giving the Community more responsibility , I do not believe , given the relatively restricted apparatus of the Commission , that it will be in a position to accomplish everything the Member States have so far been able to do with their much more extensive administrative resources .
So I would like to draw attention to a few points I am not happy with .
At this point I would like to see the EU implement those matters that are referred to in the Maastricht Treaty and the Amsterdam Treaty but I would not like it to go beyond that or to call on the Commission to do so either .
I also think we are not in a position to create equality in health .
There are very different ideas and considerations on , for instance , cures and treatments .
I am glad we have these widely different approaches and also that we have freedom of movement .
After all , the Court of Justice has ruled that people can be treated differently in different countries .
I want to retain this and would not like to see everything forced into line in Europe .
I would far rather see the responsibility left with the Member States .
I also believe that the regional authorities are not all in a position to establish contacts with the Commission .
I would like to see pilot projects .
Information can be provided but information campaigns are another difficult matter , as we cannot conduct an information campaign that is the same for all Member States because health policy also has to be conveyed in a psychologically very different manner .
That is why I take a different view on these points and would be glad if these points , with which I am not happy , were dropped as a result of the vote .
Only then could I approve the report .
Applause
Mr President , I support the report by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection because it positively confirms the importance of public health in Europe and the need to have improved resources at all levels .
However , this debate on health takes me back to the vote at midday today on the Hautala report on women 's health and I am astonished that nobody has referred to this .
The vote on paragraph 11 restricting the legalisation of abortion marks a real backward step when compared with many national laws .
I would never have imagined myself participating in such a setback for women , particularly after yesterday .
This challenging of the right to the termination of pregnancies is the result of one of those awful compromises which the PSE and the PPE so often make .
It is indicative of political cowardliness , capitulation and the renunciation of all the struggles which have helped to increase women 's rights over their own bodies .
It just shows contempt for the battles which have in their time led to vital alliances in the political struggle of certain women , in particular Simone Veil , in defiance of the insults which she received from her own side .
This attitude shows irresponsibility and political poverty .
You can count on me and the 54 Members who voted for our amendment to continue the struggle in an atmosphere of heightened solidarity with the most reactionary women in our countries on this subject .
Mr President , the Maastricht Treaty and then that of Amsterdam have considerably increased the competence of the Parliament and Commission in the field of public health .
This has given us greater responsibilities , because we must now issue directives and interpret responsibly a role which until recently was a mere aspiration .
First of all , therefore , we must change our attitude and attempt to address Europe 's public health problems .
That is what Mr Needle 's report seeks to do , and consequently we are happy to approve it .
One fundamental aspect here is to recognise Parliament 's role in determining and controlling the health budget .
This is a vital point , in that resources are the overriding problem in our attempt to achieve common standards and respond to public health requirements .
Then there are the problems of improving information and reacting to health threats .
In my opinion , it is no longer enough to confine ourselves to certain initiatives , as we did in the past ; nutrition , obesity , cardiovascular disease - and not only cancer , AIDS and so on - now need to be addressed in a harmonised , coherent fashion in all the EU countries .
In this context , Professor Cabrol 's suggestion of a European Health Observatory , which is also taken up in Mr Needle 's report , is well worth considering .
Mention is made in particular of a Directorate-General for Health located in Brussels : that would undoubtedly be a fresh approach to dealing with this problem .
Then there are other problems , including enlargement to the east , where scientific trends and responses to health requirements undoubtedly lag behind those in Western European countries .
It is important to tackle this problem , because harmonisation is crucial and cannot be achieved in circumstances of inequality .
I would merely say in conclusion that , since we are approaching the European Decade for Health - from 2000 to 2010 - I hope that the Needle report , which we support , will generate renewed and reinforced interest in public health .
Mr President , there can be no doubt that public health policy is , to a very large extent , a national matter .
Mr Needle 's excellent report also makes this plain .
Nevertheless , there are obvious areas where collaboration at European level creates added value .
Cooperation between the Member States might be advisable in certain circumstances , thereby avoiding duplication of work , for example in analysing the health risks posed by chemical substances or in disseminating information more effectively .
The report mentions best practice and standards in health care .
In my view , this is the area where the Commission has an important role to play .
In the business sector , best practice - known as ' benchmarking ' - is an excellent way for businesses to maximise their performance .
Similarly , it would be worthwhile for the EU countries to pool their experiences with such things as how policy-driven systems operate compared with patient-driven ones , how private and state-funded health care compete with one another , and the effects of competition between the different systems on medical care .
I am sure that most of this information is available today , but it should be compiled and made available to the Member States .
The proper use of this information could lead to improved medical care at a lower cost .
I am convinced that my own country , Sweden , would also find the exercise very valuable .
The report also mentions agricultural policy and the BSE crisis .
However , I think that support for tobacco growers is a matter of serious concern .
Smoking already claims hundreds of thousands of victims every day .
So it seems unreasonable to support tobacco cultivation to the tune of EUR 1 billion every year .
The support should be phased out and transferred from agriculture to the regional policy budget .
This would make it easier to reach a decision on providing support for alternative sources of employment .
Mr President , standing in for my colleague who is in fact the Commissioner responsible and who regrets not being able to be present at the debate , let me thank Mr Needle for his very good report .
It has become clear from the discussion where we must start with our work .
If there is still confusion even in this House about what the priority should be in European health activities , then of course we must first be clear in our own minds what we can do to combat existing weaknesses in the EU health system .
In my view , there is a great deal we can do .
Of course it is not a question of setting up a new administration , that is to say to add a new , European health administration to the various administrations that already exist at national and also regional level .
Here I can reassure Mrs Schleicher that that is not our intention .
But I must say that in our view the idea put forward by some Members that we need simply to increase the funds and then spend the resources accordingly , and then we would manage to tackle the problem properly , is not the right method either .
In the area of health we cannot hope to create a greater effect simply by allocating more resources ; instead we must realise that this system is no longer working in the way it really should .
It is not efficient enough .
That is why the Commission considers it very important that we begin by collecting and collating the information in order , as Mr Virgin just said , to establish a kind of benchmarking for the various systems , so as to identify where there are better options that can perhaps be recommended to others .
Even the collection of information on , for example , the use of medicinal products , would do a great deal towards reducing costs and making treatment more efficient , because at present the experience gained in particular clinics or by practising doctors is simply not being collected or made available on a Europe-wide basis .
That is in itself a disadvantage for research , but it is an even greater disadvantage in practice , because patients could be cared for much better if general findings were available that could then be tailored to the individual patient .
So there is a great deal to do here .
Of course the Member States can also do it on their own behalf , but collating the findings would indeed produce a European added value .
In any case , there is no need to discuss that further .
The Treaty of Amsterdam has now passed that task on to the European Union and Mrs Schleicher does indeed appreciate that competition between systems , for instance the freedom to offer medical services in the single market , can be useful ; I also find the European Court of Justice rulings in this area very positive .
There is something else we should not overlook , and where we also have experience , especially from the USA which puts far more emphasis on the involvement of the patient in question or the potential patient ; this means the patient is involved in the shaping of the health system .
Where that happens , for example where drugs are freely obtainable , namely what are known as OTC or over the counter products , we find a markedly higher health awareness on the part of the individual .
That means that the more you involve the public in the decision making and the more they themselves are asked to make the decisions , the surer you can be that they will become more health conscious .
For that is certainly one of the problems .
I have been looking at the judgments pronounced in America against the cigarette industry , as you probably all have too .
It is not fitting for us to criticise this on legal grounds , but if someone comes along and institutes proceedings claiming that he was not adequately informed about the risks of smoking , then we can only wonder whether than person has been living in our society at all .
The risks have constantly been indicated for the past twenty years , not just on the packets but all around us , and here we should not do something that would be very dangerous , namely release individuals from their responsibility for their own , highly personal health and in a sense look after them , care for them and prescribe to them exactly what they must do , from the cradle to the grave .
That would certainly shorten rather than extend their lifespan .
So what we want to achieve is the active involvement of the public , and especially of those who are sick , of the patients .
I therefore very much agree with what Mr Pradier said , namely that we should cooperate even more closely than before with patients ' associations , whether they centre on a particular disease or simply represent particular patients ' interests .
That is in fact the point of departure we have chosen here and I am very glad all this has been properly understood .
Of course I will report back to my colleague , who is responsible for this area , and also tell him what you said about setting up a new directorate-general .
If Parliament in its wisdom follows this up and grants us the corresponding posts , we will be able to do all these things .
Similarly we agree with Mr Virgin 's comment that it makes no sense whatsoever to spend money on preventive health care , especially on information about the risks of smoking , while at the same time subsidising tobacco crops .
Here we agree with his assessment of the situation .
Unfortunately , at its last vote on the subject Parliament approved these subsidies by a majority .
Since , thank God , we live in a democracy , this time it is for Parliament to cry mea culpa .
Commissioner , before you disappear : I am grateful for much of your answer but I asked you a specific question .
I deliberately did not devote much of the report to the measures on tobacco consumption which are expected imminently from the Commission because we thought that that would come at the same time .
I wonder can you say what progress is being made in the Commission in bringing those forward so that we can take the practical measures which you are talking about .
Sorry for not answering your question .
I was rushing out not to avoid answering your question but because bananas is the next item and I cannot hear any more on the subject of bananas .
I have just learnt that the proposal is within inter-service consultations .
That means that a decision will be taken within the next couple of weeks in the Commission and then it will be handed over to you .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Bananas
The next item is the Commission statement on the trade dispute between the European Union and the United States over bananas .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since I last spoke about this topic on 10 February this year , several new developments have taken place .
On 15 February the WTO General Council discussed the EC request for an authoritative interpretation that a member cannot be authorised to suspend concessions in the absence of any WTO ruling on the conformity of the measures complained of .
Most WTO members who spoke supported our position on this and rejected unilateralism .
However , because of a widespread reluctance on the part of other members to vote on this , we opted for a chairman 's conclusion registering the prevailing sentiment in the General Council .
On 2 March we obtained the establishment of a panel against the United States ' section 301 legislation .
As you know , this legislation is the domestic legal base for the United States ' unilateral threats and actions in the banana case .
This panel will start its work shortly .
Also on 2 March , the arbitrators , who had been appointed to examine whether the US proposed level of concessions of $ 520 million is equivalent to the level of nullification or impairment , rendered an initial decision .
This decision states very clearly - as we had argued all along - that it is not possible for the arbitrators to set any level of concessions in the absence of an examination of the WTO conformity of the revised banana regime .
This point of principle is very important .
The arbitrators also ruled that the 60-day time limit from the end of the reasonable period for amending the regime which the US had claimed to be all-determinant is , in fact , not a decisive factor .
This removes any excuse from the United States to claim a right to take sanctions at the expiry of the 60-day period .
Finally , the arbitrators also gave a clear indication that the American estimate of damage will at least have to be reduced by the amount of indirect damage they have wrongly claimed which should , in any event , reduce the total damage by half .
The arbitrators have requested further information from the European Union and the US by 15 March and their final ruling is expected shortly after that .
Notwithstanding this initial ruling , the US decided on 3 March to impose sanctions effective as of that date against over $ 500m of European imports .
These sanctions take the form of withholding liquidation and subjecting imports to a contingent liability of 100 % duties to be imposed retroactively .
This is not just a provisional measure to preserve US rights .
Its real intent and effect is to stop all imports of the products in question immediately .
The United States has admitted as much .
From information we have received from European industry this is exactly what seems to have occurred .
This action is a blatant defiance of WTO rules which explicitly prohibit the suspension of concessions while arbitration is still taking place .
The Commission reacted immediately by asking on the same day for urgent dispute settlement consultations with the United States .
This will permit us to request a further panel on this issue after 20 days .
The Commission also requested a special General Council meeting .
That took place on 8 March .
The United States ' behaviour was strongly criticised by most WTO members .
The position of the European Union as agreed with Member States is that our own reaction should be in conformity with the WTO rules .
We do not intend to follow the American approach of taking unilateral and illegal action .
The WTO procedures will inevitably lead to a condemnation of current US behaviour .
In the meantime , the panels launched by Ecuador and the EC regarding the WTO conformity of the revised EC banana regime are due to issue their rulings on 12 April .
In parallel we continue to be willing to pursue our discussions with the United States on the substance of the banana regime .
With a view to exploring the American position and the possibilities of solving the problem , the Commission has , at the request of the Member States , entered into informal discussions with Washington .
We have made it very clear to the United States , however , that any ideas for resolving the dispute must take into account the rights and economic well-being of the ACP countries .
We have not been negotiating but are continuing to explore the US position .
In conclusion , our approach is two-fold .
Firstly , we will resolutely oppose American unilateralism and take all steps available to us in the WTO system to see to it that this behaviour is condemned and that action flowing from that condemnation can be taken if necessary .
Secondly , it is important to stress that we will find out shortly from the WTO dispute settlement system whether or not our current amended banana regime complies with the WTO rules and , to the extent that it does not , we will have to put our house in order .
This dispute must not be allowed to fester and we will continue to strive urgently to resolve it .
But Europe will not stand by while the world 's trade rules are flouted .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Sir Leon , this is the second time this year that the European Parliament is reacting to the current transatlantic trade dispute about bananas .
Sir Leon has just described the background very accurately .
The dispute is becoming increasingly bitter and is beginning to look like a trade war .
It is becoming more and more absurd and putting the credibility of the WTO and its procedures as a whole at risk .
The European Union put a new and revised banana regime in place on 1 January 1999 .
It did so after the WTO decided that the previous regime was not in conformity with WTO rules .
The USA continues to doubt whether even this new , revised complies with WTO rules .
That is its right .
But it is not within its rights to pronounce unilateral trade sanctions in the form of punitive tariffs directed against the companies of its transatlantic partner .
This conflicts in every respect with the spirit of the World Trade Organisation and therefore means a breach of the WTO rules , in particular Articles 1 , 2 and 22 .
In so doing the United States is placing itself outside the multilateral legal system .
Sanctions may not be imposed before the conclusion of the arbitration procedure .
My group supports the Commission 's negotiating position .
We support the Commission 's statement that our side will not impose unilateral measures and we want to remain in conformity with WTO rules .
However , we certainly believe it would be sensible to keep all the options open .
Let me at this point appeal to our American colleagues in the Congress and the Senate .
It is especially important that the transatlantic partnership , and in particular the economic partnership that we have approved , prove themselves in times of crisis .
However much sympathy I have for national interests , however much sympathy I have for the desire to make up the American trade deficit , these must not put the very fragile WTO rules at risk .
It is rather ironic that the EU-USA parliamentary delegation will , we hope , be holding its first video conference this week at which it will be discussing and also organising closer political coordination and management of the transatlantic dialogue .
I think we should jointly discuss how we can strengthen a common world organisation and ensure that we do not unilaterally put it at risk by playing on national interests .
Applause
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with what Mrs Mann said on behalf of the Socialist Group .
The European People 's Party also finds that the USA has quite clearly breached the WTO rules .
But that does not necessarily mean we know what will happen next .
We are familiar with the Americans ' political rules of play ; the US Administration feels under pressure from Congress , and rather like the case of the Helms-Burton Act , it no longer pays any heed to the rules of international law but seeks instead ways of defending itself from within , which is presumably how we should regard the imposition of unilateral sanctions .
Let me point out quite firmly that we would be well-advised - even if we are in the right with the second part - not to forget that the panel , that the WTO , will probably only find conditionally in our favour on the main issue .
That happens to be the way things go in international law , which is why I would advise the Commission , on behalf of the European People 's Party , to do all it can to explore further in the discussions - which Sir Leon described as informal - with the US Administration where there are possibilities of resolving the conflict , rather than leaving it to the final WTO decision , if only because we will be facing an incredible number of points of conflict with the USA in the coming years .
If we believe we have to win this time , we will be the losers in other cases where there might be a willingness to compromise .
That is why we , who all supported and wanted the WTO , urge that it not be regarded merely as a pawn in the conflict of interests between the USA and Europe .
Mr President , the quarrel between the USA and the EU runs very deep .
It is no longer merely a question of bananas but threatens to affect EU / US trade on a much wider scale .
More than that , it could conceivably affect the very future of the WTO and tip the balance away from free trade to protectionism .
As I said in a letter to the Financial Times this very day , it is a great misfortune that European Union political leaders , including the UK Prime Minister , Mr Blair , I regret to say , have failed to heed the many warning signals and failed to grasp the nettle with the Americans at a much earlier stage .
For that and many other reasons we support the motion for a resolution .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in February the European Parliament called on the United States to comply with the international rules and not to introduce customs duties unilaterally and illegally block access by European products to the American market .
At the same time , the European Parliament warned of the need for the European Union to make plans to retaliate against the US decision .
Despite our appeals the Americans have carried out their threats .
The Commission should not accept this situation and must react against this blatant provocation which to my mind is typically imperialistic .
It must block all transatlantic economic partnership negotiations , protest against the Helms-Burton and D 'Amato Acts as the European Parliament has already demanded , and block access by all American products to European markets .
The United States has shown that it holds negotiations in contempt .
We have to take action rather than insisting on an approach that is clearly not being respected .
The Commission must also reassert its commitment to defend Community law and to fulfill its obligations towards the ACP countries and Community banana producers .
The Commission must also tell the United States that it will not let it undermine the European Union 's social and employment policies or try and jeopardise public health and the environment in the European Union .
In conclusion , the Commission and all the Member States , without exception , must tell the United States that the tactic of divide and rule is an ancient one but is well known to us Europeans and will not work with the European Union .
Mr President , bananas have become the symbol of a looming and escalating trade war which has in fact been simmering away quietly for six years already .
Fiercer world competition is forcing the protagonists to take a clear and tough position .
But the US , in threatening a trade boycott , is overstepping the bounds of that clear position and the bounds of the transatlantic partnership .
The boycott is illegal until such time as the WTO panel has given its verdict and it is politically unacceptable , coming at a time when we have just concluded our economic partnership .
This uncompromising attitude undermines the authority and rules of the WTO , poses a major problem for the next ' millennium round ' of talks due to begin in December in Seattle , and will not least be harmful - if the US gets its way - to British exporters above all .
Once again , none of the parties , least of all the Caribbean banana producers , have anything to gain from a trade war .
Commissioner Brittan has played a leading role in the debate on world free trade .
According to today 's Financial Times , your swan song could turn out to be bananas - because we shall hear it one day when you step down .
But I doubt it , because in recent years you have dealt with all manner of trade issues .
So I ask you , where do we go from here ?
Do we wait for the ruling of the WTO panel ?
Are Washington and Brussels going to talk , or is the EU going to pay the US back in the same coin ?
And if so , what coin will that be ?
Mr President , it is with bananas of all things that the USA is currently making huge efforts to dismantle the WTO .
Just because Bill Clinton promised the US Congress in autumn 1998 to impose punitive tariffs on 3 March , the WTO rules were bent and broken .
But in fact this will go on happening even after the banana dispute : in May there will the ban on meat with hormones , next will come genetically modified food .
The USA announced and began this massive campaign for free trade a long time ago , without regard for human health or the environment .
But just to appeal to one 's adversary to be reasonable really is not enough .
What we must remember is that the USA is overruling the legislation in force .
We must not go on negotiating considerately with opponents of this kind because , Sir Leon , that is precisely the way to further undermine the credibility of the WTO .
The dispute must be settled by the WTO and until that happens all other negotiations with the USA should be suspended .
Here I am thinking in particular of the TEP and the preparations for the millennium round .
I am definitely not a protectionist , but please consider what decisive steps you can take to protect undertakings in the European Union , for things really cannot go on as they are .
If we do not achieve our objective of resolving this dispute , then I fear the WTO will slip on a banana skin .
Mr President , one really wonders why the most powerful state in the world has sunk so low into global immorality .
But we learned from the press - if they are correct - that both parties in America get substantial donations from the three big banana companies .
That makes the situation even worse .
Again , one wonders why they are so greedy as they seem to have 40 % of the EU bananas and the Caribbean only 9 % .
They seem to be prepared to write off the Third World .
I am glad that Commissioner Brittan mentioned the ACP .
Why is it that we have been in Lomé all these years ?
We have always had this commitment of access to our markets .
Why now ?
It is a most puzzling matter .
I represent Moray where there is a big cashmere mill .
Along with mills on the borders , a fragile area , they are losing orders of £ 1 million .
Commissioner Brittan should know this .
I heard it on Friday .
Even before the event , orders are being cut down and people are being put out of jobs .
I also have the shortbread biscuits .
So I feel that in the north of Scotland , at any rate , any claim of a special relationship will be treated with some considerable derision .
Mr President , I would urge the Commission not to lose sight of the interests of the people of Europe , and indeed the people of all parts of the Community , in this banana dispute .
The banana regime may have doubly adverse effects on the people and therefore on the consumers , in Austria for example .
Since its accession to the European Union , banana prices have risen steeply .
In a country with a continental climate , this hits the so-called man in the street , who relies heavily on bananas for his fresh fruit supplies in winter , particularly hard .
I realise that is not the issue today .
But if as a result of possible protective tariffs against European exports , our exports to the USA , our most important overseas market , were to fall , that could lead to bankruptcies and massive redundancies .
In view of the extremely difficult situation on the European labour market , the Commission should therefore take a more pragmatic stance on this question , which unlike the case of meat with hormones does not involve health considerations , in order to prevent the dispute from escalating .
Mr President , what the European Union has to do in this phase of the so-called ' banana war ' is extremely awkward .
It must attempt at one and the same time to defend its own legitimate interests and those of its ACP partners , and to prevent the escalation of a trade war consisting of reprisals on both sides , which could severely damage Europe 's political , economic and commercial interests .
The appropriate forum for the settlement of this dispute is the World Trade Organisation .
It was the WTO which condemned the previous rules on banana imports and sales in the EU .
The decision of the WTO ' banana panel ' was what made the Union move its own goalposts .
The onus is now on the WTO , to which the United States has again appealed concerning the new European regime , to issue an unequivocal condemnation of the illegal , unilateral steps taken by the American administration .
The United States is now triggering a fully-fledged trade war , which could do serious damage not only to vital export sectors in the Community - and particularly in Italy - but also to transatlantic relations in general .
Although there is no doubt that the commercial interests of the US and the EU differ - indeed in the near future they will conflict increasingly - what seems unacceptable is that the Union should submit to WTO rulings even when they are clearly biased , as in the case of bananas , but that the United States should flout them at will .
What is more , this situation strengthens our conviction that , in the new age of globalisation , the European countries ' interests very often converge with those of many developing countries , especially the ACP countries .
The Union must therefore take steps , both bilaterally , multilaterally and within international organisations , to stand shoulder to shoulder with the poorest countries more often , beginning with the ACP countries , to give us greater strength to face the challenges confronting us .
Mr President , it is astonishing that we are confronted by a dispute about a product of which neither the EU nor the US is a major producer .
Intemperate comments are the order of the day .
One has the cynical feeling that in the United States the degree of intensity of their comments perhaps depends on the degree of lobbying which they have had from , as one speaker said , the three companies which control over 80 % of the world banana trade .
I should like to congratulate the acts that have been taken so far by the Commissioner on our behalf and , in particular , to look after our European interests in the context of the WTO and to make sure that the solution is fair to ACP producers .
In The Times today a comment sums it up for me : ' Justice , fairness , mutual global responsibility should outweigh lumbering regulation .
Chiquita and the rest do not depend desperately on that last little slice of the European market .
The Caribbean producers do .
If big producers can sleep easy at night after fighting this ignoble cause of the day , the same should not be true of responsible world leaders . ' .
Therefore , secondly , in the light of the fact that the EU and the US are the leaders of the global economy , we should now see an initiative at presidency level : of that of the head of the EU presidency with President Clinton to make sure that the proper procedures in the WTO are followed and to lessen some of the rising political impact of this conflict which could become very dangerous .
Lastly , it seems to me that there is a lesson for our longer-term transatlantic partnership .
We can invent any dialogue that we like or an economic partnership , but unless you get the political communities buying into this system with a broader partnership agreement between the EU and the US so that we can , as politicians , not talk by video conference but actually have a deeper dialogue between the two sides of the Atlantic , then the situation will not improve .
I therefore urge the German presidency to take whatever initiative is necessary in the Bonn EU / US summit in June .
Mr President , this banal issue is turning into a western entitled ' Once Upon a Time in the West - of Europe ' .
The United States of America is advancing with a ' Colt ' 301 at its hip whereas Sir Leon Brittan is advancing with his hands behind his back prattling on about the law .
This banana dispute is definitely revealing the hidden truth about Europe .

Europe represents a union of great strength , yet we have been giving way on this issue for three years .

Europe represents cooperation with Africa , yet we are abandoning Cameroon and the Côte d 'Ivoire .
Europe represents the ultra-peripheral regions , yet we are abandoning Crete , Madeira , the Canaries , Guadeloupe and Martinique .
Europe represents social welfare , yet we are abandoning the banana workers , paid EUR 10 per hour , in favour of the slaves of the multinationals , paid EUR 2 per hour .
Europe represents the market and free trade of which Sir Leon is a symbol , yet we are yielding to American protectionism , to Section 301 and to 100 % customs duties .
Europe represents the law and the superiority of European law , yet we are yielding to the law of Geneva .
Just two multinationals , Chiquita and Dole , are forcing the European Commission , the Council of Ministers and the European Union as a whole to their knees .
This is why there must be changes in Europe .
We too must adopt a Section 301 .
We must reestablish unanimity , and the European Commission must not be left to defend our commercial interests because where there is sovereignty there is freedom and superiority .
Mr President , I should first like to make a minor correction to what my good friend James Elles has just said .
I do support his point of view , but according to him , neither the United States nor the European Union are major producers of bananas .
This is something the CNN channel has been reiterating in a campaign on behalf of the United States .
I am not sure if this is true of the United States , but Europe certainly is a major producer of bananas .
We produce about a million tonnes of bananas in the European Union , in the autonomous community I represent , in Madeira , Greece , Martinique and Guadeloupe .
The European Union is indeed a major producer of bananas .
I do however agree with everything else James Elles said and , of course , I agree entirely with Erika Mann .
The Union is currently involved in a legal dispute .
In such a situation , when a country like the United States has flouted the law , the only course of action open for the Community is to defend its position from within the law .
I find the position advocated by the Group of the European People 's Party through its spokesman Mr Kittelmann rather dangerous .
The proposal made was that we should now sit down and negotiate with the United States .
It is as if someone were to steal my wallet and I were then expected to sit down and negotiate with him .
If someone stole my wallet , I would go straight to the police , I would not sit down and negotiate with the thief .
The present situation is that the United States is in breach of the World Trade Organisation regulations and the only possible response is to take the action the Commission has taken , and deal with the matter through legal channels .
I should like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to certain statements printed in the Financial Times .
They may not be correct , but Mr Rod Abbot , the European Union Ambassador to the World Trade Organisation is quoted as saying that ' they will find probably something out of line ' and ' I don 't expect the answer to be zero because this is a political process as well ' .
The Union is not involved in a political process at this juncture .
What we are involved in is essentially a legal process .
The time to sit down and negotiate will be after the World Trade Organisation has decided on the solution .
I have asked the Commission to advise its representative to consider his actions carefully , because any statement by him may later be used against the Union .
Mr President , because of this dispute and its impact on the cashmere industry , feelings in Scotland are running very high .
People feel hurt and bewildered at being involved in a dispute which is not of their making but which threatens to devastate significant parts of the economy .
Such is the strength of feeling that a major Scottish newspaper The Sunday Mail has organised a campaign to boycott Chiquita bananas and it has received a massive response .
And this is understandable .
In this House also we are angry and dismayed at the petty vindictiveness of the United States .
So , let us take the gloves off .
No more softly , softly on Helms-Burton .
Let us have a WTO panel on that .
Full support from this House for your attack on the extra- territoriality of Section 301 , a re-affirmation of our solidarity with the EU 's traditional suppliers in the ACP , an unequivocal warning to the United States of what is at stake here - an ordered regime of world trade which we can build upon or a descent into chaos .
Who can now have faith in the WTO and its disputes settlement procedure , in particular the developing world .
They can see their vital interests being sacrificed on an altar of free trade which amounts to no more than a platform for the imperialist ambitions of the corporate cartels of the United States .
Applause
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since I represent a country with very remote banana-producing regions , I have to tell you of the deep revulsion felt by many communities in those regions at the frequency and duration of these never-ending conflicts over banana production .
Very often the problem is not so much the size of the banana production in these regions or countries but the important part that it plays in their economy or social and environmental fabric .
We cannot only look at volume or quantities ; we have to take into account our communities , our European Union and our ultraperipheral regions , regardless of whether they are small or big producers .
The ACP countries represent a pledge made by the European Union , a pledge that it has to honoured .
We have already given in to the World Trade Organisation on many occasions .
What is the aim ?
To flood the European Union with bananas produced in countries where low labour costs mean that they can practise unfair competition .
The attitude of the United States is an unfair one and calls for a firm stance from the Commission , with no giving in .
Fundamentally , the Commission must continue to fight for the interests of the small and poor regions that still exist in the European Union .
Mr President , bearing in mind , Commissioner , that the WTO referred the US call for sanctions to arbitration and that a panel has been established to determine whether the proposed new EU regime is in fact illegal , can you now assure this European Parliament , as my colleagues have asked you to do , that the Commission will not bow to illegal pressure from the United States .
This is essentially blackmail and a manipulation of the World Trade Organisation disputes procedure .
This blackmail aims to force the European Union to renege on its obligation to our traditional suppliers to advance the interests of one well-connected corporation , namely Chiquita .
Will you be prepared to stand firm in face of this kind of pressure and will you acknowledge , as I do , that in the past companies like the United Fruits Company were companies which bought Costa Rica and bought Hondurus .
Now we can say that the banana barons in the United States are actually buying the United States and buying favours from the people on Capitol Hill in Washington .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying how much I appreciate the broad degree of support that Parliament has given to the position that the European Union , and the Commission in particular , has taken .
That support is not only appreciated ; it is heartening , because it has to be added to the support given by the international community represented by the members of the WTO in their deliberations in Geneva .
I can assure all concerned that I share the sense of indignation expressed , for example by Mr Smith and Mrs Kinnock , at the fact that innocent people , both in Europe and in the banana-producing countries of the ACP , are being taken hostage in a battle for which they have no responsibility whatsoever .
I can assure you that we , the European Union , will take action against the United States , have taken action against the United States , but we shall do so in accordance with the rules of the WTO .
In discussing matters with the United States , as I was careful to say in my opening statement , we will stress above all our obligations to the ACP countries but also to producers of bananas within the European Union .
It is indeed the case that the companies concerned already have some 70 % and more of the market .
It is not the case that they are being excluded from Europe in any sense of the word .
It is also the case , as Mr Medina Ortega has rightly said , that we are engaged at the moment in a legal , and not just a political , process .
We shall abide by the law , when it is pronounced , and we shall condemn those , such as the United States , who break it in advance of any decision .
We shall not only condemn them .
We shall , as we have done , take them to the WTO and follow the consequences of that action .
Finally , I wish to say that there has been talk of trade wars .
We have not started a trade war and we shall not pursue a trade war but we shall do what we are entitled to do under the WTO rules .
Talk has also been prevalent about the impact of this on transatlantic relations generally .
I would say both to this House and to our American friends that it is impossible for action to be taken in flagrant violation of the rules of the WTO by the United States and for the United States to believe that can have no impact on our relations generally , important as they are .
I believe I have worked as hard as anybody not only to maintain but to develop those relations .
That is in the interests of Europe , it is in the interests of the United States and it is in the interests of the world as well .
However , for that to happen and for that to happen effectively and for the work of those who have striven to improve those relations not to be set at naught , the United States must play its part : it must abandon its resort to unilateralism and conform to the rules of world trade .
That is the appeal I launched to them but it is not just a vain appeal ; it is also expressed with the support of this Parliament and the determination of the European Union to defend its legitimate interests .
One speaker referred to an article which suggested that bananas might be my nemesis .
We all have our nemeses in due course .
It affects people and it reaches them at different times and on different issues .
I am not afraid of a banana nemesis because I know that the policy we are pursuing , with your support , is one of complete adherence to world trade , of a determination to build a relationship with the United States but on the solid basis of mutual respect and of equality on both sides of the Atlantic .
On that basis , nemesis can be avoided .
However , let us , in avoiding that nemesis in this way , also recognise that wiser counsels exist .
It is our task to ensure that wiser counsels prevail .
Thank you , Commissioner , we are behind you .
I have received eight motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11 a.m.
Own resources
The next item is the report ( A4-0105 / 99 ) by Mrs Haug , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the need to modify and reform the European Union 's own resources system .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy first has a point of order .
Mr President , before the debate on the Haug report starts , I wish to move the inadmissibility of this report . This is for the following two reasons : firstly on a matter of substance , linked to the report 's content , and secondly on a procedural matter , linked to the way in which the report was drafted in the Committee on Budgets .
Firstly , on the substance , this reports contains a provision which can simply be called the cofinancing of agricultural expenditure .
However , under the Treaty , agricultural expenditure is regarded as compulsory expenditure . For this reason , financing shared between the European Union budget and the national budgets cannot be permitted .
A minority opinion from Mr Bourlanges sets out this point .
Moreover , the report in question was not submitted for an opinion to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , although this committee is clearly responsible for expressing an opinion on an issue of this kind .
The procedural matter involves the fact that Rule 150 of the Rules of Procedure has not been applied .
This is because the principle of compromise amendments has been adopted , as so often happens in this committee , whereas the rapporteur should have presented a new report with a new deadline for the tabling of amendments .
These are the two reasons why , pursuant to Rule 128 , I am moving the inadmissibility of this matter which I would ask to be put to the vote .
As I understand it , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , you wish this item to be removed from the agenda .
I can now give the floor to one speaker in favour and one against .
Mr President , added to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's arguments is the fact that the Haug report is not available in French at the documentation centre .
A pirate electronic version is available but not in French .
Mr President , I wish to speak against the motion , since in my view the argument put forward by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , namely that cofinancing is impossible because the expenditure is compulsory , is not covered by the EC Treaty .
The question of compulsory expenditure has nothing to do with the way decisions are legitimised , which is why I would ask for the motion to be rejected and the Haug report to be debated now .
Mr President , I believe it should be quite normal and necessary in the European Parliament to discuss the future too and quite simply to mark out the course we want to follow in future , which is the purpose of this discussion .
I put to the vote Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's motion to remove this item from the agenda .
Parliament rejected the motion
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is quite clear that this week we are waiting for important signals to be set in the European Union , even if that is precisely what Mr Fabre-Aubrespy and a few other Members wanted to prevent .
In addition to the Structural Funds and the common agricultural policy , the financing of the Community needs to undergo radical reform .
President Santer rightly pointed out that financial reform is one of the main pillars of Agenda 2000 .
Parliament has already taken important steps in regard to the interinstitutional agreement by laying down our principles , but financial reform will quite simply remain inadequate unless we also see changes on the revenue side .
Interinstitutional agreement and reform of own resources are two sides of the same coin .
The financing structure we have at present no longer matches up to the increased demands made on it .
We need greater flexibility , transparency and autonomy in the European financial system .
The present system relies too heavily on sources of finance that are calculated in a highly complicated manner and which , on top of that , virtually still take the form of Member State contributions .
These shortcomings , together with the obvious imbalances in the distribution of the burden among the more prosperous Member States , need to be remedied .
The Committee on Budgets therefore proposes a step-by-step readjustment of the own resources system .
We voted on this last night and basically reached the following conclusions . Firstly , European budgetary revenue must take a simpler and more transparent form and come under stricter democratic control .
We want to replace VAT-based own resources and GNP-based own resources with a uniform , new , simplified source of own resources on a GNP basis .
This measure will also help eliminate the imbalances between Member States in relation to funding the budget .
Secondly , in principle the European budget must be financed under the same conditions for all Member States .
This means that existing correction mechanisms must be phased out and we must not add new correction mechanisms or even rebate systems .
In concrete terms this means that the British rebate must have been phased out gradually by the time of the accession of the first new Member State at the latest .
In its time , this rebate was granted to make up for the fact that the UK received too small a share of payments under the common agricultural policy .
But at that time the agricultural proportion of the budget , accounting for over 70 % , was considerably higher than it is today .
A rebate is anti-systemic and in no way justifiable , even in relation to financing the Structural Funds or the costs of enlargement .
Thirdly , I would emphasise that reducing economic differences and achieving solidarity among the Member States are an important pillar of the Treaty and of European integration .
But we cannot achieve this important aim on the expenditure side .
Such an attempt would merely create rules that would make the budget complicated and less transparent .
We have policies created specifically for the purpose of achieving solidarity among the Member States , such as structural policy .
We want horizontal justice and vertical solidarity to be our principle for shaping the budget .
Fourthly , ever widening imbalances have emerged in the course of time in the financing of the budget . They now form a considerable obstacle to the development of the European Union .
You can see that just by looking at the current discussions in the Council .
To put it plainly : there will always be net contributors and net beneficiaries , nobody disputes that .
But we must avoid excessive imbalances and unfair distributions of the burden .
Otherwise there is a risk that our people will doubt the legitimacy of the Union .
It is obvious that these imbalances can only be eliminated if the largest expenditure heading , agricultural policy , which accounts for almost 50 % of the budget , is not disregarded .
It is all the more important to have rules that include agriculture because that is where many of these imbalances stem from .
That is why it is sensible and reasonable for agricultural policy to be cofinanced in future , as the Committee on Budgets decided last night .
In this context let me also emphasise again that cofinancing does not mean renationalisation - on the contrary .
In fact it involves the Member States more closely in framing Community policy , in qualitative terms too , and therefore leads to deeper integration .
Nobody would even think of denying the Community nature of our structural policy .
However , we do not want anyone to be overburdened as a result of this kind of measure , and I could imagine that when cofinancing is implemented , differentiated rules , which is to say lower cofinancing rates , could perhaps be found for economically weaker Member States .
I would also add that the considerable differences of opinion in the Council on this subject have naturally also had an impact on the discussions on our report , and have also had an impact on Parliament .
Since there were heated disputes about the instrument of cofinancing , I submitted a compromise proposal to the Committee on Budgets . Accordingly , agricultural expenditure was to be reduced every year by a certain percentage and part of the resources thus obtained would go on structural aid measures in rural areas .
This compromise did not obtain a majority , for which those who strongly rejected cofinancing bear particular responsibility .
But since any solution that disregarded agricultural policy would have no substance and no prospects , we re-submitted the original cofinancing proposal , which was then accepted , although not until after the compromise proposal had been rejected .
By correcting the unbalanced distribution of the burden we create the conditions for a viable budget for the future .
To ensure that the European Union is financially independent , in the long term its financing should be based on new own revenue which does not take the form of Member State contributions .
Primarily this revenue would consist of own taxes .
As a first step towards this objective , a proportion of these taxes should accrue to the Union budget , on the basis of an agreement between the Member States on certain types of tax .
Here we must emphasise , however , that this new own revenue should not be additional but should replace existing revenue , so as to avoid putting a further burden on the European taxpayer .
In my view , what we are trying to achieve is to adjust the financing of the Union to the requirements of the new quality of Communitisation .
We have nearly achieved this new quality of Communitisation with the completion of economic and monetary union .
The Member States ' economies are interwoven in a particular manner .
That means that the Member States ' budgets and the European budget can no longer be looked at in isolation from one another .
In the long term the stability of our common currency and the potential for growth of our closely linked economies depend on whether the European budget also becomes capable of taking economic action .
When we vote on this report we will also be deciding our own ability to act .
Shall we sit and wait for Council decisions or are we capable of developing the power to shape policies by ourselves ?
If we adopt this report here on Thursday and make its demands the subject of negotiations with the Council on the new interinstitutional agreement , we will have made an important contribution to the reform of the European Union .
Support us along this new road and let us dare to embark on it together .
Applause
Mr President , I would be prepared to support the revolution but it is actually the opposite which is being proposed .
I am speaking on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs had two concerns on this issue .
The first was to ensure that clarification was given on whether , in the future , own resources should be national contributions or resources collected in the form of taxes from economic operators .
Although I must congratulate Mrs Haug 's report which has achieved some very important work , I do not share its conclusions and find its answer to this question to be rather paradoxical .
This is because it initially suggests that national contributions should end and then it proposes extending the GNP national contribution and making this the main resource of the Union 's budget .
Work that one out if you can !
The second concern of the Committee on Institutional Affairs was to clarify the status of cofinancing .
Would this be a subsidy granted by the Member States on a voluntary basis to supply certain areas of Community expenditure ?
If so , this would involve a system which would call into question the unity of the common agricultural market and which would involve renationalisation and distortion of competition , as each country would subsidise its own agriculture at will .
If , on the contrary , this involved compulsory cofinancing imposed on the Member States , this would be a new own resource , which is what justifies the project appearing in the Haug report .
This new resource would be outside the legal framework of the Treaty as it would not comply with Article 201 .
Either we have a system of own resources with unanimous agreement and ratification by the national parliaments or we forget this and work within Article 43 , in which case this would be highly illegal .
The main proposal of your report , Mrs Haug , is therefore contrary to the Treaty .
Applause
Mr President , despite the increased use of the concept of gross national product , I should like to look at contributions to the European Union 's budget from the point of view of the people 's Europe .
If we take as a point of reference the contribution made by each individual in each Member State expressed as a percentage of his or her income , it emerges that the contribution made to the Union 's budget by people in certain countries with a lower standard of living is higher than the Community average in terms of a proportion of their income .
On the other hand , if the same terms of reference are applied , say , to an Italian or to a British person , it is clear that their contributions are well below the average .
The European Commission 's communication puts forward three courses of action aimed at resolving the problem of budgetary imbalances . It should be borne in mind , however , that the Commission has been accused of partiality in formulating these proposals , as it only seems to defend the interests of certain net contributors .
It is abundantly clear that the Commission 's communication does not exhaust all possible solutions .
One of the most ingenious , as far as fairness is concerned , involves compensating countries whose balance differs from what it should be as a function of their gross national product and relative per capita wealth . The combined negative balance would be financed by the remaining members , excluding the Member States benefiting from cohesion funds .
This option would allow cohesion to be preserved within the Union and would permit a fairer distribution of the financial effort required to maintain this level of cohesion .
Though I commend the rapporteur for the work she has put into this report , I have to disagree with her . We should be advocating fairness - equitas - a principle which dates from the earliest days of Roman law .
Mr President , firstly I should like to congratulate Mrs Haug on her report , not just because she is from our group but because she embarked on a Mission Impossible to try to get the agreement of the European Parliament on the future financing of the European Union .
I am sure when we come to the vote you will see how impossible that position has proved to be .
And yet the hard work she has put into it has made some progress towards a position that all the political groups can support .
Her original drafts resulted in 241 amendments .
That shows there was more than a little interest .
The fact that 241 amendments were tabled gave rise to some concern in the Committee on Budgets .
The last thing we wanted to do was to come before Parliament with so many amendments to be voted on .
So we asked the rapporteur to try to obtain as many compromise amendments as possible .
And that is exactly what she did .
She then put together a revised draft .
And that is what the Socialist Group has tried to go along with .
She has pleased just about every nationality except one , namely my own , in the way she has taken on the majority of interests .
She has done very well .
However , I would not be telling the truth if I were to say that we were unanimous in our support for the final report we voted on last night in committee .
If I were Greek or Irish , where the GDP of my country would be affected by Amendment No 141 which refers to the co-financing of agriculture , I would not want to vote for that amendmen .
Others believe that Amendment No 141 should be supported wholeheartedly as it would help reduce the net payments of their Member States and if I were German or Dutch , I would wholeheartedly support this new paragraph 13 .
Fourteen out of the fifteen delegations within the Socialist Group want rid of the UK rebate and they will vote for those paragraphs which refer to it .
If I were speaking for the British , I would make a valid case why the UK rebate is fair and justified but I am not speaking for the British and therefore I cannot say these things .
The one thing my group can agree on is that the status quo needs to be changed .
It has not developed in any systematic way nor in accordance with any European strategy or real forward planning .
Rather , it has developed as a reaction to events at given periods of time .
I will give you a couple of examples .
The original traditional own resources was the one truly European own resource .
At the same time that one truly European own resource is waning rapidly in its importance .
Yet , the good old traditional own resources are the cause of major headaches for control and concern about fraud .
And what about the VAT and GNP-based own resources ?
As a member of the Committee on Budgets for almost ten years I would challenge any Member - except Mr Samland and Mr Colom I Naval - to explain the formula for VAT and GNP-based own resources , that is to say how to calculate Member States contributions .
Try to explain it to members of the general public and - even if you can do it - how are they to understand it ?
That is the situation that exists .
We have a system of own resources that is extremely complex and lacking in transparency .
All this Parliament wants is a clear and comprehensible system .
We are somewhere near to getting an agreement on that through Mrs Haug 's report .
I would hope that at the end of the voting we have a clear and concise position and most of my group will be supporting it .
Mr President , I wish to move a procedural motion .
At the end of the morning sitting , the President put to an informal vote a change in the agenda for this afternoon in order to allow Sir Leon Brittan to attend .
We have now reached Question Time and this change has caused a totally unacceptable imbalance between the political groups in this debate .
The rapporteur , Mrs Haug from the Socialist Group , has just spoken for eight minutes followed by Mr Wynn from the Socialist Group for five minutes .
This means that this debate on a report that is extremely important for European finances will now be suspended until the evening sitting , thereby preventing the other political groups from speaking before 9.00 p.m.
For this reason I urge you to ensure that at least one speaker from each group is given the floor by encroaching into Question Time .
Otherwise , the press who are listening in the press room will have heard thirteen minutes from one group - actually five but the rapporteur is from the same group - and nothing from the other groups .

In view of the importance of this report and of the vote on Thursday which will be closely followed , with three minority opinions and roll-call votes , particularly with regard to agriculture , I would consider it deplorable if this House were to begin Question Time without at least one speaker per group having spoken .
Mr President , I would ask you to consult our colleagues because I feel that the groups must be allowed to vote on this in the same way as you put to the vote the possible referral of the report back to committee due to the inadmissibility of the matter .
You are right , Mr Giansily , that there is a tremendous problem every time we change the agenda .
It makes life very difficult for Members , Commissioners and the press .
I also hope you will appreciate that when it is established that Question Time begins at 5.30 p.m. it is very difficult for the President of the sitting to disregard that .
But if you insist that we take a vote on the matter , then of course it can be done .
However , I would prefer it if we could avoid that and let Question Time begin now .
On the other hand , I think it is important that Mr Giansily has made our audience and the press aware of the imbalance which has arisen in that only members of one political group have had the floor .
I think you are quite right in that respect , although I would point out that Mr Bourlanges has also spoken , as well as Mr Valdivielso .


Do you insist on having a vote , Mr Giansily ?
Yes , Mr President , I am asking for a vote .
Mr President , I just wanted to propose a compromise .
I think seven groups still have to speak and there are only a few minutes left .
Perhaps we could come to a compromise .
After all , you do not have to work through the whole list of speakers .
I understood Mr Giansily to mean that he wanted the seven Members who are speaking on behalf of the political groups to have the floor before Question Time .
One speaker per group , Mr President .
Mr President , I should like to make a further remark .
When the opinion of the House was sought on the timing of the Commission 's declaration on bananas , we were never told that that would mean cutting short the debate on own resources .
I am one of those paying the price for this , as I am will now have to speak in the evening .
It does seem to me , however , that it is politically unacceptable not to allow all the groups to express an opinion at least once before postponing the debate .
Mr President , I would suggest that we continue the debate here in plenary immediately after Question Time .
I put to the vote Mr Giansily 's request for the political group spokesmen to be given the floor before Question Time .
Parliament approved the request
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Budgetary Control has repeatedly considered the system of own resources on the basis of the various reports by the Court of Auditors .
Mrs Haug has now done an extremely comprehensive job on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , but I am sorry to have to say that the great number of amendments tabled in committee have not made the whole business any clearer or more convincing .
Basically I would like to point out that as long as the issue is confined to the fair distribution between the Member States of the own resources that have to be found , we will keep having to deal with conflicting financial and budgetary interests , to bemoan the lack of transparency and lack of ascribability of both revenue and expenditure .
Only if the contribution of each individual taxpayer throughout Europe is taken seriously and evaluated could this dispute be brought to an end .
That is why I particularly regret the rejection of the proposal from our Committee on Budgetary Control that the Commission provide information concerning the possibility of personalising the contributions that feed the own resources system .
We should adhere to the principle of own resources , even if only traditional own resources - duties and agricultural levies - are genuine own resources , which in addition have been regressive for years .
In addition , the Member States deduct these own resources as their contribution and ask for 10 % of them back for their customs administrations .
One should at least check whether this 10 % can be appropriated for the customs administrations in the first place .
At any rate , there is still quite a lot of circumvention and evasion in this area by the Member States .
VAT-based own resources are tending increasingly to take the form of national contributions to the EU budget .
Their share is being distorted because of the size of the black economy in some states .
GNP-based own resources still correspond most closely to contributions .
But I am sorry that the net-contributor issue is not being resolved at all .
I am in favour of cofinancing , I am in favour of the phased abolition of the British rebate and I am also in favour of examining the question of new own resources .
Mr President , I should also like to compliment Mrs Haug on her report .
She nearly had a mission impossible but we should make a distinction between some very controversial points and the general direction in which Parliament can express itself .
It is essential for Parliament to indicate before the Berlin summit that it does not like the concept of juste retour , that it does not want to have further exemptions , that it wants to review the exemptions of the British rebate and that it does not want to go in the direction of a general correction mechanism .
These are very fundamental points for the future .
It is also important for the future for us to look at the prospect of having own resources of a real nature , although this may still take some time yet .
In that respect it is a report of fundamental importance which we should welcome .
Obviously there are a number of points which cause difficulties .
The issue of cofinancing will clearly be shared by a large majority of my group .
I would take issue with Mr Bourlanges who says it is illegal .
He said so in so many words .
It is not illegal .
It is the review of a policy which should remain communautaire .
There is no question about that .
The question is whether , in 1999 , we should still have the same amount of finance in the Community budget for an agricultural policy which is in need of review .
That element has nothing to do with legality .
It is a question of appropriateness and of review .
In the same way it is very important that the report very clearly says that we should find corrections on the expenditure side in the future .
We know , for instance , that within the framework of the review the Spanish Government has put forward suggestions concerning asylum and immigration .
It may be that the specific ways in which it is formulated need correction , but it is that kind of correction which will ultimately make , as Mrs Haug said , a Community of solidarity and a Community of justice .
Against that general background the Liberal Group is very positive about her overall approach .
There will certainly be individual items with which we may disagree .
It is clear also that not everybody would be happy to phase out the UK rebate right away .
We have heard that point before .
But again , it is relevant to know that a large majority in Europe does not want to have any specific positions for any specific group of countries or individual countries .
Indeed , as Mrs Haug rightly said , it should also be clear that by the time the first new batch of countries comes in , there should be an end to such special arrangements .
That is a very positive point .
It would be quite illogical if one Member State were not to cofinance enlargement of the European Union , which has nothing to do with the fact that in 1984 there was a specific situation concerning agriculture .
Against that background it is also important that Mrs Haug makes it clear that we should have more democracy and a bigger say for Parliament in the future .
Our colleague , Mr Colom i Naval will have considerable support for the issue of having more flexibility and transparency .
Mr President , thank you for having agreed to put our proposals to the vote .
Clearly they were positively supported . In my opinion , this is because Mrs Haug 's report is extremely important for the future of this House and the European Union .
This report boils down to just a few questions .
Are the own resources that allow Community policies to be financed still sufficient ?
Do they guarantee the financial autonomy of the European Union ?
And finally , will they be sufficient to finance the future enlargement and to allow the Community to keep its commitments with regard to the common policies ?
The problem is that , although the rapporteur asked good questions , the Committee on Budgets provided poor answers in its vote yesterday .
Firstly , Mrs Haug has instigated a real witch-hunt against the common agricultural policy because , just by citing the share of agricultural expenditure in the Community budget , she has asserted that this is a main cause of the budgetary imbalance .
We cannot support such an erroneous assumption .
Although the share of agricultural expenditure in the budget has remained constant over the last twenty years in terms of GDP , it has nevertheless constantly fallen from year to year because the other policies have increased and also because a financial straitjacket has been imposed on this .
Agricultural expenditure now represents less than 45 % of the total volume of EU expenditure whereas , when this House was elected for the first time in 1979 , it represented over 90 % .
Secondly , having found that the CAP share of the budget is inappropriate , Mrs Haug proposes nothing less than cofinancing of agricultural expenditure by the Member States .
Mr Bourlanges has just explained that this is totally unacceptable .
This is due primarily to the special status of agricultural expenditure which , because of its effect on the economy and its support of the markets , cannot be lumped together with all the non-compulsory expenditure and cannot be subject to the will of this House .
Even partial cofinancing of the CAP from national budgets would inevitably lead to agricultural expenditure being renationalised and would lead the European Union down the dangerous road of reversing the integrated nature of the common policies .
In this case , we cannot risk heading disastrously towards the disintegration of the common policies as , due to financial convenience and political opportunity , full financing would no longer be assured .
Any reform of Europe 's finances must consolidate Community solidarity , yet the options put forward by certain delegations continue to give cause for concern , particularly in terms of the Structural Funds .
In my opinion , as recalled after the Brussels and Edinburgh European Councils of 1988 and 1992 respectively and the signing of the Maastricht Treaty , the main priority in this issue is to respect the commitment made to the Member States which most need these funds , namely Greece , Ireland and Portugal . In this respect I am speaking on behalf of my colleague , Nikitas Kaklamanis .
Finally , how can we fail to keep the commitments made previously when we are trying to integrate these states into the European Union and to ask for their full solidarity ?
The vote on Thursday will demonstrate that solidarity must be maintained between the Members of this House and between the European partners .
Mr President , the first question to be asked about the European Union 's own resources is whether they are sufficient for the policies that we intend to implement .
What policies and at what level ?
Or , in other words , to use an expression we have often used , we must have the means to realise our ambitions .
This is our vital starting-point , especially now that we are heading towards a further and considerable enlargement due to bring into the European Union a large number of countries that , at best , have a level of development that is markedly below the current Community average .
These questions cannot be avoided . That is why , in our opinion , a clear answer will have to be found to the following questions : do we or do we not wish to continue with the current Community policies - and now is not the time for us to discuss what kind of policies they are - and do we or do we not want to prepare the ground for extending them in the future to the applicant countries ?
Furthermore , we must also consider whether there might not be other areas in which Community action is desirable and which would need resources to be allocated to them .
I am thinking , for example , of the fight against unemployment .
What I have just said obviously clashes with the general direction taken in this discussion since , very often , the level of implementation in terms of revenue is confused with the level of implementation in terms of expenditure . Also , on a more fundamental level , there seems to be one overriding concern : to regard the current level of own resources as adequate and as a proper starting-point and , in the light of the new developments - particularly preparations for enlargement - to settle for a fresh redistribution and allocation of those resources .
Obviously , we do not go along with that approach , which is , in any case , out of keeping with all of the efforts made by the European Parliament on this subject for many years .
We are the first to call for a root-and-branch reform of the CAP , but that does not mean that a properly reformed CAP will require less finances .
We must , after all , ensure a fresh distribution of the available resources between producers and regions .
Therefore , we reject outright the proposal to renationalise CAP funding and the proposals to introduce a degressive approach .
On the other hand , we feel that solidarity and cohesion must be at the forefront of the European Union 's concerns , and we even believe that the current 1.27 % of GNP earmarked for those objectives will prove insufficient to guarantee effective redistribution in the future .
In particular , we should make it crystal clear that there can be no enlargement with this level of own resources .
Furthermore , there are other job-creation projects which cannot be delayed , and they also call for additional funding .
I would say that this is the central issue : how the European Union is to be properly financed .
Therefore , in our opinion , and without wishing to go over the top , we think that this problem can only be solved if we improve the existing system of own resources , in particular by giving greater weight to GNP when calculating the transfers .
We believe that this is the only sure way to achieve this objective .
Mr President , the fate of the Haug report on Thursday still rests in the lap of the gods , but nevertheless , many thanks for this great endeavour .
I would like to make it clear that the question of cofinancing agricultural policy has nothing to do with the cheapest version of the net-contributor debate that we keep hearing but that it is necessary in order to achieve what we have always called for : structural reform that will bring about more democracy in expenditure policy and that , above all , can make us capable of enlargement , for otherwise we would never manage to finance eastward enlargement .
In my view , to describe this is as ' the only communitised policy ' is just a cliché to hide the fact that in this area , which accounts for nearly half the budget , there is no democratic control .
When the ministers for agriculture meet and decide on their EUR 45 billion , neither the European Parliament nor any regional or national parliament has any say .
That is the fundamental mistake in what is called the communitised agricultural policy .
Support for environmental policy in rural areas , yes , as a structural policy , but support for a single sector , the agricultural sector , really is out of date in my view . It casts very serious doubt on the credibility of European policy-making and is something that must also be discussed during the negotiations on a new financial framework .
In that respect I warmly thank the Committee on Budgets for nailing its colours to the mast !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a shame that so little attention is being paid to this very important debate , which we owe to Mrs Haug , because we are in the eye of a major storm which arose in our Committee on Budgetary Control in what I might describe as a spectacularly unacceptable way .
I must say we are content that the question of national rebates has been abandoned : that notion - like all other such demands relating to sums totalling some 10 or 12 000 billion lire , a mere fraction of a Member State 's overall budget - goes to the core of a topical debate which is gnawing away at European integration .
I welcome the abandonment of this principle ; however I do not welcome some of the attitudes struck in the report , particularly where we resuscitate an idea that has disappeared from the agenda of our governments and the Council of Ministers .
We learned a few days ago that the German Government , which had been calling more loudly than any other for a new method of cofinancing the common agricultural policy , has withdrawn its proposal .
To make Parliament , which unfortunately has a purely advisory role , return to the fray on this issue now strikes me as a mistake on the part of our committee yesterday .
We shall vote in favour of the report , as long as it is somehow divested of all such inappropriate and blatantly controversial considerations .
European integration does not depend on a few thousand million lire , but on creating true political union among the peoples of Europe .
Mr President , the characteristic feature of our four own resources is that they are inappropriate . There are three reasons for this .
Firstly , their basis of assessment is fudged . This is true of both VAT and GNP .
Secondly , they are not clear or transparent . Who among us can calculate the British rebate ?
Thirdly , these resources fortunately do not belong exclusively to Europe but are disguised contributions from the Member States .
It is now intended to alter this system under pressure due to enlargement to the East and pressure from Germany .
The European Commission has made a number of proposals .
In fact , these own resources are serving to reveal the truth .
The European Union cannot maintain its ceiling of 1.27 % of GNP and so we will ultimately end up with additional European taxes .
Federalism will roll on implacably . Just as in the United States of America , Brazil , India and Australia , we will have to share income tax and corporation tax receipts between the nation-states and Europe .
Only one thing can protect us from this unfortunate fate and that is the rule of unanimity .
Thank you , Mr Martinez .
We shall adjourn the debate at this point .
It will be resumed this evening at 9 p.m.
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0144 / 99 ) .
Ladies and gentlemen , today 's Question Time to the Commission is starting 26 minutes later than it should according to the agenda approved on Monday .
I apologise to the Commissioners for the delay .
We had asked them to attend at 5.30 p.m.
I apologise also to the authors of the questions .
Question No 41 by José Valverde López ( H-0139 / 99 )
Subject : Food analysis unit of the Environment Institute ( Ispra ) The European Environment Institute in Ispra has a food analysis unit which monitors the quality of food ingredients , additives and chemical products generally used in the preparation of foodstuffs .
What links does this unit have with the various Commission services responsible for food security ?
Are there any plans to incorporate this unit into the planned European Food Security Agency ?
I should like to welcome Mrs Cresson and ask her to reply to Mr Valverde 's question .
Mr President , I am happy to answer this question which concerns an important subject , namely the Environment Institute and the problem of food safety .
Since 1 October 1998 , the Food Products Unit has been part of the new Institute for Health and Consumer Protection of the Joint Research Centre .
This unit provides the independent scientific expertise needed for preparing and implementing various EU policies .
As the fifth framework programme for research is implemented , the unit will continue to provide scientific and technical support to various directorates-general of the Commission , for example to DG III for industry , to DG VI for agriculture , to DG XI for the environment , to DG XXI for customs and to DG XXIV for consumer health protection .
The main research priorities of the unit within the fifth framework programme for research are to control the safety and quality of food and related items and to detect genetically modified organisms in food and also in the environment .
The unit 's activities will essentially involve developing , validating and harmonising analytical methods .
To a certain extent this involves determining uniform European analytical methods which we can therefore regard as reference methods .
The unit 's activities will also involve developing databases and disseminating the results of research .
The areas covered by the unit include food and animal feed , cosmetics , food packaging and childcare products and toys .
I can give you some more specific examples of the work to be carried out by this Institute . In particular it will validate two methods , one involving general screening and the other which will be more specific , for the detection of genetically modified organisms in staple foods , for example soya bean or maize flour .
This study will be extended to processed products .
I can also cite the development of methods for determining the presence of vegetable oils and fats other than cocoa butter in chocolate .
This study will serve as a scientific basis for the new ' chocolate ' directive which is being prepared .
The Institute will also participate in studies on the migration of phthalates in toys .
This work involves developing and coordinating the validation of a mechanical method to simulate the sucking of toys and childcare products .
You will be aware that there was recently a major debate on this subject because phthalates can be the cause of serious illnesses in children who suck or chew toys .
Another example is the validation of methods in respect of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and the safety of animal feed , one demonstrating the appropriate heat treatment of animal meals according to the legislation and the other allowing the detection of animal meals in animal feed .
Finally , I can mention a database for wine , covering over 10 000 wines , and the fight against fraud in the area of wine , alcohol and spirits . These are just a few specific examples of the Institute 's activity .
As for the reference to the European Agency for Food Safety , the Commission would point out that it has not so far put forward any proposals on this .
It therefore seems premature today to discuss the possible participation of joint research centres . However , this is clearly something which can be studied at a later date .
I should first like to thank the Commissioner most sincerely for her lengthy reply to my question . Her detailed account of the major restructuring which has taken place at Ispra and , in particular , of the new activities undertaken by the Institute for Health will also be of great interest to the general public .
What I would like to emphasise if I may , Commissioner , is that the Commission must continue working on the project to establish the new food analysis unit which will be able to coordinate all these activities and render the combined effort more efficient .
I am reiterating a hope rather than putting a question , and I hope that the Commission will be as efficient as it has been in restructuring the Ispra centre and will be able to complete its work with the creation of this unit .
I can confirm to the honorable Member my interest in the problem of food safety .
I am keen that particular attention is paid to this subject within the restructuring of the Joint Research Centre .
I can inform you that a document will be made available to Members .
This gives the work programme for 1999 and also contains a description of what has been achieved , in greater detail than I can give you today , together with the list of publications which have been issued as a result of the work carried out by the Joint Research Centre .
Thank you for your reply , Mrs Cresson .
Once again , I apologise for the delay and thank you for waiting so patiently to reply to Mr Valverde 's question .
Thank you very much .
Question No 42 by Christine Oddy ( H-0211 / 99 )
Subject : Financial control problems in Nicaragua I visited Nicaragua from 17-21 February and was alarmed to find , when I went to the Commission office in Waspam Rio Coco that no work appeared to be carried out and the people at the office were watching television ; a caretaker showed us round and said the project manager had gone to Managua in December and had not returned .
The skeleton staff had not been paid for several months , there were no files in the filing cabinet , the Land Rover outside had lost its spare tyre and was not properly locked and another Commission car was lying wrecked in another part of the village .
I have severe misgivings about the appropriateness of such a lavish Commission office in such a small remote village .
Will the Commission investigate urgently ?
I offer you a warm welcome , Mr Marín . Mr Marín and I go back a long time .
Not only are we friends but we also fought side by side in the cause of civil liberties in Spain during a difficult period . So I am particularly pleased to be able to give him the floor .
Mr Marín , you may reply to Mrs Oddy 's question .
Thank you for your kind introduction , Mr President .
Mrs Oddy has asked me about the situation concerning what appears to be a European Commission office in the Río Coco area of Nicaragua . I must first of all make it quite clear that the only European Commission delegation in Nicaragua is located in Managua .
The premises you visited do not belong to the European Commission and the staff you met are not employed by the European Commission .
That project was completed in 1997 .
Therefore , none of the individuals on the premises have any professional association with the European Commission .
As regards the office equipment and the two Land Rovers which you said were not being put to good use in 1997 , you will doubtless be aware that whenever a project is concluded , any remaining vehicles and office equipment which are sufficiently depreciated are handed over to the local authorities . In this case , the vehicles and office equipment were handed over to the Nicaraguan governor of the Río Coco province .
Clearly , there has been a misunderstanding .
Nevertheless , I have instructed the Commission 's delegate in Managua to visit the Waspam region and ascertain in situ why the Nicaraguan authorities did not , as it appears , put the two Land Rovers and the office equipment donated to them to good use .
Thank you for the answer .
I am aware that the project was closed down but nevertheless the building is operating to all intents and purposes as a Commission building .
It has a sign to that effect outside and the two vehicles I referred to have Commission logos on them .
To the outside world it appears to be a Commission office and people in the village refer to it as a Commission office .
I do not accept the answer I was given and the people who I spoke to thought that they were still employed by the Commission .
I can only reiterate what I have asked in the original question .
This situation needs to be investigated urgently .
If there is a misunderstanding then the people should be put right who think that they are in arrears of salary .
Mrs Oddy , the necessary checks have already been carried out , and I can confirm that the building in question does not belong to the Commission .
I am unaware of the reasons behind this situation you describe though I can make an educated guess at them .
The delegate has indeed confirmed that the European Union 's logo is painted on the wall of the building .
The European Union 's logo is also painted on the two Land Rovers .
As I explained , when a project is completed any sufficiently depreciated vehicles are handed over to the local authorities , and in this case they were given to the local governor .
I will tell our delegate to get rid of the logos on the Land Rovers .
But I must stress that the building does not belong to the European Commission .
It used to , but we stopped using it two years ago .
A misunderstanding has arisen .
Quite apart from all this and following the devastation caused by hurricane Mitch , the Commission decided to repeat the process , as you will doubtless be aware .
On this occasion , of course , it was handled in a different way , and not through the local governor of the Río Coco province .
A competition was held and was won by an Italian NGO .
We decided on such a procedure because this small example illustrates once again how difficult it is to deal with what we always term sustainable development .
The European Union financed this project aimed at the Misquito Indians for five years .
According to the arrangements for sustainable development , once a certain period of time has elapsed , responsibility must be transferred to the local authorities .
We did so two years ago in 1997 . You have seen for yourself how sustainable development often requires constant European presence , because when European cooperation is withdrawn , the kind of situation you witnessed can arise .
Rest assured that the delegate has been instructed to ask the governor of the Río Coco region for an explanation , and I shall also ask for the logos to be removed from the office and from the Land Rovers in order to prevent any confusion amongst the local population .
I have not been to Nicaragua but Christine Oddy has and she has reported faithfully what she saw .
It would seem to me to indicate an unhappy situation in the representative 's office because he should have done two years ago what you are now arranging to do .
That office is overdue for a visit of inspection from your department - possibly , from the Financial Controller and possibly also from the Court of Auditors .
When this question was raised some months ago , the body concerned foolishly wrote to Managua and said it is not intended to make a visit during this year .
If one is worried about things not being properly run it seems a pity if you advertise the fact that they are not going to be checked .
Mr Kellett-Bowman , I am not exactly sure what you are trying to say .
Could you please explain it more clearly ?
I thought I was clear enough .
What I have been hearing about the representative in Nicaragua is indicative that the project had not been properly closed down .
A visit to Managua should be made .
I invite you to say that an inspection visit will be made , possibly from your department , from the Financial Controller and from the Court of Auditors .
Mr Kellett-Bowman , I understand you now .
The delegate has been asked to visit the area to ascertain exactly how the local governor of the Río Coco region has been dealing with the project since it was transferred to the Nicaraguan authorities . I must however reiterate that a misunderstanding has arisen .
I have been asked how Commission premises came to be in such a regrettable state and I can only reply that the premises in question do not belong to the Commission .
Secondly , the staff on those premises - who were indulging in rather unorthodox behaviour , according to Mrs Oddy - are not Commission employees .
I would like to make that crystal clear .
Therefore , neither the building nor the staff have any connection with the Commission .
How do you expect a financial audit to be carried out in relation to a situation that is based on a misunderstanding over officials who are not employed by the Commission ?
I said Managua , I did not say the site of the project .
Mr Kellett-Bowman , when the Commission states the obvious , it sometimes provokes a reaction I cannot comprehend .
I am referring to the Río Coco project .
Naturally , the Managua delegation ...
The President cut the Commissioner off
Mr Marín , please reply without engaging in a dialogue , as the Rules do not provide for one .
I have been far too generous with Mr Kellett-Bowman because he and I work together on Fridays , but I cannot allow myself to continue in this vein .
Please reply as you feel appropriate and we shall move on to another question .
There is no difficulty over carrying out an audit of our official delegation in Managua as you request . It has to be audited in any case , as part of SEM 2000 .
As regards the premises referred to in Mrs Oddy 's question however , those premises do not , I stress , belong to the European Commission , nor , I repeat , are the people she saw at those premises employed by the European Commission .
It is as simple as that .
I am sorry , but that is the way it is .
I am grateful to the honourable Member for his question .
In reply I would say that following the Council decision of 16 July 1998 , the Commission was authorised to open negotiations with the states whose civil aviation regulatory authorities are full members of the joint aviation authorities but not members of the European Community , with a view to concluding an agreement establishing a European civil aviation safety authority that takes the legal form of an international organisation .
The negotiations will be carried out in accordance with the negotiating directives and in accordance with the ad hoc procedures specified by the Council in order to ensure close coordination between the Community and its Member States .
The authorisation to open negotiations entailed the establishment of a special committee to which the Commission is obliged to submit a draft text of the founding treaty before commencing negotiations .
The Commission has prepared a first draft text which has recently been submitted to the members of the special committee .
When a text has been finalised it will serve as a basis for the negotiations with the European countries outside the Community .
It is envisaged that such negotiations can be finalised within the course of this year The European Parliament will naturally be kept fully informed of the process .
The convention will then have to be ratified by the contracting parties and signatories in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements .
For the Community this will be done in conformity with Article 228 of the Treaty , that is after consultation of this Parliament by the Council .
In order to avoid delay in implementation it is envisaged that the potential contacting parties should agree to implement the convention on a provisional basis as early as possible .
Thank you for your reply .
I have asked this question on behalf of the voters in my country who are interested in what you have to say .
I am not especially knowledgeable myself , but I understand from Commissioner Kinnock 's remarks that ' things are coming along ' , the task is on the way to completion and work is progressing on the forthcoming convention .
I am well aware that it is not possible for Mr Kinnock to tell us when it is likely to be completed or become a reality , since it will have to be ratified by the Member States .
However , I should still like to have some idea of when we may expect the convention to enter into force , as it is a matter of considerable importance for all the Member States of the Union and for people in general .
I am getting used to procedures here very gradually .
I share the honourable Member 's eagerness to ensure that the safety authority is established quickly and is soon operational .
Indeed , I think I can safely say that there is nothing but goodwill towards this development which is why , exceptionally , we have a provision which will allow for the operation of the convention on a provisional basis as soon as possible .
Everybody is working in a cooperative spirit and I hope the time for the establishment and operation of this essential safety authority is now not far away .
I doubt , however , whether it will fall within the term of this Commission .
I just hope that I will be invited to the opening ceremony because we worked damned hard to get it .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
We trust you will be invited to that opening ceremony and to many more .
Question No 44 by Bernie Malone ( H-0209 / 99 )
Subject : Dumping of canned fruit on South African market Is the Commission aware of the profoundly detrimental impact that certain aspects of the present Common Agricultural Policy are having on many third-world farmers ? I refer particularly to subsidies for EU fruit producers and the dumping of European fruit on the South African market .
Does the Commission agree that this situation is undoing much of the good work being done by Community development policy , and if so , what does the Commission intend to do to rectify this ?
I should like to welcome Mr Pinheiro and ask him to reply to Mrs Malone 's question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the question put to me by Bernie Malone could also apply to other products in the past , especially beef , during the upheaval on the South African market .
European exports rose during that period but the situation has now been rectified .
As for the issue of canned fruit and vegetables on the South African market , I can tell you that European exports are extremely small .
The only product of any significance is canned tomatoes , but even they account for no more than 7 % of the market .
They are therefore unlikely to lead to any sort of crisis or cause major concern .
As far as the fruit and vegetable market in South Africa is concerned , the country suffered serious problems in the wake of the World Trade Organisation agreements , especially since South Africa applied a highly irrational customs system , often imposing customs duties instead of quotas .
In some cases , the reduction in customs duties was excessive .
The situation was such that , when we started negotiating the cooperation and trade agreement with South Africa , we had to accept - and did - that the principles of ' stand still ' and ' roll back ' - traditionally sacrosanct principles in negotiations and free trade agreements - could be subject to a number of exemptions in the case of South Africa , so as to take account of the unusually large reduction in customs duties on certain South African products and , specifically , on goods such as canned fruit and vegetables .
The negotiations that took place forced us to look in detail at our bilateral trade in canned fruits and vegetables and all other products and enabled us to reach a satisfactory solution : South African exports to Europe will continue to take account of our ability to absorb them , the country 's export capacity and the Community 's own supplies .
These were by no means easy negotiations but I can tell you that the final outcome is well-balanced . It is true that some Mediterranean countries maintain that we were too generous with the South Africans .
For my part , I feel that the negotiations were balanced and that they open the way for achieving a sustainable market .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
This is an area of European policy that a lot of citizens are very worried about .
You are aware of the campaign that is being run in relation to canned tomatoes in particular .
It is not just a few people campaigning but it is a massive campaign .
Many of the letters I receive in Dublin are from members of religious orders , for example .
They have a very healthy respect for the European Union but they disagree fundamentally with the way the common agricultural policy operates with regard to all the areas mentioned in relation to food and also in relation to fisheries .
You know yourself that the agreement with South Africa was held up because of the fisheries question , too .
Europeans are going down there and trawling for whatever they can get , damaging the indigenous fishing industry .
You have to take more into account the whole question of , not just giving aid , but fair trade .
I would like you to come back and tell us what reply I can give to the people who have written to me .
As regards canned tomatoes , the largest exports that we had account for roughly 7 % of the South African market .
As regards other African countries , our exports are of roughly 90 000 tonnes for the whole ACP area .
So , I do not think frankly they are disrupting the internal market in South Africa .
As regards fisheries , nowadays there is no access for European boats to South African waters .
We have asked South Africa to put us on an equal footing with other countries which have access to South African waters .
It is not asking too much to be considered on an equal footing especially when we are prepared to open up our markets to South African fisheries products in a way which suits South Africa .
It is quite easy to blame big Europe for some of the difficulties that exist from time to time in South Africa .
But let me reassure you that in the Development Council , and in the Commission as well , we have been looking very carefully at all the potential inconsistencies between CAP policies and development policies .
The problem with beef arose a few years ago and I am quite confident that has been solved and that there is no such problem today .
But if one should occur , we are always prepared to deal with it .
Our policy is to have coherence between the CAP and development policy .
So we are always open to listen to complaints and study them , in any situation whatsoever .
I congratulate the Commissioner on his valour in doing the dirty work for DG VI on this question but the information that I have received is that dumping of cheap subsidised tomatoes on South Africa has had very serious consequences for domestic producers there .
It may only be 7 % spread over a year but the information I have received and which I will pass on to you is that a flood of cheap tomatoes , particularly last year , contributed to the loss of some 10 000 jobs in the canning industry , in areas with extremely high unemployment in South Africa .
Certainly the trade unions and others have been blaming the European Union for that .
I think that matter does need looking at again .
On a related matter : as you know , when the trade agreement with South Africa was rejected by the General Affairs Council , France raised the general issue of export refunds as one of its reasons for refusing the deal .
Can you tell us how confident you are that the meeting of 22 March will endorse the trade agreement ?
Sometimes subsidies are paid to canned-tomato producers because the price at which they have to purchase tomatoes is higher than the international average price .
So it is to compensate them for the higher prices which the CAP imposes on tomatoes , to ensure a level playing field as regards canned tomatoes .
Sometimes we are accused of dumping because of those subsidies to the producers of canned tomatoes .
I do not think it is appropriate to use that word .
The overall amount was 6 500 tonnes of canned tomatoes .
That is the figure of our exports to South Africa which accounts for 7 % of their consumption .
No doubt , after these two interventions , we will look at it again , together with DG VI .
As to trade agreement and refunds , it was indeed suggested at a certain moment in the negotiations that if South Africa would lower some tariffs we would phase out our export refunds .
For the European Union , the difficulty for France is not with the specificity of a given product but the fact that these may rise or may open up the door for phasing out export subsidies altogether , which France is not prepared to do at this stage .
The compromise of lowering tariffs , phasing out export subsidies : at the end the one who pays is the South African consumer .
So for South Africa it was not such a big deal .
That is why when France raised some difficulties , I immediately said that I had no doubt whatsoever that I could take it out of the agreement without any difficulty at all , because in the end it would be South Africa which would have to pay for this kind of deal .
That was why I said I would take it out immediately because South Africa , of course , was ready to accept that .
Mr President , following the Commissioner 's answer I would like to put a general question to the Commission .
Is it really in the EU 's interest that we thereby also put many of our trading partners in a very difficult position ?
Is it really in our interest that we thereby cause market disturbances , whereas in my view it would be far more important to have strong partners and fair competition ?
Mr President , I agree 100 % with Mrs Schierhuber .
The problem is that in trade negotiations we must bear in mind the interests of our Member States .
That is our first obligation .
The second is to try to make the agreement as fair as possible and take account of the special requirements of the other party .
That is where negotiations sometimes throw up difficult points for one side or the other and that is why sometimes it is difficult to reach an agreement .
I have to say , however , that in my opinion the European Union was exemplary in the way in which it took account of certain legitimate South African concerns - in particular the fact that it had inherited a difficult situation in terms of how customs duties were applied , and the need to restructure the automobile and textile sectors ( something now under way ) , to mention just two examples . Similarly , we met with some understanding on the South African side over some of the problems that we face within the European Union , reflected in some specific points of the agreement .
I still believe that this agreement is a good one and have high hopes that on 22 March , perhaps with some fine tuning , the Member States will see the final outcome as positive for the European Union and acceptable for each of the Member States .
But , as for the principle , I fully agree with Mrs Schierhuber .
Question No 45 by Fernando Pérez Royo ( H-0121 / 99 )
Subject : Fishing in Gibraltar Has the Commission studied the situation in Gibraltar , in the wake of last week 's events ( the seizure of the Spanish fishing boat ' Piraña ' by the Gibraltarian authorities ) , and is it planning to take any measures to ensure that Community legislation is respected ?
I should like to welcome Mrs Bonino and ask her to reply to Mr Pérez Royo 's question .
All the Commission has to say is that the cause of the conflict between the Spanish fishermen and the Gibraltar inspectorate does not in any way involve infringement of Community fisheries regulations .
It concerns the limits of territorial waters , a matter which is not within the Community 's competence .
As it has said many times in the past and reiterated only recently , the Commission is not therefore empowered to intervene directly in this situation . All the Commission can do is encourage both parties to resolve the problem and maintain contact with the governments involved .
The Commission does however regret that because of its legal basis , this issue does not fall within the Community 's competence .
The events to which my question refers - the detention of the crew of a Spanish fishing vessel in Spanish waters by the Gibraltarian police - are indeed a matter for international law and do not involve the Commission directly .
Nevertheless , these events took place in an area where Community law does apply .
The area in question is covered by the Treaty . Indeed , serious doubts have also been cast on the effective application of a whole range of Community directives in this area relating not only to fisheries but also to other issues such as taxation , finance , money laundering and so on .
This apart , I should like to make a final political comment .
I agree with your remarks on good relations and the need to create a climate in which this and other disputes can be handled in a reasonable way , avoiding unnecessary tension in the area . Such tension has a negative impact on both the Spanish and the Gibraltarian populations , though the Spanish population are uppermost in my mind at present .
The appropriate climate in which to deal with this dispute in a reasonable way will not be created by making life difficult for the local Spanish population .
What is needed at the moment is a series of measures designed to reduce the tension which has built up in the area . Only then will it be possible to resolve this dispute and any others which might arise in the future .
The Commission shares the view that it is essential to reduce tension and work towards a solution .
I feel it would also be relevant to read you a note on the application of Community law to the sectors you mentioned . The text of the note is as follows :
The Commission seeks to ensure the correct implementation of Community directives in Gibraltar as it does in all areas of the Community , taking account of the particular regime that applies to Gibraltar as defined in particular in the Act of Accession of the United Kingdom .
Where appropriate the Commission has launched infringement proceedings against the UK for failure to implement applicable directives .
In the area of company law , for example , the Commission has sent four reasoned opinions to the UK for failure to implement company law directives in the territory of Gibraltar , etc. etc .
This is just to explain that although , strictly speaking , the matter is not within the Commission 's competence , we are working to ensure that the acquis communautaire is applied , as it should be in all cases .
I wish the Commissioner well in her presidential campaign in Italy .
I will support your campaign .
This is a very important point which was brought up by Mr Pérez Royo , particularly the matter of is it planning to take any measures to ensure the Community legislation is respected ?
In terms of actually reducing tension in that area , the most important thing is to start to implement freedom of movement between Gibraltar and Spain .
If we actually started that and sorted it out locally , as the fishing dispute has been pretty well sorted out locally between those two communities , tensions would disappear very quickly .
So could the Commissioner suggest ways in which Mr Pérez Royo could help towards that freedom of movement as required by the Treaties , and reduce those tensions ?
I do not think it is a real question .
It is mostly a debate between two Member States .
The Commission is really trying to de-escalate and help so you can both resolve this conflict .
I should like to take this opportunity to say to Mr Teverson that I am not campaigning for any presidency .
It is procedurally impossible in my country .
There is no question about it .
I am a full-time commissioner and I will act as a commissioner , full-time , as is my duty .
I merely wish to make a remark concerning the limits of territorial waters .
There is no reference to territorial waters surrounding the Rock in the Treaty of Utrecht , which justifies and legitimises certain British activities in Gibraltar .
You will be aware , Commissioner , that according to the Treaty of Utrecht , the town and fortress of Gibraltar were ceded to the United Kingdom . However , that Treaty does not cover the area later occupied by the British and which does not have territorial waters .
The extent of Spanish and British territorial waters has never been specified , because although Spain recognises the Treaty of Utrecht , it disputes the United Kingdom 's claims in this respect .
Furthermore , Spain 's claims were not affected in any way by its accession to the Community .
On 12 June 1985 , Spain signed the Accession Treaty along with the United Kingdom .
On 15 June , letters were exchanged with the British Minister for Foreign Affairs , making it quite clear that Spain 's accession to the Community did not affect its claim to Gibraltar .
Thank you , Mr Morán .
Mrs Bonino , I invite you to respond to Mr Morán 's remarks .
Mrs Bonino tells me that no response is necessary .
Thank you for being here today , Mrs Bonino , and thank you for your replies and for your courtesy .
Question No 46 by Robin Teverson ( H-0132 / 99 )
Subject : Fraud In the event of fraud , who should take responsibility for a directorate-general 's finances - the individual Commissioner in charge of the directorate-general , the Director-General of the DG concerned , or the entire Commission ?
I should like to welcome Mrs Gradin and ask her to reply to Mr Teverson 's question .
The Commission bears the overall political responsibility for budget execution and for the fight against fraud .
It may delegate management of individual budget lines to a Member of the Commission or to a Director-General .
In any specific case of fraud , it is the individual who committed the crime who will be held legally responsible .
However , the Commission or Commissioner or the Director-General concerned are still responsible for appropriate control and management measures being put in place .
I thank the Commissioner for that reply with words like ' responsibility ' and ' individual responsibility for certain areas ' .
My supplementary question is very precise .
If the report from the experts finds very specific problems within the Commission , will that mean that individual Commissioners will at that time take responsibility for the areas under them and , if appropriate politically , resign individually ?
I need only a short answer , just one word will do in any of the official languages .
I have already given the answer and I am not going to say what will happen after the Committee of Wise Men give their report .
Commissioner , in the Committee on Budgetary Control Mrs Cresson recently denied any knowledge of certain scandals .
Meanwhile we have learned that she was informed of them by her administration and we now want to know : who is it who has to resign here ?
The official who informed her or the Commissioner who falsely said in committee that she had no knowledge of these facts ?
I would like to ask Mrs Gradin whether she would reinstate Paul van Buitenen , who was suspended because he took the trouble to give an elected representative a document which he believed the elected representatives ought to read as part of the investigation into fraud at the Commission ?
Mr President , it seems to me that we have digressed from the question that was put to me and to which I have already replied .
So I think that is enough for today !
Question No 47 by Jan Andersson ( H-0136 / 99 )
Subject : The Commission 's action programme on drugs The EU 's current action programme on drugs is due to end soon , and the Commission is said to be drawing up a new action programme .
Will the Commission say what the timetable is for putting together its new action programme on drugs ?
I give the floor to Mrs Gradin to answer Mr Andersson 's question , which has now been taken over by Mrs Hulthén .
As you know , the EU 's current action plan on drugs comes to an end this year .
The European Council has therefore requested the Council of Ministers , the European Parliament and the Commission to draw up a new action plan for the period 2000 to 2004 .
In the Commission , the work is progressing well .
Most of our services are directly involved and are now working flat out to produce their contribution .
I and my officials are responsible partly for the internal coordination of the work and partly for the sectors that have a bearing on the area of justice and home affairs .
It takes several decades to develop a European drugs policy .
Consequently , my premiss is that the EU 's actions must have a sound body of knowledge and well-evaluated experience on which to build .
In the long term , therefore , continuity and consistency will be the main themes in our forthcoming proposal .
As a result , our contribution will build on the previous plan , but it will include an evaluation of what has been accomplished during the last five-year period .
And last but not least , we are describing new trends and tendencies that require special treatment .
Our goal is to be in a position to present the new action plan by the end of the spring - in May .
Our proposal will then as usual be forwarded directly to the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers for further consideration .
I should like to thank Commissioner Gradin for her reply .
This is merely an observation , but it will presumably be another Parliament and presumably another Commission too that will be adopting a position on the new action plan .
While the issue is still under discussion , and since Mrs Gradin has just mentioned some points that will be central to the new action plan , it would be interesting to know which areas she is intending to concentrate on .
For example , is the Commission in a position to say , in terms of preventive measures in the face of new types of drugs , how we are going to safeguard our external frontiers to ensure that we do not have more drugs inside the Union than we do at present ?
We should appreciate a reply on that aspect too .
Most of the private offices and directorates are already involved .
What is needed is a combination of repressive measures and social commitment .
We should therefore be trying to combine a policy of repression with social responsibility .
We shall be discussing the new trends in consumption and trafficking and the prospects for the future .
We shall also be discussing what is to be done at international level to evaluate and meet the new challenges .
We shall look into how we are going to involve the Central and Eastern European countries that are currently knocking at our door and asking to be admitted as members .
Accordingly , we shall be discussing access to and demand for drugs , and of course the new trends such as synthetic drugs , as well as the need for Europe to keep its own house in order if it is to be a credible cooperation partner , for example on the international stage .
Mr President , Commissioner , I was in America again recently and one thing was crystal clear to me : drugs cannot just be combated at the frontiers , by checking consignments from the producer countries to the consumer countries ; it is far more effective to shape the legal system in the consumer countries in such a way as to make drugs traffic more difficult , as is done in the United States for instance .
What does the Commission propose to do to combat drugs here in Europe ?
Like the USA , the Commission is working at international level .
We have formed cooperation links in Latin America and in the golden triangle in order to promote alternative types of crops and to restrict access to drugs .
At the same time , we are tackling the problem of consumption , just as we have in the Member States .
In this respect , we are extremely keen to involve voluntary organisations as well as schools and parents , since we believe that the people who practise drug abuse do not just listen to us politicians , but that the efforts of friends in the workplace and at school are also needed to influence and dissuade them .
Consequently , we are trying to tackle this very serious problem on all fronts .
Question No 48 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0149 / 99 )
Subject : Illegal emigration from northern Morocco to the EU What is the Commission 's view , with regard to illegal emigration , of the current situation and possible future developments in the Straits of Gibraltar and north Morocco area ?
What progress and improvements are in prospect ?
What steps will be taken to prevent deaths among those making the crossing in small boats next summer ?
I give the floor to Mrs Gradin to answer Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's question .
Illegal immigration to the European Union from northern Morocco is , in many cases , a straightforward matter of the smuggling of human beings .
It is not only a pressing problem for the Member States in the Mediterranean region , but also concerns , to a large extent , the entire European Union .
The individuals who allow themselves to be persuaded by the people-smugglers are , more often than not , the poorest and most vulnerable migrants , some of whom are desperately seeking better living conditions and are prepared to take enormous risks to achieve their goal .
Others fall victim to the modern slave trade in women that goes on all over Europe .
Each year , a growing number of young women are lured by false promises of well-paid work into prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation .
Many lives are wasted every year because of the depredations of the people-smugglers .
We know for certain that those who try to reach the coast of Europe by sea from Morocco often meet a grim fate .
The battle against the trade in people must remain a priority in the Union .
During the past year , a great deal has also been done to step up cooperation in precisely this area within the Union .
In 1996 , the EDU 's mandate was extended to include the smuggling of human beings .
With the establishment of Europol , the Union 's capacity in this area will be further enhanced .
In November of the same year , the Council of Ministers also set up the STOP programme , the aim of which was to strengthen the Member States ' ability to combat the trade in human beings .
It has enabled us to support and encourage an exchange of experiences and to pursue activities to raise the level of competence throughout Europe .
Together with the American Government , we have also carried out preventive work in the countries where the trade in women originates .
Among other initiatives , campaigns have been mounted with the aim of trying to make young girls aware of the risks involved in trying to reach Europe with the help of people-smugglers .
These measures are only regarded as a first step along the right road .
Obviously , major economic interests are at stake and fundamental values are being put to the test .
In future , the Commission will continue to avail itself of every opportunity to put a stop to the smuggling of human beings .
It is also gratifying that the new Treaty makes it easier for us to really get to grips with this problem in the future .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for her reply , which was doubtless well-intentioned .
Her reply was very specific as far as the analysis of the problem was concerned , but quite inadequate when it came to the Commission 's competence , that is to say , the measures it plans to take .
The feeling here is that her answer has not provided us with any information at all .
As you stated yourself , Commissioner , the problem is very serious indeed but certain measures could easily be taken .
For instance , in the summer it would perhaps be possible to set up surveillance operations to detect the flimsy craft used to make the crossing .
Such arrangements already exist to detect fishing operations and fish , yet we seem unable to do the same in order to detect people .
In addition , television campaigns designed to dissuade would-be immigrants from making the crossing could be broadcast on television in northern Morocco .
The Commission is doing nothing at all to cope with the very serious problems which exist on the southern borders of the European Union . For you to reply to a question like this by merely setting out all the possible measures amounts to an abdication of responsibility .
It amounts to saying nothing at all , Commissioner .
Of course the Union is doing a great deal , as I made clear in my reply to the honourable Member .
There are good prospects for Europol , but at the same time , if it is to achieve practical results in its surveillance operations , as the honourable Member would like it to do , this has to be done through cooperation with and between the Member States .
We know that there are boats plying between Morocco and Spain and Gibraltar , and that the different authorities concerned are cooperating fully .
I have been to the places in question myself to see what is being done , both as regards control of the trade in human beings and the presence of drugs on these boats .
Of course practical measures are being carried out , in which Europol is also participating .
Furthermore , the Council of Ministers has only recently set up a high-level group specifically to study the countries from which large numbers of people are trying to reach our nations .
In point of fact , Morocco is one of the countries they will be studying in that context .
It appears that I have to contradict what you have just said , Commissioner , because I have been informed by the director of Europol himself that no operation or investigation is currently under way concerning the organised mafias operating along the south-western border of Europe . I am referring in particular here to the area of northern Africa which has a direct influence on the migratory pressures originating in the Maghreb .
I should like to enquire what the Commission 's view is on this blatant neglect of an area through which such significant migration towards Europe takes place , neglect recognised by the director of Europol himself . I should also like to know what steps the Commission intends to take to ensure that Europol does turn its attention to this dreadful scourge of organised crime which is leading to so many tragic deaths around the Straits of Gibraltar .
With regard to Europol , I should be extremely grateful for the support of this House so that we can get Europol up and running at long last .
The convention itself has been ratified , but there are a number of protocols which still need to be ratified by the Member States before Europol can fully enter into force .
Consequently , I should really appreciate your support since this would allow us to further reinforce its work .
Mr President , how is it planned to distribute the burden in regard to this problem within Europe ?
What do you think are the target routes here ?
As the honourable Member will be aware , during the four years that I have been a Member of the Commission , I have worked hard to bring about a situation in which we all share the burden .
The first proposal was not accepted , and another proposal is now before the Council of Ministers .
Unfortunately , some Member States are deeply committed to burden-sharing , while others are not .
As you know , unanimity is required to reach a decision under the third pillar , which functions on the basis of intergovernmental cooperation .
I had hoped that we would have made more progress , but we may now hope that the German Presidency will be successful in persuading its colleagues that what is needed is a really vigorous effort .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
That brings us to the end of the time set aside for questions to Mrs Gradin .
Question No 49 will therefore receive a written answer .
Question No 50 by Concepció Ferrer ( H-0111 / 99 )
Subject : Follow-up to the complaint concerning unfair trade measures which has been lodged with the TWO At the end of 1997 , in response to trade restrictions imposed on exports of skins and hides produced in India , the Commission initiated a WTO dispute settlement procedure in order to protect the interests of the European leather sector which had been suffering from the harmful effects of those restrictions for some time .
From the initial consultations held in Geneva at the beginning of 1998 there emerged clear confirmation of the fact that the complaint lodged by the Commission was justified .
Since that first meeting under the procedure laid down by the TWO , it appears that the negotiations have ground to a halt .
Could the Commission explain why a date has not yet been set for a resumption of the dispute settlement procedure ?
I should like to welcome Sir Leon and ask him to reply to Mrs Ferrer 's question .
The de facto export ban on hides and skins by India led the Community to hold formal WTO consultations at the beginning of 1998 .
The Commission has repeatedly raised its concerns with regard to the GATT incompatibility of the Indian regime since then .
The Indian authorities finally promised in October 1998 to seriously consider the suggestion of replacing the current export licensing scheme by tariff-based measures which could take the form of an export tax .
In the context of the preparation of the new budget such a proposal is currently being discussed by the Indian authorities .
We are closely monitoring the matter and should know whether the regime has been modified within the next few weeks .
I remain hopeful that we will be able to solve this sensitive issue .
If that does not happen by the time of my planned visit to India in early April I intend to raise this matter at Ministerial level .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner , and thank you also for pursuing the matter of the Indian Government 's failure to comply with regulations on opening up the markets for leather goods . I would however like to ask you as a matter of urgency to move things on as quickly as possible , so as to guarantee full compliance with the rules governing international trade .
I am not making this request as a matter of principle but because it is the only way of ensuring that all those companies that have been making great efforts to update their business and become competitive are able to export freely and thus ensure their survival .
Once again , I urge you to remain vigilant . If you wait until April , many companies may already have closed , precisely because of the difficulties involved in exporting .
I do appreciate the importance of the imports of raw material for the European tanning industry and I can assure you that I take this issue very seriously .
I cannot promise a result before April .
We are pressing hard and we will continue to press and take whatever action is open to us .
Question No 51 by Paul Rübig ( H-0113 / 99 )
Subject : Differences in punitive duties and voting behaviour in the Council There are many aspects to the trans-Atlantic discussions on banana imports into the EU .
One fundamental issue relates to the selective imposition of punitive US duties on imports from thirteen Member States .
The equivalent of the sum that has been announced amounts to unilaterally estimated losses of EURO 508 million .
The banana market organisation applies equally to all fifteen Member States .
Within the WTO , too , the EU speaks with one voice .
However , punitive duties which affect the EU Member States in different ways distort comparative costs and competition in the Internal Market .
What action will the Commission take to ensure that sanctions imposed by third countries do not deliberately favour individual Member State , so that such ' tactical manoeuvres ' do not affect future voting behaviour in the Council and overshadow common interests ?
I give the floor to Sir Leon to answer Mr Rübig 's question .
I agree that the issue raised is serious .
There are two reasons why third countries exclude some Member States from retaliatory measures against the Community .
First , Member States are still , separately from the Community , individual members of the WTO .
Secondly , the origin rules applicable to imports to third countries from the Community are still based on individual Member States .
Although Community legislation provides for the notion of Community origin , which is mandatory in certain situations , US and other third countries continue to make a distinction between Member States in this field .
It is worth recalling that retaliatory measures may only be applied legally after authorisation by the WTO .
In the case of the bananas dispute the United States has not received such authorisation .
Mr President , my supplementary concerns the punitive tariffs themselves that the United States has imposed unilaterally .
According to our view of the law these measures are direct trade restrictions that even now , at this cautionary stage , are inflicting serious damage on our domestic firms .
How will you bring claims for compensation in the event that the WTO panel declares these measures inadmissible on principle or in terms of their level ?
If our case against the United States on the basis that the measures that have been taken are unlawful is successful , then either the United States will have to withdraw the measures and give us compensation or we will be entitled to take lawful retaliation .
Question No 52 by Arthur Newens ( H-0127 / 99 )
Subject : Trade with Cuba Would the Commission make a statement about the trade agreement reached with the United States in May 1998 and whether it is still likely to come into operation , and will it give details of the present state of trade between the EU , its Member States and Cuba and of the effect that the Helms-Burton Act is having upon those relations ?
I give the floor to Sir Leon to answer Mr Newens 's question .
The agreements reached with the United States on Helms-Burton and ILSA legislation in May last year represent important progress on the issue .
The Commission continues to work towards full implementation of these agreements .
The onus is on the United States but we on our side are ready to implement the agreements once the United States grants a waiver under Title IV of the Helms-Burton Act as foreseen in the London Agreements .
From the outset we have expressed determined opposition to both acts .
As part of the defence of the European Union against the extra-territorial effects of these acts the Council passed the blocking statute in November 1996 .
Its object is to counter the extra-territorial effects of legislation on a third country , such as the Helms-Burton Act and ILSA on the territory of the Community .
Detailed statistics on EU trade with Cuba are not available . We have consistently taken the view that such trade is legitimate .
The Helms-Burton Act has had a chilling effect in the past and may have distorted the channels in which trade has flowed .
That is why the May 1998 agreement was an important step forward .
While thanking the Commissioner for his answer , I do not accept that it is true that as long as Congress in the United States refuses to agree to the waiving of Titles III and IV , no real progress in implementing the basis of the agreement can be put into effect .
At the same time , some individuals , some traders and some companies who would otherwise trade with Cuba are playing safe and holding off .
In those circumstances , how much longer can we continue with this state of affairs in which there is real uncertainty for all concerned ?
Does he see any change taking place in the near future ?
It is true that the agreement is not fully implemented and cannot be until Congress passes the necessary legislation .
It is not true , however , to say that it has no effect .
I would draw the attention of those whom you describe to the fact that , since the agreement was entered into , no coercive action has been taken against any European company or individual under either of the two pieces of legislation .
That is something that the businessmen should note and a lot of trade is going on .
As to further progress , we are pressing the US Congress and have made it clear that we will not implement our part of the rest of the agreement until they implement theirs .
Question No 53 by Hugh McMahon ( H-0174 / 99 )
Subject : Predatory pricing and dumping of salmon by Norwegian producers in European markets Can the Commission inform Parliament of the steps it has recently taken with respect to actions against Norwegian companies which have flouted agreements with the EU through practices of predatory pricing in the salmon market and will it indicate which Norwegian companies have been involved in such practices ?
I give the floor to Sir Leon to answer Mr McMahon 's question .
In June 1997 an agreement was reached with Norway as part of the definitive anti-dumping and countervailing measures .
These consist mainly of individual price undertakings from 190 Norwegian exporters .
The Commission devotes considerable resources to monitoring those undertakings and 84 exporters have now had duties imposed upon them because they breached or withdrew from their undertakings .
In addition , the market is being constantly monitored , the time given for the reports on the undertakings has been shortened , and when the monitoring showed that the minimum price for salmon fillets was too low , it was increased to include an amount for processing costs .
Having found that a number of parties with undertakings were not exporters , those parties were made to withdraw their undertakings , and after it appeared that the proceeds of the Norwegian export tax , which is part of the countervailing measures , were not used in accordance with the agreement , a further agreement between the European Union and Norwegian industries was entered into in October 1998 to deal with that .
More recently , the Commission and the Norwegian authorities have agreed on further joint action specifically to root out the possibilities of circumvention .
Norway introduced in December 1998 a regulation making it illegal for there to be any salmon sales to the Community via intermediary exporters not bound by the undertakings .
The Commission mirrored this restriction and the text of the undertakings also included a stricter minimum price provision where importers related to exporters in Norway source salmon from other intermediary importers in the Community .
I thank the Commissioner for a very full answer .
Could he give me an up-to-date position ?
I understand from sources in the Scottish industry that there is a major company involved in Norway at the moment .
Would he be prepared to give the House the name of this major company ?
It is not entirely clear what the major company is supposed to have done or which one the honourable Member is referring to .
As I have said , 84 exporters have had the undertakings replaced by duties instead .
I do not know which particular one the honourable gentleman is referring to .
If he would like to write to me giving me the details , I will see whether there is any further information I am able to supply .
Question No 54 by Richard Howitt ( H-0217 / 99 )
Subject : Burma Selective Purchase Law In 1996 , the State of Massachusetts in the USA introduced the Burma Selective Purchase Law banning government procurement from companies that do business in Myanmar .
The EC expressed its opposition to the Federal authorities and also filed a complaint before the WTO .
Aware that this complaint has temporarily been suspended awaiting the results of a legal investigation into the validity of its ruling , the fact that the Commission submitted a complaint before the WTO is not only contradictory to its own policies imposing sanctions against Myanmar and expressing concern for human rights violations , but it can also be considered a cynical act of impeding an attempt to set a precedent in making international trade policies more coherent with international human rights standards .
Can the Commission explain why it applies such contradictory policies and has pursued this policy , thus expressing a contempt for human rights in Myanmar ?
Under what circumstances can it withdraw its complaint ?
I give the floor to Sir Leon to answer Mr Howitt 's question .
Our position on Burma is clear : we deplore the situation facing the people there and support Member States in their determination to maintain pressure on the leadership .
This has led to the adoption of a common position on Burma and the withdrawal of GSP benefits .
Last October the Council adopted an extension to the common position and strengthened it through the widening of a visa ban and by suspending high-level government visits to Burma .
We have also sought to coordinate policies on Burma internationally in order to make the actions of all concerned more effective .
While our objectives as far as Burma is concerned are similar to those of the United States , that does not mean that we can condone the flagrant breach of international obligations arising from the Massachusetts law .
We took the decision to request the panel to rule on the compatibility of the law with the relevant WTO rules , in particular the plurilateral government procurement agreement in July 1998 , after having failed in two years to resolve the matter in other ways .
The National Foreign Trade Council of the United States also challenged the Massachusetts law and the US District Court last November declared the law unconstitutional and suspended its application , so , naturally , we suspended our proceedings in the WTO but the American court ruling is under appeal .
Our decision to complain to the WTO is not an endorsement of the regime ; it is about ensuring predictability in the international trading environment and adhering to internationally binding trade rules .
There is no contradiction between the steps we have taken against the Burma regime and our expectation that the United States observes its international commitments .
Thank you , Commissioner , I think you will understand that I profoundly disagree with your answer though it was helpful to the House that you expressed it so clearly .
The contradiction was contained in what you said .
For us to deplore human rights abuses in Burma and say that we wish to coordinate actions internationally to make the Burmese regime change its policies and then to eschew the opportunity of using trading opportunities through the WTO in order to coordinate those actions is contradictory .
I appreciate that we have a set of rules under the World Trade Organization but it has repeatedly been the position of this House , both in September last year when the actions of the Commission were condemned , and in my own report on codes of conduct of multinational companies , to say that we must use trading relations through the WTO to uphold trading which is ethical , and respects the environment and human rights .
Can he answer the last part of my question which is under what circumstances , should the appeal go the other way in the United States , would the Commission withdraw and ensure that the panel is not revived ?
The WTO proceedings are suspended at the moment because of the decision of the US district court .
That has already happened .
But I have to say that it is a very different question as to whether or not we should use trade sanctions for example under the WTO , where permitted by the WTO , and whether we should just accept that , without consultation and not as part of an international agreement , an individual state in the United States should take action to apply , as it were , its own foreign policy .
We may have a very high degree of sympathy with the motives behind the Massachusetts legislature but you really cannot have a world trading system in which the particular way of imposing pressure on a country is determined by one state in one country with consequential affects upon the rest of the trading world .
It damages the front against Burma for us to find fragmentary action of that kind being taken , which damages the European Union and is not part of a consolidated , agreed international package of action against a particular country which we have profound disagreements with .
Thank you , Sir Leon .
With that question by Mr Howitt , we have completed the group of questions to Sir Leon Brittan .
We thank him for attending Question Time .
Question No 55 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0107 / 99 )
Subject : Transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings In reply to my Oral Question H-0761 / 98 , the Commission informed me that the Greek authorities had notified it , on 2 July 1998 , of the provisions that they had adopted to incorporate Directive 80 / 723 / EEC , as amended , into Greek law .
However , owing to a disagreement over the obligations deriving from that Directive , the Commission had decided to wait for the supplementary information it had requested from the Greek authorities before expressing its opinion on the possible discontinuation of infringement proceedings .
Could the Commission say precisely what the disagreement concerning the obligations deriving from Directive 80 / 723 / EEC , as amended by Directive 93 / 84 / EEC , consists of and whether the supplementary information provided by the Greek authorities does or does not warrant the discontinuation of the infringement procedure initiated against Greece in 1996 because the information provided was not consistent with the requirements of the above Directive ?
I should like to welcome Mr Van Miert and ask him to reply to Mr Papayannakis 's question .
The Commission can inform the honorable Member that the disagreement in question concerned the scope of the obligation to inform the Commission under Article 5 of Directive 93 / 84 / EEC .
According to these provisions , Member States must in particular send the Commission a list of their public undertakings in the manufacturing sector by 31 March of each year at the latest .
Non-compliance with this obligation constitutes an infringement of the law to which the Commission must respond through an appropriate procedure .
A few days ago , on 3 March , Greece finally supplied the information requested and it seems satisfactory with regard to the undertakings in question .
In so doing , Greece has therefore abandoned its alternative view of its obligations under the directive in question .
Consequently , the Commission will in all likelihood discontinue the infringement proceedings , subject to a detailed analysis of the information provided .
I can therefore give you good news as I believe that Greece is on the way to complying with Community law .
Commissioner , as far as I understand it , the issue centres around whether the list of companies was submitted or not .
What concerns me most , and what I would like your opinion on , is whether the provisions of the directive were adhered to , in particular as regards transparency and the actual use to which public funds were put .
I personally am in favour of funds going to public companies on condition that there are clear objectives , that the methods of allocating the money are transparent , and that this is where the money actually goes .
Does the Commission have any information on this or does it wish to comment on the issue , or was the dispute with Greece merely procedural ?

A distinction must be made between the obligation deriving from the directive , which only now seems to have been complied with by Greece , as I have just indicated , and the scrutiny by the Commission of the report in question on the undertakings which are on the list .
This is a different process on which I cannot comment at the moment , given that we only received a fairly full report a few days ago .
I must congratulate and thank the Greek authorities for having finally agreed to fulfil their Community duty .
Question No 56 by John Iversen ( H-0144 / 99 )
Subject : Merger The Commission is currently considering the notification of plans for a merger between Danish Crown and Vestjyske Slagterier .
How will the Commission ensure that a merger will not mean that Danish Crown / Vestjyske Slagterier acquires influence over and an insight into a smaller , competing business such as Defco Food , in which Danish Crown currently has a minority shareholding ?
Defco is a limited company which manufactures and sells products to FDB and Dansk Supermarked in direct competition with Danish Crown and Vestjyske Slagterier .
Obviously , it is of the utmost importance for a company such as Defco that the merger does not mean that Danish Crown / Vestjyske Slagterier will acquire an insight into and influence over Defco Food .
I give the floor to Mr Van Miert to answer Mr Iversen 's question .
I would like to thank you for your reply .
The background to my question was a criticism of the merger .
I fully understand it - in fact I think it is a sensible thing .
I am a little tired of the fact that people have not been willing to look more closely at the problem which arises , for example , from the fact that the company concerned is dependent on Danish Crown .
This means , amongst other things , that the company cannot give its employees the opportunity to buy shares because the new , very large merged company will be entitled to step in and acquire shares ahead of the employees .
But I do understand that it is a difficult problem for the Commission to solve , so I would like to thank you for your reply .
This is an issue which clearly concerns this House because I have answered questions on this before .
As you know , we have stressed to the Spanish Government that it must notify this case because it involves what are called stranded costs .
You will also know that this problem is not unique to Spain as it has arisen in several other Member States due to the electricity directive .
We have stressed that , when a system of stranded costs is specified , this may in principle involve a public aid operation and therefore the Commission must at least be able to check whether this aid is in accordance with the stranded costs .
As the problem is currently arising in different ways in several Member States , we are trying to develop a coherent method .
With regard to the Spanish case , we have received the notification and are currently analysing this .
Contact will no doubt be made with the Spanish authorities in the coming weeks in order to discuss the Commission 's analysis .
As for the consumer , given that this involves public aid , we must judge this case according to the rules in question , namely to see whether the ' aid ' specified is actually compensation for the stranded costs .
Consequently , consumer concerns are not a priority in these ' state aid ' matters .
These are the rules .
Having said that , we must not ignore this issue .
However , I must remind you that the rule requires the Commission to check whether , in such an operation , the specified aid exceeds what is justifiable .
By doing this , I personally believe that we are also acting in the interests of consumers .
In the first instance , if we try to limit any state aid , be it in this case or another case , to the strict minimum , at the end of the day it is to the benefit of the consumers because they are usually also taxpayers .
Also , we are going to continue to pursue this case , as I explained earlier , the reason being that we felt that this case had to be notified to allow the Commission to do its job .
Apart from that I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the declared aim of the policy , namely to liberalise the electricity sector , is entirely shared by the Commission .
We feel that more flexibility , more real competition means that we have to see to it that in the energy sector companies do not have too much control of the market ; that there is real competition , not only for companies , but also for the individual consumers .
As you know , this is not yet the case with the directive .
The directive is more modest .
But we certainly share the view , which is apparently held by the Spanish Government , that one should liberalise beyond what has been agreed in the directive .
That is being encouraged and acknowledged in a positive way by the Commission .
But that should not distract us from our other task , to scrutinise whether the costs are strictly proportionate to the money which is under consideration .
Commissioner , you must be aware that as things stand at the moment , these costs will be borne by domestic consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises .
The rates they are charged will not be reduced as they should have been , even without taking liberalisation into account .
I have a more technical question to put to you , however .
Rule 3 of the Council 's Rules of Procedure on the subject of aid states that aid will only be allocated following a Commission decision to authorise it . I do not know if the Commission is aware that the 4.5 % in question is already being deducted from the charges .
Aid is therefore already being received . Do you intend to stand firm , Commissioner , and call the Spanish Minister for Industry to account tomorrow , insisting that such charges and the amounts already illegally charged to consumers be frozen , and insisting , too , that all these monies be returned until you authorise the aid ?
There has clearly been a misunderstanding .
The authorities should have notified their intentions under the directive and the majority have done this .
However , it was not properly understood that this type of operation should also have been notified under Articles 92 and 93 .
We have had to stress this before certain governments would accept it and this has taken time .
This has now been achieved . In short , there are two scrutinies : firstly the scrutiny under the directive , for which Mr Papoutsis is responsible , and secondly the scrutiny of a problem or case concerning a state aid .
In the case in question , we recorded this as unnotified aid given that the measure had actually already been implemented .
However , I must acknowledge that , given the rather confused and unclear situation and perhaps without any intention to mislead , certain governments thought that it was sufficient to notify the case under the directive .
We are therefore in an embarrassing position with a government which , I believe in good faith , thought that it had done its work whereas we have had to remind it that it had additional work .
This is the situation .
As for the others , you will recall that in this very House I warned the authorities concerned that , as the case was being scrutinised , it was perhaps ill-advised to continue the measure in question , given that the result of the Commission 's scrutiny must normally be awaited .
You did indeed advise that in cases such as this , it would be wise to delay implementation of the mechanism provided for under Spanish law until the Commission 's ruling was published .
The fact is that the Spanish Government and the electricity companies have not heeded this advice and have already implemented the mechanism . This has given rise to the problem of how to reimburse customers if it turns out that they have been overcharged .
How could millions of customers be reimbursed if the charge had already been included in their electricity bills ?
Do you not think that in terms of monitoring state aid , which is what this really is , it would be more transparent and more workable if payments were made in stages , annually , through the state budget ? Monitoring would also be easier and any wrongs could easily be righted should the need arise .
Such an arrangement is already in place for aid to the coal sector . Do you not think that this would be a more sensible method than introducing a 4.5 % surcharge to electricity bills , as well as floating such aid on the financial markets ?
Firstly , we warned the authorities that if they went ahead with the securitisation they would be doing so at their own risk . This is because , as I have already said , the situation remains uncertain until the Commission has completed its work , in this case drawn its conclusions from the scrutiny .
However , the authorities are responsible for this .
Secondly , with regard to the amounts , for the moment no one can say what these may be .
I would repeat that it is only after scrutinising the stranded costs to check that these exist that we can conclude what amount is correct and justifiable in relation to these stranded costs .
It is only then that we can say that a particular sum is acceptable for this stranded costs operation and that a sum beyond that is not acceptable .
However , I will only be able to tell you this when our scrutiny is completed .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Question No 59 will not be taken because the subject to which it refers is included on the agenda of this part-session .
Ladies and gentlemen , with that joint answer to Questions Nos 57 and 58 , we have reached the end of the time set aside for questions to the Commission .
Questions Nos 60 to 111 will therefore receive written answers .
For reasons beyond the Chair 's control , Question Time to the Commission has exceeded the allotted time by 42 minutes .
This has placed a considerable strain on Parliament 's services and I offer them my apologies .
Their cooperation is much appreciated .
That concludes Question Time .
The sitting was suspended at 7.45 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.

Own resources ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0105 / 99 ) by Mrs Haug , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the need to modify and reform the European Union 's own resources system .
Mr President , I confess that , at the time , I doubted the chances of this report ever being drawn up . I was concerned about its consistency in relation to the report I have the honour of presenting on Agenda 2000 .
Now the draft report has been voted through in the Committee on Budgets and - this is not just a personal opinion - I admit that it seems not only superfluous but also counter-productive .
And I say this whilst being fully aware of the work the rapporteur , Mrs Haug , has put into the report and the excellent hearing she organised where we all learned a great deal about own resources .
But in my opinion , the Committee on Budgets has not reached the right conclusions .
Frankly , I am concerned that the Committee on Budgets has submitted a text to this House which , I might add , does not correspond to the proposed commitments the rapporteur was defending yesterday in the meeting .
The text of the motion for a resolution never really gets off the ground and it is also confused .
What are we really talking about here ?
In theory , we are discussing own resources . In practice , we are discussing national contributions .
But this is an artificial problem . It was created by politicians themselves in the Member States but it lacks an objective basis and is strongly anti-European .
It has no legal basis whatsoever .
The Treaty has for many years included the concept that the European budget should be financed wholly from own resources , without prejudice to other revenue . In 1992 , the Treaty on European Union , which was signed by the Maastricht Council and ratified by all the national parliaments , including those of the countries that joined afterwards , repealed Article 200 .
This was the article relating to national contributions and their scale .
For electoral reasons and in order to appeal to the masses , the subject has been brought up again . We are undermining European political integration with all our comparative injustices between countries , budget balances , cheques and cries of ' I want my money back ' .
We talk about having more Europe , but some wish to see less Europe . This whole debate is leading to a renationalisation of the budget , and here I am not talking about cofinancing but rather about the general approach of the report by the Committee on Budgets .
In my opinion , this motion for a resolution misses the point .
It is unable to get away from the perverse logic of national contributions and step up the debate .
As I see it , it does not complete its task of showing the Council what the medium-term objective should be .
Ladies and gentlemen , how often do we have to point out that citizens pay taxes , not countries ?
The main inequality has nothing to do with whether or not the level of contributions from Germany or the United Kingdom are fair , but rather that two citizens with the same income may contribute in totally different ways depending on the country they live in .
As a result , it could be that the unemployed in Brandenburg are funding large estate owners in Andalusia .
Therefore , we have a duty to ensure fair treatment insofar as every inhabitant of the European Union should contribute to the budget - this paltry budget that represents approximately 1.1 % of GNP - according to their income .
This is the first injustice that must be rectified .
One objective we must have is to introduce a straightforward and proportional European income tax .
Yet what does the motion for a resolution suggest ?
It concentrates on national balances that lead to rivalry and that discourage solidarity . And , to top it all , it suggests cofinancing the CAP , an idea that was rejected by this very House in November and that was even rejected by the government that proposed it to the Council .
Mr President , my proposal may be utopian , as Mr Spinelli 's was , but the proposal in the report is an anachronism .
It is 25 years out of date .
Mr President , the issue of own resources is , and always has been , extremely complex , as the system requires unanimity to change it and , above all , as improving its shortcomings by amending the current decision on own resources would give rise to other shortcomings and would most likely create new opposition .
The Commission itself accepts that the shortcomings of the system are not sufficient to motivate an urgent amendment of the decision on own resources and confines itself to putting forward alternative solutions to addressing the problem of financial imbalances , which was raised by some Member States .
Mrs Haug 's report does not avoid this logic ; it enlists the measures put forward in the short term solely to achieve the same objective , that is , to reduce the differences in contributions for the financing of Community expenditure , while in the medium and long term , it resorts to general recommendations .
Mrs Haug has attempted to reconcile opposing views but unfortunately these remain as far apart as ever .
In addition , we have focused all our attention on the issue of cofinancing agricultural subsidies and we have forgotten many other issues which we could have tackled and which , unfortunately , have gone by the board .
The solution proposed in the report therefore , which is the partial cofinancing of the common agricultural policy , despite assertions to the contrary , essentially boils down to the partial renationalisation of the common agricultural policy . This touches on a fundamental aspect of Community policy , which goes beyond the amendments this policy is called upon to undergo in the context of Agenda 2000 not only due to the planned enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe but also because of the commitments which the European Union has assumed in the context of GATT , which we are to some extent ignoring .
What this new provision contains , moreover , runs counter to the philosophy we would expect to govern a union in which the achievement of EMU would normally provide the impetus to aim for greater unification rather than lead to the adoption of the notion of correcting financial imbalances which arise from its operation and from the implementation of policies which were defined many years ago .
The notion of net financial surpluses is therefore a retrogressive notion and must be abandoned by the European Parliament .
Any direct or indirect attempt to cofinance the common agricultural policy must also be abandoned .
An increase in the receipts of some Member States cannot be made on the back of the reduction of the receipts of other Member States . Nor can it have the character of a correction .
Quite the contrary : it must be creative , in other words it must be the outcome of participation in existing or unfolding new policies .
Mr President , it would be a sad fact if the logic of financial accounting were to dominate , especially at a time when the eyes of the people of Europe are on the European Parliament in view of the forthcoming elections , and if we were to give the impression that we were betraying policies and achievements of the European Union that were of long-standing , great historical significance and of great importance in relation to issues which were fundamentally accounting solutions .
Mr President , Mrs Haug 's report on the organisation of the EU 's own resources is both relevant and necessary .
It aims at the heart of the matter , as Agenda 2000 negotiations have reached a critical stage .
For that reason I wish to thank Mrs Haug most sincerely for an excellent report .
The report 's most important proposal concerns not EU income but expenditure , and suggests that the Member States should meet half the costs of the CAP .
The proposal is a radical one and would have enormous consequences for the EU budget , which would shrink by some EUR 18 billion , approximately the cost of eastward enlargement .
Thus the proposal would solve the financial problem threatening eastward enlargement .
The common funding of agriculture would have an immense impact on net contributions .
At a rough estimate , Germany 's net contribution would be reduced by approximately EUR 1 300 million a year and that of the Netherlands by approximately EUR 450 million , while the contributions of Spain , Greece and France would increase by EUR 1 billion .
The proposal would also have enormous consequences for matters of principle .
If the point of departure here is for consumers to benefit from EU agricultural aid in the shape of reduced food prices , is it right that some producing countries should have to pay more ?
Would it not be fairer if all those benefiting also paid ?
From the point of view of the farmer , it is also a question of whether the new system will be as secure as the present one .
The main question is whether the CAP should remain under the tightly-controlled jurisdiction of the EU , with levels of aid at least stable , and nationally based aid which does not distort the single market .
Mrs Haug 's report is an important addition to the Agenda 2000 debate , and to the ongoing preparation process for the next phase of the programme .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have noticed in this debate that those countries which are net beneficiaries do not wish to speak about net contributors or net beneficiaries , whereas this is exactly what the countries that are net contributors want to talk about .
The issue is the financing of EU enlargement .
We are now fighting over who is going to pay for it .
On that basis I would like to express an opinion which is important to me and from our point of view generally .
The total EU budget should not be increased by more than 1.27 % .
The EU should not be given the powers to tax its citizens or collect taxes in the Member States : the money must be collected from the Member States themselves .
The best basis for calculating how much each Member State should pay is GNP .
I do not think it is out of the question to increase the share that agriculture itself contributes .
It will only divide up EU income and expenditure in a new way , but we cannot object to that in principle .
Mr President , this report gives us the opportunity to raise some important questions of principle regarding the financing of the European Union .
In fact , the European Union 's so-called ' own-resources ' system - as it functions at present - seems to us to be dangerous for the taxpayer , as demonstrated by the changes in budgetary revenue in recent years .
Studies on the economic rationality of parliaments - particularly , for example , those carried out by Professor Buchanan , who won a Nobel prize - have successfully demonstrated that parliaments are always interested in increasing taxes , the burden of which is shared amongst all taxpayers whilst the expenditure itself can relate to an individual group , and benefit a specific group of politicians .
Owing to this rationality , each elected Member of the European Parliament therefore receives payment for expenditure which he can make in his constituency , and he is not disadvantaged by the burden of having to pay taxes which are levied by the national authorities .
As regards the bureaucratic machinery itself , most of which comes under the Commission , its interest in extending the tax system is obvious .
Numerous studies have shown that when the members of the general public themselves vote for taxes by referendum , as is the case in Switzerland and some states in the United States , for example , they do not vote at all as parliamentarians or bureaucrats would wish them to .
This tells us a great deal .
Admittedly , however , such referendums can only take place at local or national level , and it is difficult to imagine a large-scale referendum on tax taking place at European level .
Therefore , if we want to avoid an increase in tax , it would seem preferable for the Union to be financed through payments made by the Member States that would be fixed on the basis of unanimity and would put into practice the principle of ' juste retour ' in order to prevent tax increases .
Our defence of taxpayers therefore leads us to reject the Haug report .
Finally , we should point out that defending the taxpayer is at the heart of defending the freedom of nations .
Mr President , Mrs Haug 's report represents a significant effort to draw together many differing strands of opinion .
I want to congratulate her on that .
However , she left me with a serious physiological dilemma : how to applaud her with one hand while gesticulating angrily to her with the other .
A lot of her report deserves applause but she went somewhat awry when she tried to interfere in decisions that were made at Fontainebleau and were incorporated in the own resources decision , a decision which requires unanimity to change it .
I speak on behalf of the British Labour Members on that major area of dissent .
The United Kingdom rebate was created because of the inequity of our net contribution compared to our receipts from the Community budget .
That inequity continues and the circumstances of Fontainebleau have not changed for the better .
If anything , they have worsened over the years .
Instead of threatening the United Kingdom rebate , what we ought to be concentrating all our efforts on doing is mitigating the necessity for the United Kingdom to have such a rebate .
That means a combination of all of four things : agricultural spending reform and deep agricultural spending cuts ; cofinancing in addition to that reform ; a re-evaluation of the cohesion fund countries who have qualified to join the single European currency and therefore an examination of their entitlement together with a capping of the budget and strict budgetary stringency .
Therefore , while I welcome much of the Haug report , the British Labour Members stand firmly behind the efforts of successive British Prime Ministers , including Tony Blair , in their just demand for budgetary fairness and equity .
Mr President , I really think this is much ado about very little .
We have spent the last three or four years talking about cutting back on spending at European level , freezing the budget and maintaining the present rate of spending .
At the moment we spend 1.11 % of Community GDP and we have written a great volume on the whole question of how we are to collect this money .
Personally , I think own-resources is whatever we decide own-resources are .
Whatever European law says is own-resources , that is own-resources .
Even if we ask the county councils or national governments to collect it and pass it on to us , that does not prevent it from being own-resources .
So I think we make too much of that issue .
The other point is the question of the just return .
Maybe I am wrong when I tell people that when the European Union was founded there was a common agricultural policy not because it made absolute common sense that we took that particular industry and made it common , but because it was recognised that the single market would give great advantages to a skilled , industrialised country like Germany , and the French demanded , as a corresponding benefit , a common agricultural policy .
So we recognised that there were benefits to be gained from the single market in the European Union other than just the amount of money that people got from the budget .
That has been borne out because we cannot just evaluate the benefits of European Union on the basis of how the balance of payments in the European budget works out .
At the moment , Germany has a massive surplus in its balance of trade with the rest of the Union - something like 25 billion .
That is fair enough !
I do not begrudge Germany that , it got that out of the single market because of its efficiency and hard work .
The Dutch have a bigger surplus still , something like 35 billion .
Some of that may be the Rotterdam factor but , even if it is , it still leaves profit that would not have been there and could not possibly accrue to the Dutch economy if it were not for the single market .
So the single market gives benefit to the Dutch and Germans .
Ireland gains because it has a surplus in its trade with the rest of the Community , except the British .
We also are net beneficiaries , and have the best of all worlds .
So I am not in favour of rapid change !
Being serious , we are going much too far and the demand for national contributions to the common agricultural policy is not a reasonable proposal .
It is definitely renationalisation .
Mr President , in the one minute I have at my disposal I should like to make three short comments .
Firstly , does the total amount of Community budget receipts cover the current requirement of the European Union ?
My opinion is that it does not .
The report has nothing to say on this .
Secondly , this is a distortion of reality : while here we are talking about the system of own resources , that is , the system of collecting budget receipts , the report concerns itself essentially with expenditure .
It wants to reduce expenditure on the common agricultural policy , the Committee on Budgets is transformed into the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , it recommends the restructuring of agricultural policy and finally calls for national contributions to this policy .
From 70 % of the budget the common agricultural policy has fallen to 45 % .
How much further do we want it to fall ?
How much further do you want it to fall ?
Let us just reflect on the fact that , without a common agricultural policy , there would be no European Union today .
My third and final comment is this : the notion of net contributions must cease .
We must accept that contributions are determined by the single market as a whole and not just by the Community budget .
Mr President , this report is an admirable and very well formulated attempt to chart a course between various conflicting mega-interests , what a skier would call a slalom .
But it has no clear thrust .
In order to develop that , the report should really be referred back to committee .
During the debate emphasis has repeatedly been put on the need for economic and social cohesion and solidarity , and rightly so .
But solidarity also means that all the Member States must commit themselves fully to combating waste , corruption and mismanagement .
For when it comes to collecting revenue we see particularly large losses in the Member States as a result of irregularities and fraud .
The aim of the future own resources system must not just be to make the revenue system more transparent , simpler and more rational but also to reduce the burden on European taxpayers as a whole .
In this context , any European Central Bank profits should not , as proposed , be paid into the Community budget but accrue to the Member States ' budgets .
Mr President , I want to extend my warmest thanks to the rapporteur for what she has done on behalf of the Committee on Budgets and this House .
Ladies and gentlemen , I rather got the impression today that you thought Mrs Haug had drawn up this report largely for her own amusement .
Every one of us should realise that she took a real Sisyphean task upon herself here and I believe she has done an admirable and fantastic job .
Each of us comes from our own Member State and we really have seen today that we are all bringing our own Member State 's special interests with us here .
The discussion showed that extensively enough .
The way I read this report , Mrs Haug has tried to propose short and medium-term measures .
They include the question of the British rebate and of course they include the question of cofinancing agricultural policy . And to the Member who declared it was about renationalising the agricultural system - something people sometimes say against their better judgment and that has been debated at length - I would say that such matters must of course be addressed here .
But Mrs Haug has also paved the way for what we will in the final analysis need on the revenue side , namely European revenue in the form of European taxes .
Only then will we see an end to the interminable debate about who is the biggest net contributor , who is the biggest net recipient , which is what it is obviously all about just now .
Because this report is sufficiently logical and well constructed and because it comes very close to fulfilling the task we set , namely to formulate and document Parliament 's position prior to the European Council decisions , I would call on everyone to support it accordingly .
It will not be the last report by the Committee on Budgets to cause us problems .
Looking at the question of the financial perspective , we may find that the balance of interests differs somewhat from today 's , but we as the European Parliament should seek to remain capable of action at budgetary level .
With this report we certainly are , which is why we should support it on Thursday .
Mr President , with the Haug report the European Parliament underlines once again its political commitment to the question of the Community 's own resources .
Although the number of parliamentarians present today is not very high I must say that the issue is still of the highest political topicality in all the member countries as we prepare for the Berlin summit .
Like its predecessors , in particular the famous Langes report of 1994 , the Haug report combines short-term realism and long-term vision .
I am happy to note that the same difficulties that we had in the Commission when we had to draw up our report have also been encountered in the European Parliament .
I congratulate Mrs Haug for this balanced combination of those issues : short-term realism and long-term vision .
The Haug report and the Commission report on the operation of own resources published last October are on the same wave-length on many questions .
For example , both reports agree that the present system has provided sufficient resources to finance the Community expenditure , but also that it lacks transparency , comprehensibility and financial autonomy .
Both reports agree that the notion of juste retour is unrepresentative of the relationship of the EU with the Member States and misleading in several respects .
Both reports note that VAT resources pose a series of difficulties in terms of transparency and complexity , as well as the possibility of replacing VAT resources by GNP resources .
This has been given a lot of attention in the present discussion with the member countries .
Both reports recognise the diminishing importance of the traditional resources : it is necessary to take the cost benefit aspects of their collection into account .
Finally , if the weight of the GNP resources increases - which may prove possible in the next few weeks - it will become even more necessary to use the latest and most credible GNP estimates which take account of all the underground economy aspects .
With regard to specific new own resources , positions still differ considerably .
These differences have also manifested themselves within the European Parliament .
Given the cumbersome decision-making procedure in the field , more convergence of views will be required before an initiative can hope to have any possibility of succeeding .
Intellectually it is very interesting but politically there are not very many realistic options today .
Timing is important here .
The successful launch of the euro and the difficult negotiations on the harmonisation of certain taxes in Europe could be slowed if too close a link is made with the question of potential Community own resources .
I fully agree that the question of the financing of the Union has to be seen as an integral part of the integration process of the Union , that it has to move forward in tandem with it .
I once again congratulate the rapporteur for her excellent work .
Thank you , Mr Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11 a.m.
Transportable pressure equipment
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0094 / 99 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council ( 12050 / 98 - C4-0679 / 98-97 / 0011 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Directive on transportable pressure equipment ( Rapporteur : Mr Camisón Asensio ) .
Mr President , one year ago , Mr Camisón Asensio drew up an excellent report , as this House confirmed during the first reading of this timely proposal for a directive .
The report 's view has not changed at second reading and is one that will help increase safety as well as improve conditions for free movement in terms of the manufacture , use and transport of transportable pressure equipment in Europe .
The Socialist Group supports the criteria of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which are the rapporteur 's initial criteria . Our group will therefore vote in favour of the small yet important amendments contained in this report and that the rapporteur has summarised .
The creation of a single economic area based on a common market remains one of the objectives from the Treaty of Rome that requires constant improvement .
Consequently , Parliament and the Commission have a lasting obligation to iron out technical problems in the trade of industrial goods in this area whenever there are cases where eliminating such problems will still guarantee a high level of safety .
Both high safety levels and the elimination of technical difficulties can be achieved with this report .
I still do not understand how the Council can be against approving and increasing transparency in limits on times when loaded lorries can use European motorways at weekends . Fortunately , we only have three months left of the German Presidency , after which we can assume that such approval will be granted .
We should like to congratulate Mr Camisón Asensio for his work throughout these two readings and also the Commission for its excellent initiative and for accepting most of the amendments from this House .
I should like to begin by thanking the Committee on Transport and Tourism and , in particular , Mr Camisón Asensio for the time and productive effort that he has spent on this issue , not only at this time , but for the period in which he has been living with this proposal - the past 18 months or more .
The result of his efforts has been improvement in the Commission 's proposal .
We have recognised that in the most practical way by accepting a significant number of his first reading amendments .
The sight of Mr Jarzembowski always disorientates me .
Such a thing of beauty at this time of night !
The Commission 's position , which includes all the amendments accepted by the Commission - the common position - will improve the safety of transportable pressure equipment such as gas cylinders or tanks , will allow their free circulation and free use and will meet these purposes through provisions relating , among other things , to the conformity of new equipment , the reassessment of existing equipment , periodic testing and relevant Community marking .
Let me comment on the amendments to the common position that are offered by the report that we are considering tonight .
First of all , the Commission is able to accept Amendment No 2 since it introduces the compulsory notification to the Commission in case of undue marking .
We are not , however , able to accept Amendment No 1 .
The reason for that is that reassessment of an existing receptacle by an agreed body is only a possibility under the terms of the proposal .
The House will know that the Member States that are going to use this provision are those that already have a lot of experience with agreed bodies .
They will only authorise some specific agreed bodies for the reassessment activities .
In those circumstances and taking into account the fact that a notified body will have previously reassessed the type of conformity , unannounced visits by a notified body are not necessary .
I should like to congratulate the interpreters on the way in which they followed that passage that I have just read out .
Since Amendment No 4 is a consequence of Amendment No 1 , that too is not acceptable .
The Commission is also not able to accept Amendment No 3 for the simple and formal reason - which I know the rapporteur understands - that the report to the Council and the European Parliament on the adaptations to technical progress are laid down in the directives of the Commission which are published in the Official Journal .
I hope that the honourable Members will accept that the Commission 's reasons for not accepting these few amendments are entirely the result of practical and procedural considerations and not objections in principle .
I should like to offer my thanks to the rapporteur and his colleagues for their very constructive approach and bid Godspeed to this useful piece of legislation .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Ports and intermodal terminals
The next item is the report ( A4-0074 / 99 ) by Mr Piecyk , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision amending Decision No 1692 / 96 / EC as regards seaports , inland ports and intermodal terminals , as well as project No 8 in Annex III ( COM ( 97 ) 0681 - C4-0151 / 98-97 / 0358 ( COD ) ) .

Mr President , perhaps I will not need my whole seven minutes of speaking time .
After all , one can keep it a bit shorter .
We transport politicians always try to be precise , without letting things get out of hand .
When we began working on the TENs in 1994 , it was clear from the outset that the TENs will not be some unique event that suddenly erupts like a volcano , something that is decided just like that ; what was clear is that there will be a process that will continue for a number of years and will also have to be reviewed constantly .
That is why the 1996 decision taken by the Council and Parliament is sensibly entitled ' Guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network ' .
During the conciliation procedure the Council and Parliament could not agree on what Parliament called for at the time , namely the need to include ports in the TENs .
I think that anyone with any brains and common sense will realise that a transport network without interconnection points is an incomplete system , but then nobody has ever pretended that every member of the Council shines with common sense .
I would never go so far as to say that .
During the conciliation procedure the Commission - indeed you , Commissioner - declared that a proposal on seaports would be on the table immediately .
Immediately took rather longer than we would normally understand by the word .
But in the end we did get what I would regard as a very sensible proposal , namely to bring seaports , inland ports and intermodal terminals together in one proposal .
It makes sense because all three are after all transport connection points and as such they are indeed the condition for linking the various transport modes together .
Moreover , seaports and inland connection points interact with one another and are a significant factor in the development of intermodal transport .
The market is crucial to the development of seaports .
We do not deny that either and so when we lay down European criteria for seaports this must not lead to any distortions of competition .
But regarding the volume criterion , I believe that a traffic volume of 1.5 million tonnes of freight a year is quite certainly more appropriate for a European network than the 1 million proposed by the Commission .
What is totally incomprehensible , however , is the Commission 's specifications for seaports .
Quite rightly , there is a great deal of detail about port infrastructure , but in the end the Commission proposal says that infrastructure projects are not eligible for aid !
We , and indeed I , regard that as totally wrong .
We stick to our original approach : we want to recognise port infrastructure as eligible for aid on principle , but certainly not superstructure , which is a different matter .
To make it quite clear what infrastructure means , my report proposes a basic definition of the term .
After all , we have all sorts of fancies in our mind about all the things that could be supported .
But if these are to be kept in check , we must also have a basic definition of what infrastructure means in the future networks .
The situation regarding inland ports is somewhat different .
Of course , as the Commission proposes , they should be equipped with transhipment installations for intermodal transport ; that would be one criterion .
But those inland ports that only tranship bulk freight should have an annual traffic volume of at least 500 000 tonnes of freight .
The Transport Committee is adding that criterion to the report .
There are two other points I would like to address .
The Commission also wants to include rail freight freeways in the TENs .
Parliament has always supported the Commission and you personally , Commissioner , on the matter of freeways .
We think this is necessary in order to move more freight from the roads to the railways .
And we continue to support you .
However , by virtue of their construction , the freeways are a service installation and not an infrastructure .
That is why both I and the committee believe that in terms of the system - not of the principle , where we entirely agree - they do not belong in the TENs , simply because they are not an infrastructure .
Then there is the famous project No 8 of the 14 very important projects endorsed by the Essen summit .
For God 's sake , these projects have been examined a thousand times as to whether they can go ahead !
The Christophersen Group went to great trouble , and now everything is to be changed again !
This is certainly not a glorious chapter in the annals of the Council .
But I believe Parliament and the Commission should both forgive and forget here and say yes , while specifying one thing , namely that to be precise project No 8 is a project consisting of several individual projects .
And that is the basis on which we should decide tomorrow .
All that remains is for me to thank my colleagues in the committee for their cooperation , to also thank the Commission departments with whom we also cooperated , and finally to call on the Council to finally get round to producing a common position before the end of the legislative term , so that we can get on with this in the autumn .
Finally , on principle the Commission is considering possibly presenting a white paper on the basis of its review of the networks .
We think that is wrong .
Article 21 of the decision provides that the review shall be followed by Commission proposals , which means we should not rethink the whole matter again in the form of a white paper .
That is why we expect the review , when it finally appears , to put forward new , revised proposals , but not , so to speak , to start from scratch again .
We have worked on the networks too long for this to happen .
That is why it is useful to have the completed proposal on the table now .
I can only wish the Commissioner luck in his work and hope that we will manage to achieve a common position during this electoral term .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Piecyk for a good report and a resolution which is a leftover from our resolution on trans-European networks .
We did not get as far as how ports should be included in the master plan .
Since then , we have shown that a lack of efficiency and higher costs both in ports used for inland shipping and seaports have contributed to restricting shipping .
The report on short-sea shipping demonstrated that .
We have discussed the green paper on ports , and we have in fact progressed a long way in our debate on ports .
There is a need for development all over Europe .
We are now jointly picking out some priorities and some ports .
It is important for us to consider not only the functional aspect , but also the need for uniform conditions as far as bureaucracy is concerned .
That is what I want to talk about today .
There is one thing that is very inconvenient for ships when they arrive at ports , and that is the inconsistency in the way they are received and the way the ports operate .
I would therefore urge the ports in the Member States which , through the ' fellowship ' of the trans-European network , are now expected to provide a more sustainable transport system , to fulfil the obligation which goes with being part of the transport chain and all its bureaucracy .
Another point is that the selection of ports should be based on strategic considerations , and not just on regional and local factors .
A port may have great local significance , but it may not live up to the idea of a trans-European network .
Local desires for expansion should therefore be held in check when we talk about the development of trans-European networks .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Tuesday evening is the time for the Committee on Transport and Tourism , so let us get to work again .
I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , very warmly for his report .
He has managed most successfully to incorporate the points we made at the time of the discussion on the green paper on seaports .
In terms of the white paper and amendment of the TEN proposal , he has included Parliament 's views in his report and reconciled them .
That is a most important task and ensures that we do not have two different legal acts and follow different courses .
I believe it also demonstrates how right we were to be stubborn in 1996 and not to adopt the seaports proposal at the time . For with the Piecyk report we now have a far more precise and clear definition of the tasks relating to supporting or not supporting seaports and inland ports .
I admit that , Commissioner , and also thank the Commission for improving its proposal compared to the original text .
In that respect , we have come closer to one another .
I also believe it is important for us to have a proper map of European seaports , for the public did not understand why we had a map showing airports , railway lines and roads , without any indication of seaports .
I agree with Mr Piecyk that including seaports in the maps does not mean that no other ports have a chance of achieving prominence in Europe ; those ports simply have to manage that themselves .
I think that is the crucial point .
In particular , I think it is very good that we have a clear delineation between port infrastructure and port superstructure in the Piecyk report .
One of our central tasks continues to be to avoid distortions of competition between seaports through national aid or even aid from the Cohesion Fund or the Structural Funds .
That means we need clear definitions of port infrastructure and port superstructure .
I hope the Commission , Mr Kinnock , will agree with our more precise definition of project No 8 .

The Council keeps talking about the Essen and Dublin projects , but we have always taken that to mean that this is a matter of codecision and not of a Council decision : it is after all a list of priority projects and not a list of generally applicable priority tasks .
Unfortunately No 8 was a generally applicable commitment .
We have defined it more precisely on the basis of the Commission 's practical proposals , and we are prepared at the next stage perhaps to find a common , stronger , more precise definition .
But it is important that we are clear in our minds what the priorities are and do not restrict ourselves to generally non-applicable tasks .
I also agree with Mr Piecyk that we do not want a white paper on the TENs , for that always means two years of discussions and everyone in this House and everyone in the Council knows what we are talking about here .
We need a brief report summarising the experience gained and a clear review .
That is our task and I believe the Commissioner should do us that favour .
Mr President , following Mr Jarzembowski who spoke of Tuesday evening being transport night , I would add that it is striking to see how many of us transport people are on the back benches .
Perhaps , Commissioner Kinnock , if you keep this portfolio and we exercise our powers of codecision , we can make an effort to move this a little closer to the centre of the political stage and have it acknowledged as rather more important .
Having said that , I must begin by complimenting Mr Piecyk .
We have worked together on this remarkably well , and if his predecessor Günther Topmann could see the harmonious atmosphere in which this report was produced , I think he would find it heartwarming .
I share the views that have been expressed , but there is one aspect which I should like to develop a little further .
Ports are of course the most important points of intersection in our trans-European networks .
After all , all our Union imports and exports pass through them .
The importance of ports is determined not only by history , but also by the ease of their links to the hinterland .
Why , for example , is the port of Oporto rather less busy than that of Rotterdam ?
Because , despite the fact that it means two or three days ' less sailing time , transport from the coast to the interior is more difficult because the infrastructure which the port requires is not yet well enough developed .
That is one of the reasons why we established the TENs and why it is most important to have multimodal transport services from the ports to the hinterland .
So I am also grateful to the rapporteur for mentioning waterways which are at least as important , the Elbe-Lübeck canal and the Twente-Mittelland canal which was added in committee as the result of an amendment .
We should be very glad to see the Commission stressing the importance of these waterways as well .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Piecyk on his excellent and important report .
Please bear with me if , in the short amount of time at my disposal , I concentrate on priority project No 8 , dealing with links between Portugal and Europe via Spain .
The project now submitted could be regarded as a genuine revolution in the world of transport as far as Portugal is concerned .
It fully incorporates the new philosophy which we in the European Union , and particularly in the European Parliament , have always supported .
The fact that Portugal 's current Public Works Minister used to be a member of the European Parliament may have something to do with the far-reaching transformation that has occurred in proposals for Community projects affecting Portugal .
The previously planned project consisted of a motorway between Lisbon and Valladolid , and this is also part of the new project , but what has changed in my opinion is , above all , the philosophy behind it .
Account has been taken of ports and intermodal transport , with rail and road links guaranteeing merchandise improved access to ports outside and inside Europe .
As Mr Wijsenbeek said earlier , there really is a world of a difference between the port of Oporto and the port of Rotterdam in terms of infrastructure .
What is being proposed in this project - in my view nothing short of a revolution in the world of transport in my country , which is why I ask both the European Parliament and the Commission to support it - will enable Portugal to overhaul its transport system and create a logical and complementary network that will link up the different means of transport and modernise every form of access to the Portuguese ports . That means that we will be on a new cutting edge of development .
We therefore think that this project must be approved . It is of overriding importance for Europe and Portugal alike .
Mr President , firstly I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , for this report because , as we have come to expect , he has once again done some excellent work .
We gladly welcome the Commission 's proposal as it is important and urgent that we complete the conciliation procedure between the European Parliament and the Council . This procedure began in 1996 , as no agreement could be reached on the way in which ports were to be incorporated in the TENs .
However , the Commission 's proposal , as the rapporteur has already highlighted , was delayed and the procedure for the current proposal will overlap with the preparations for the Commission report on the fundamental revision of the guidelines .
In fact , the Commission 's explanatory statement in its proposal for amendment constantly refers to the forthcoming review that will take place in accordance with Article 21 of Decision 1692 / 96 / EC .
What is more , I do not believe that the proposal for a continuous process of updating and reviewing the guidelines should be made through a White Paper .
And as regards Amendment No 13 , concerning point 8 , and more specifically on the corridors in the Commission 's proposal , ' Multimodal link Portugal / Spain with the rest of Europe ' , the following corridors are included : Galicia ( La Coruña ) / Portugal ( Lisbon ) , the southwest corridor ( Lisbon / Seville ) and a third corridor Irún / Portugal ( Lisbon ) . The Spanish side of this last corridor is not properly defined .
I believe this is a transcription error , as it should read Irún-Valladolid / Portugal ( Lisbon ) . As a result , I ask that this be corrected in order to avoid any misunderstanding and I would ask the rapporteur to clarify this when it comes to the vote .
Mr President , this Commission proposal completes a significant range of measures concerning the trans-European networks , although it has to be said that the solution envisaged will not be the last word on this matter .
Unlike some colleagues , I am convinced that the new TENs project requires in-depth discussion , harking back to the original spirit of the White Paper by Jacques Delors and stimulating innovation , above all by linking these networks to the development of urban and industrial areas .
I am therefore in favour of a Commission communication which generates a wide-ranging debate with Parliament and with European society , and is not merely a list of projects mediated by national governments .
I am broadly in agreement with this proposal , and I think that a compromise should be possible on one point .
In my opinion , the classification of seaports on the basis of freight volume should not be related exclusively to an annual volume of 1.5 million tonnes , but should be considered over a longer period of at least three years .
As far as competition is concerned , although careful attention must be paid to distortions , I believe that support from the Structural and Cohesion Funds is crucial to port structure and superstructure activities .
The Commission 's survey of ports is most useful here , considering that public funding also benefits many non-Mediterranean ports , albeit indirectly .
A very clear and accurate analysis of both Mediterranean and non-Mediterranean ports is required .
I believe that the important concepts here are nodes , intermodality , technological innovation and the rational development of interconnected networks , including links with railway nodes .
Intermodality is a key factor .
Mr President , of the fourteen priority projects for the trans-European transport networks established at the Essen Council in December 1994 , three are at the finishing stages and six are due to be completed by the year 2005 , while for the other five there is a great deal of vagueness about their timetable , costs and funding .
That is the case with the multimodal link between Portugal and Spain and the rest of Europe .
In 1996 when the new Socialist government came to power in Portugal , policies changed , Madrid moved into line and , at the Dublin Council , the European Union approved the new emphasis on multimodal transport with which we happen to agree .
Two and a half years later we still do not know what actual projects for multimodal links with Portugal and Spain and what economic or environmental impact studies have been presented in Brussels or what their cost and sources of funding will be .
It is curious that as we are changing the designation of project No 8 , which relates to three Iberian multimodal corridors , the Portuguese Government has just presented its national social and economic development plan for the period 2000-2006 and refers to four main Iberian corridors as part of the current set of trans-European network projects , namely the Galician-Portuguese corridor from Vigo to Lisbon ; the Irun-Portugal corridor ; the Extremadura corridor from Lisbon to Madrid ; and the Mediterranean corridor from Lisbon to Seville via Faro and Huelva .
So where does that leave us ?
Are there three or four corridors ?
Which text accurately reflects the current political will of the Portuguese Government ?
Which of them can we rely on in the future ?
We must avoid getting bogged down in vagueness , toing and froing , putting off the vital day when Union funding must be forthcoming .
In particular , regions such as the Algarve and Andalucia cannot be satisfied with simply being ' on the map ' while in practice being indefinitely left out of the transport corridors linking those regions to Europe .
The rail network in southern Portugal is the worst in Europe as there are no links with Seville or with Faro airport .
In the short term the Lisbon-Algarve motorway , the second stage of the Via do Infante and the Ayamonte-Seville link must be joined up to form part of the European road network .
We have now had enough inertia and vacillation .
Mr President , I begin by offering my regrets that I will not be as precise and brief as Mr Piecyk , partly because there is a complexity about this report .
I want to make a candid and as full as possible response to what has been said because these are important issues .
So I hope the House will bear with me if I stray a little over the five minutes .
I also think that Mr Wijsenbeek , as ever , has made an excellent suggestion that in these late night sessions we actually gather closer together so that we can save electricity by not having to project our voices so far and maybe , at the end of the evening , we can join in some community singing .
That would be very good .
Sometimes I feel rather lonely , although , as Mr Wijsenbeek says , this is a packed House by comparison with what we are sometimes used to .
That is a testimony to the very great interest that is expressed in this important subject .
I am glad that Parliament has taken up the proposal we have put forward and there is general support in the House for its objective , which is the completion of the trans-European networks transport guidelines with the inclusion of seaports , inland ports and intermodal terminals .
Mr Piecyk , the rapporteur , must have a particular sense of accomplishment in producing this report since , after our joint experiences in 1995 and 1996 , I always think of him as the parliamentary midwife of the transport TEN guidelines .
It will be clear to honourable Members that the development of a multimodal trans-European transport network would be incomplete if the principal interconnection points were not included .
That is the reason , as several Members of the House will know , why the Commission , following the request of this House , declared in the conciliation procedure on the guidelines that we would submit a proposal for seaport projects in 1997 .
Indeed , it is consistent with the entire thrust of our TENs policy which , because of the mission of developing real networks , must focus increasingly on connection points and access to main arteries rather than simply on traditional stretches of infrastructure .
I am glad that the committee has supported the main principles and the main objectives of the Commission .
A number of amendments adopted by the committee can be accepted either in their entirety or , at least , in principle .
Before dealing with the substantive amendments , I should like to comment on Amendment No 1 - an issue that has arisen repeatedly in the course of this debate - which inserts a recital stating that the European Parliament expects a legislative proposal on the revision of the guidelines , rather than the White Paper that the Commission has announced .
I understand that view very well .
However , it must be said that under Article 21 of the guidelines decision the Commission is requested to present a report and not a proposal for an amendment of the law .
We are therefore fulfilling that requirement .
I hope that the House will agree that there is good sense in producing a report as a White Paper , deliberately in order to provide this Parliament and others with a real opportunity for a broader debate on the trans-European networks policy in general before a new proposal is finally decided upon .
Parliament and the wider community have everything to gain and absolutely nothing to lose by this approach , especially in terms of real participation in policy development in what is a crucial strategy for the European Union .
So rather than in any sense being evasive in not immediately coming forward with a legislative proposal , we are , frankly , trying to do the opposite and being more transparent and more inclusive in the approach that we are making to consideration of the TENs guidelines after the experience and after the evolution of the policy over four years in which a great many developments have taken place .
I shall address the other amendments in three main groups : those relating to ' Trans-European Rail Freight Freeways ' ; secondly , those on the criteria for deciding which ports are included ; and , thirdly , those relating to the types of infrastructure , superstructure and rolling stock investment support that are eligible .
Amendments Nos 2 and 7 refer to the ' Trans-European Rail Freight Freeways ' which , as Mr Piecyk said , have been supported by this Parliament as a means of making early progress in reviving rail freight across the Union .
This revision of the guidelines provides us with a further means of encouraging the development of rail freight freeways by making clear that infrastructure investment in the freeways routes will be given priority .
That makes sense because the viability of infrastructure investments obviously depends on competitive revenue-raising services and competitive services clearly need quality infrastructure .
So investment in infrastructure will certainly help to deliver better services .
But I thought that was the whole purpose of infrastructure investment in any case .
Indeed it is in line with the amendments that Parliament itself put , and we accepted , on the project action for combined transport programmes .
So I cannot support Amendments Nos 2 and 7 which have the effect of dropping all references to trans-European rail freight freeways .
I would , however , be happy to consider a reformulation of the provision that does not directly refer to the rail freight freeways but rather to cross-border trans-European rail freight corridors open to all operators .
If that was accepted , I hope that all parts of this House could then give support to the reference .
Turning to criteria for identifying ports , the Commission accepts that part of Amendment No 4 gives special treatment to ports in the outermost regions .
However , the increase in the minimum traffic volume stipulated in the proposal from 1 million to 1.5 million tonnes of freight would exclude about 27 ports , mainly in remote areas of the Union .
We , therefore , cannot support this specific point because of the breadth of our commitment and indeed the Treaty requirements relating to the function of the trans-European network strategy in connecting up the peripheral regions of the Union to the centre .
Meanwhile the stipulation that ports must be connected to the TENs routes that is set out in the amendment would have the effect of excluding a number of ports that are not currently linked to the trans-European network .
Similarly , the inclusion of a minimum volume threshold for bulk freight in inland ports envisaged in Amendment No 3 would alter the present approach which is essentially based on intermodal freight .
Those proposed amendments cannot , therefore , be accepted entirely .
I hope the House will recognise that there are practical reasons for the Commission taking this view as well as reasons that are also connected to a desire to provide a breadth of effective coverage in the trans-European network strategy as we are further developing it .
Amendment No 6 makes more radical changes to the guideline maps , adding new links and creating new categories of ports .
As I am sure the House recognises , these are , in reality , issues for consideration in the forthcoming general revision process .
Consequently , I cannot accept that amendment for that reason .
Amendment No 5 mainly tightens up definitions and can be readily accepted .
I am grateful to Mr Piecyk for putting that amendment .
Turning to types of eligible investments , I can easily concur with the argument that all projects of common interest , including those related to ports , should , in principle , be potentially eligible for TENs funding .
That means dropping a restrictive paragraph in our proposal on the non-availability of funding for infrastructure in the port area .
Of course financing of those infrastructures - as Mr Jarzembowski pointed out - must not distort competition .
What would , however , create real problems is the introduction of a new concept of superstructures in ports as the distinction between superstructure and infrastructure is far from clear .
We would open the door to uncertainty about eligibility , in particular in the area of combined transport .
If the Union in its wisdom would appoint Mr Jarzembowski to be the inspector of TENs superstructures in all the ports of the European Union , that would mean he was gainfully employed , dedicated to the service of the Community .
All I would regret was his prolonged absence from this House .
But if that power was not vested in Mr Jarzembowski I am not sure that I could accept any definition that clearly delineated between superstructure and infrastructure .
I will illustrate the point by taking the argument further .
The idea of giving a detailed definition of port infrastructure in Amendments Nos 8 and 9 , although I recognise the good intentions of putting it forward in that way , has been very thoroughly examined by the Commission .
We have had to conclude , however , that the provision of a detailed definition would definitely carry the risk that relevant features could be missed out .
In the case , for example , of this specific amendment , the proposed definition , although it is carefully crafted , still misses landing places , quay walls and locks - matters of critical interest in both sea and inland ports .
On balance , therefore , and for practical reasons , I prefer not to have a more precise and exhaustive definition of the term ' port infrastructure ' in the legal text .
I emphasise strongly to the House that it is only for practical reasons that are directly connected with the desire of the Commission to get effective commitment to the development of ports .
Finally , the Commission accepts in essence Amendment No 13 which seeks to describe more precisely the specific project No. 8 in Annex III which has been the subject of several references in the course of the debate , though the accuracy needs cross-checking with the two Member States concerned .
Summing up , the Commission cannot support Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , part of 4 , 6 , 7 , most of 8 and 9 , and 11 .
But we can accept Amendments Nos 5 , 10 , 12 , the first part of Amendment No 8 , and 9 , and we can certainly subscribe to the principles of Amendment No 13 and part of 4 .
I warmly thank the House for having taken this proposal forward and also by expressing my particular gratitude to the Committee on Transport and Tourism and specifically to the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , for the excellent work that once again has been done by himself and his colleagues .
Commissioner , I would just remind you that when you became Commissioner for transport five years ago you promised to listen to Parliament .
What you have just offered us , namely to reject all the proposals we submitted , is outrageous !
But perhaps we will be meeting again next year !
Mr President , I have a similar , short question .
The Commissioner did not accept the amendments on the specific inland waterway links with ports .
Could the Commissioner at least assure this House that he will take seriously inland waterway links with the important points that ports constitute for our trans-European networks ?
Mr President , I will be extremely brief because I am conscious of the fact that unavoidably my first contribution was long .
Firstly , I entirely sympathise with the point that Mr Wijsenbeek makes .
This , however , is not the proposal before the House .
It is not a general revision of the trans-European network strategy .
I very firmly give him the undertaking that precisely the point he is making will be a feature of our proposal relating to the general revision .
He need have no worry about that .
Secondly , I say to Mr Jarzembowski , who is a Parliamentarian like myself , that I made a solemn undertaking - which I honour every moment that I work - to listen to the Parliament .
He will recognise , however , democrat that he is , that this does not imply being a rubber stamp or accepting everything the Parliament says .
It does , however , mean , that I owe the Parliament my honest judgment .
That he always gets , whether he likes it or not .
Happily , he likes it more often than he dislikes it !
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Railways
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0058 / 99 by Mr Sarlis , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 91 / 440 / EEC on the development of the Community 's railways ( COM ( 98 ) 0480 - C4-0561 / 98-98 / 0265 ( SYN ) ) ; -A4-0059 / 99 by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , onI.the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 95 / 18 / EC on the licensing of railway undertakings ( COM ( 98 ) 0480 - C4-0562 / 98-98 / 0266 ( SYN ) ) II.the proposal for a Council Directive relating to the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure and safety certification ( COM ( 98 ) 0480 - C4-0563 / 98-98 / 0267 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in its resolution of 13 January 1998 on the White Paper on a strategy for revitalising the Community 's railways - the personal work of Commissioner Kinnock - this House wholeheartedly and consistently supported the Commission 's strategy on virtually all its lines of attack .
However , it also highlighted several important points .
One of these was that we called upon the Commission to submit proposals in order to give railway undertakings the right of free access to railway infrastructure on the basis of an amendment to Article 10 of Directive 91 / 440 / EEC regarding the operation of international freight transport , along with accompanying measures .
The Commission 's new proposal , or rather the package of three separate proposals , one of which concerns the amendments to Directive 91 / 440 / EEC , goes in the right direction but is not sufficiently substantial .
The most important point I would like to highlight is that the Commission proposal fails to make recommendations for the gradual extension of the liberalisation of the railways , as I mentioned earlier , which this House introduced in its resolution of 13 January 1998 .
This omission becomes even more apparent when we realise that this issue has stagnated somewhat in Council circles and that the third directive of the package submitted by the Commission is essentially a measure accompanying a policy which is leading to partial liberalisation , which was set out in the White Paper and , above all , in Parliament 's resolution of January 1998 .
As a result , in line with what I have already said and , most importantly , with the almost unanimous view of this House , which was expressed in January 1998 , I put before the Committee on Transport and Tourism Amendment No 10 granting Community railway undertakings free access and transit rights on equitable conditions to the infrastructure in all Member States for the purpose of operating international railway services for the transport of goods .
This right currently exists only for international groupings of railway undertakings and not for individual railway undertakings .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have the 1969 directive , which expressly provides for the gradual liberalisation of rail transport in the European Union - which was then the European Community - and has not been implemented since that time .
As a result , with this amendment , which was adopted by a large majority in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we are putting back on track the process towards the gradual liberalisation of rail transport , starting with the transport of goods .
Amendment No 6 puts forward a new provision which obliges Member States to create legal entities , separate from railway undertakings , for the management of their national railway infrastructure , not later than two years following the date of entry into force of the directive .
Finally , the remaining amendments which I propose , and which have been adopted in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , concern improvements to the Commission proposals . For example , Amendment No 5 , in contrast to what was proposed by the Commission , reconfirms that responsibility for operating the control and safety systems lies with rail infrastructure providers .
Last of all , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to underline three things .
Firstly , the reports being debated this evening in joint debate are harmonised and complement each other .
Secondly , there has been an announcement from the German Presidency that , very soon , some time in March , it will take the initiative to promote issues relating to the railways .
Thirdly , this is a significant milestone in the liberalisation of this important form of transport in Europe .
I hope that the solidarity that was shown in the Committee on Transport and Tourism will still be there tomorrow during the vote .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to thank my colleagues in the committee , who worked together admirably , and especially Mr Sarlis , with whom I cooperated closely .
I am also grateful to our Commission colleagues , who provided us with a great deal of information and were most understanding , although I very much regret - as did the entire committee - that one Commission colleague decided in the end that none of the amendments was acceptable .
Commissioner , I do not know what you will say ; as a democrat of course I have to accept it .
But I would certainly be sorry to see all the amendments simply dismissed out of hand .
Commission , I entirely agree with what you have repeatedly said , namely that the European railway system needs to be reformed .
But I cannot agree with those - even if we have close political links in the unions and in other areas - who believe that it would be best to leave things as they stand , or who believe that the difficult problems with the railways had been created by the Commission 's proposals .
No , the difficult situation of the railways has arisen partly because many railway undertakings believed they did not need to reform , they did not need to change anything , they could continue operating in a national framework .
That is not true and in principle I agree with the ideas put forward by the Commissioner and the Commission .
It is certainly true that the difficult situation as regards rail / road competition in my view disadvantages the railways and that this needs rectifying .
In that regard I have taken several aspects into account .
And I can understand that the unions and the railway undertakings are highlighting this .
There is much talk of privatisation and liberalisation .
But privatisation does not even come into question in this context , it is not being proposed .
We can certainly consider liberalisation up to a certain point .
I would prefer to say something different , in relation to our proposals : it is a question of Europeanising the railway system .
Air transport has been Europeanised , all the undertakings have been Europeanised , there is a common market .
However , many railway undertakings continue to believe they can frame their programmes at national level and then they wonder why freight traffic and employment and so forth are declining .
That is untenable !
That is why I , like Mr Sarlis - and that is the thrust of my amendments - believe that we should target the next step towards liberalisation or Europeanisation at an area where we have a European market , where the competition between rail and road is particularly strong , namely cross-border freight traffic ; I have made the corresponding proposals .
So I entirely support the Commission 's basic premise and its proposals on opening up the market .
It is up to the railway undertakings to decide whether to do so more in the form of cooperation or of competition .
Of course we do not want new monopolies to emerge .
It is a question of the transparency of the decisions , the transparency of the allocations .
Although this sector has not been regulated , it is certainly also a question of technical framework conditions .
So we need harmonisation in the technical field too .
And it is a question of equal competition and fairness , not just between rail and road but also as regards the railways themselves , in these individual decisions .
I come now to a central point , where my opinion differs from that of the Commission .
In particular it concerns the large number of both central and decentralised rules .
I believe the Commission has done a very good job in many cases .
Its detailed proposals are probably also the most sensible way to go about this .
But I do not think it is always sensible of the Commission to want to propose and implement them without making the national rules sufficiently flexible in their turn .
That is why I have deleted a fair number of provisions - and this really must not be seen as any disrespect for the Commission 's work here - not because I think they are bad but because I believe it is not the Commission 's job to regulate this in such detail , particularly since I am convinced that nobody can control all this centrally .
I happen to believe that we should only adopt rules of this kind if compliance with them can also be checked , rather than having an abundance of rules that cannot be monitored .
As for the charging principles , here again I agree with the Commission : on principle marginal charges should be required .
But I think the external costs should only be charged in the railway system if they can also be charged at about the same rate for road traffic .
I believe that a profit that bears a proper relation to the costs would be entirely acceptable and could be calculated , and that higher costs could also be charged for certain special investments .
However , I have deleted the detailed rules on this from the report .
Regarding the central issue of the authorised applicant , I personally have nothing against the Commission 's views on this .
But I have added one restriction , which I consider important to ensure that this is acceptable and that we really concentrate on what is necessary .
Each country should continue to be able to regulate this as it wishes in its area of jurisdiction .
But all European Member States must note and accept that for cross-border freight traffic all European railway undertakings shall be regarded as authorised applicants , meaning that they shall be eligible to request capacity .
I think that is the essential point .
If we take this decision in Parliament tomorrow , then I believe it will be a real milestone in the development of a European railway system .
We will then have competition in cross-border freight traffic ; that is where it is most important , that is where the railways must make efforts .
For I hope we will take a decision on all those matters that the Commission is rightly proposing , such as on the European tax disc , on the Switzerland package and the fair distribution of costs between rail and road .
It is vital for the railways also to show that they are willing to reform and to make the appropriate reforms .
That is why I hope , Commissioner , that you will be able to accept some of these amendments and that this package will help us finally also to have a European railway system .
Mr President , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has adopted a number of amendments , all of which involve the deletion of sections containing over-detailed rules .
In general , one should be very careful about over-regulating , for example in relation to charges , times of operation and so on .
It can easily lead to a situation where the gains made through increased efficiency are swallowed up by administrative costs .
Personally , I should like to see a number of other requirements deleted .
I do not believe it is possible to forcibly increase efficiency by means of highly detailed directives from Brussels .
In my view , it is totally unacceptable for directives to specify the exact date on which all railway companies in the Union should change their timetables .
The requirement that all railways should have separate accounting for freight and passenger transport is also quite unnecessary .
Both these proposals may well cause serious problems , especially for small railway companies that wish to participate in the market , while the bigger former monopolies can easily adapt to them .
Consequently , the proposals could , in practice , produce the opposite effect to that intended and become an obstacle to increased competition .
In my view , before introducing all these detailed requirements , it would have been wiser to wait and assess the long-term effects of the ground-breaking directives approved by the Council in 1991 and 1995 , which established the principle of increased competition in the rail sector .
Mr President , these changes to existing directives and the adoption of a new directive on the allocation of infrastructure and the levying of charges represent a final break with national monopolies and provide opportunities for competition .
Or is that really the case ?
As Mr Wibe has just been saying , there are problems .
It is a long way from decision to reality .
Consideration for public services and social obligations make the consequences difficult for many people .
Many countries and regions are worried , and perhaps with reason .
We should bear that in mind .
But the opportunity for the renaissance of the railways is at hand , and that is what we should strive for .
That is our goal .
The goal is to ensure that an appropriate share of all transport work goes to the railways .
Like the ports , the railways are also part of the transport chain and are therefore under an obligation to develop sustainable transport .
We must solve the problems of this process together with our citizens .
This afternoon we discussed public services , competition and state aid with Commissioner Van Miert in a working group , and it is very interesting to see how things are developing in Europe .
I believe we should be aware of the fact that changes and market developments do not happen by themselves .
We have to prompt them in one way or another .
Whether or not it is too detailed , as Mr Wibe suggests , I could not say at present , but if we want the best for the railways , we have to work on it seriously .
Parliament should also say to the Council and the Member States that if we want something like this , then we also have an obligation to act .
There has been a great deal of talk about the railways over the past ten years , but it has done little to help .
Decisions need to be taken .
The market will not change this situation by itself .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , let us see what you have to say to Mr Sarlis 's and Mr Swoboda 's proposals today .
Compared with my own objectives , I do not think the demands made by either of them are tough enough .
A year ago we called for a gradual liberalisation that took account of social framework conditions but was sufficiently clear-cut .
Nevertheless I endorse both reports .
They are a balanced mix of Parliament 's views and I hope , Commissioner , that you will prove a rather more generous benefactor this time and accept the amendments .
Let me address a few points .
In my view we cannot accept that the railways should decline as a result of your deliberate policy of not applying European legislation .
Directive 91 / 440 / EEC - separation of infrastructure management and operation of trains - has been applicable by all Member States since 1986 .
Some simply refuse to do so .
I hope that at least you , Commissioner , are in favour of the call in both reports for progress to be made towards this objective in the next two years .
If need be , we will have to initiate proceedings here .
For only if we separate the two can other railway undertakings also effectively use the railways ; we want to see effective use made of the railway network , we do not want some countries to seal themselves off and not let anyone through .
That is why we need a clear separation between infrastructure management and operation services ; we need clear rights of access , as both colleagues called for , we need wider rights of access , lenient rights of access , but definite improvements ; and thirdly , we need uniform rules on transport charges .
Mr Swoboda , in your place I would have preferred not to bring up the idea of marginal costs .
After the hearing in committee , we should not get involved in this .
For the rest , I agree with you that if we look first at road costs - building and maintenance costs - we would say that external costs may only be increased if the other transport modes are required to bear similar costs .
In the same way I would like to see the railways given greater opportunity to compete with the other transport modes on the basis of sensible and reasonable transport charges .
But I also think we must then say that regardless of how high or low we set the transport charges , they must be charged in all the Member States .
We cannot have some Member States saying that temporarily , for the next two years , we will not impose any transport charges , at least not on certain routes .
In this respect it is then up to the Commission to ensure equality under the law .
In this difficult battle between Council , Parliament and Commission to open up the railways so that they will become client-oriented and effective , we are on your side , Commissioner , and I hope you are on our side !
Mr President , here too I must congratulate the two rapporteurs .
Mr Jarzembowski is right in saying that there is indeed a broad measure of agreement on this amongst the various groups . And there were times when that was not the case , when we had some fairly heated clashes on the subject of railways .
But there are a few facts that we must face .
We have made nothing like the progress on railways which we ought to have achieved .
The proportion of freight carried by rail continues to decline .
So that is the opposite of what we actually want .
Mr Wibe has left the Chamber , but as draftsman for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy he said that there was not really any need to separate the exploitation of infrastructure from actual transport operations .
I do not agree with him at all .
How can we license individual operators if we do not make that separation ?
I think the Commission will have to press that point and stick to it .
And for this reason too , not so much because it makes all that much difference , but more because we wanted to send a signal , our group wished to maintain an amendment which says that we want to see the separation between the exploitation of infrastructure and rolling-stock within the year , and not in two years ' time .
Why do we say that ?
Because the railways have had plenty of time since Directive 44 / 91 .
That is eight years ago . They have still not all taken the measures which the Commission wants the railways to take .
So we should like to hear from the Commissioner how things stand , and which railway operators have not yet taken the necessary action and why not .
And we want to see a real separation , not the kind between SNCF and VFF which is a separation in name only , and not in practice .
I welcome this report on the need to upgrade the railway systems within the European Union , as well as guaranteeing the most efficient use of railway infrastructure to meet consumer needs .
This is quite a timely report from an Irish perspective .
Only last week the Irish Government announced a dual strategy involving the spending of £ Irl 430 million on improving rail safety standards , alongside the expansion of commuter train services in Ireland .
As a result of this investment , which I fully support , the suburban rail network will be increased in capacity in terms of over 60 % .
As a Member of the European Parliament for the constituency of Leinster , it is good news because towns such as Naas , Newbridge , Kilcullen , Wicklow , Athy , Arklow , Kildare and Monasterevin must all in the near future secure the necessary finance for the upgrading of their respective railway operations .
While the upgrading of rail infrastructure is of paramount importance , equal concern must also be the quality of service , and the Irish rail company Iarnród Éireann must , in my view , be up to the task .
The legitimate request of the people in Monasterevin , for example , for the re-opening of their train station and the people of Portlaoise for the upgrading of the service is fully justified .
The overcrowding problem on suburban trains will also be eased by the addition of more passenger carriages , and platforms will also be lengthened .

Mr President , with the reports by Mr Sarlis and Mr Swoboda the European Parliament is forced to take a stand which is fraught with consequences for the future of rail transport .
The Commission 's directives - and , by extension , both reports - are in keeping with a policy of liberalisation , as they open the market in international freight transport to competition .
Mr Sarlis 's report even goes beyond the Commission directives , which do not advocate liberalisation , for example by proposing to amend Article 10 of Council Directive 91 / 440 / EEC .
Yet , there has been no evidence in the railway sector to confirm the belief that liberalisation is the only way it can be revived .
On the contrary , the sorry state of affairs that resulted from the liberalisation of British railways represents a genuine counter-example .
Conversely , high-speed trains which have brought about the irrefutable development of railways could not have come into existence in a liberalised system .
This is also the case for the first rail freight corridor which was set up on the basis of cooperation between public services .
I should like to go back over two points .
Firstly , the amendment of the concept of authorised applicants which allows any natural or legal person to request infrastructure capacity .
This is likely to lead to a chaotic liberalisation with the increase in the number of new operators .
The railway undertakings would thus be restricted to a role of service providers ensuring the traction of trains .
This system can only lead to the most profitable sectors being creamed off , leaving the railway undertakings to take responsibility for personnel , maintenance of rolling stock , and the least profitable sectors .
Only one liberty is therefore granted , that of allowing companies who are not at all involved in the rail sector to take the biggest share of the profits without providing the conditions for developing this sector .
The nuance provided by the Committee on Transport and Tourism which makes it possible for Member States to provide for authorised applicants is an illusory precaution , since one unauthorised applicant in any given country would in fact impose itself on others .
The second point I should like to make concerns competition .
Rail transport is subject to competition , competition from road transport which benefits from its small-scale use of infrastructure and the extremely low level of social conditions it needs to provide .
No effort is made to remedy this distortion of competition that is so costly in terms of the environment , social protection and safety .
The reports by Mr Sarlis and Mr Swoboda advocate competition within the rail sector itself , which does not exist in any country and risks compromising the progress achieved , particularly in view of the specialised infrastructure for rail transport in comparison with that for road and air transport .
Together with their trade unions and the ETUC , the railway workers of the European Union made known their opposition to the liberalisation of railways during a day of large-scale strike action across the European Union .
Within the Council , governments are divided on the issue : some , including the French Government , are against it , whilst others think there is no need to force liberalisation on countries that do not want it .
For this reason , before voting starts tomorrow , I will be requesting that both these reports be referred back to committee so that Parliament does not take such an important decision as this in haste .
The European Parliament must reject the liberalisation proposals and envisage instead measures to encourage the development and modernisation of the rail sector and its public service obligations , as well as the development of cooperation and social harmonisation at a high level .
Mr President , I can deal briefly with the Commission proposal , though it is far too detailed , and with the proposals put forward by Mr Sarlis and Mr Swoboda .
We are happy with them .
Discussions outside Parliament often assume that the Greens will probably be against , like our colleagues on the left .
That is a major misconception .
The Greens are in favour of more freight going by rail , and they are for fair competition and against monopolies , whether they are private or state monopolies .
So we are also in favour of breaking national monopolies on the management of infrastructure .
We are in favour of transparent administrative and financial structures for managing infrastructure and providing services .
We are in favour of the market being opened up to all kinds of responsible operators , with an independent body to scrutinise them .
And I would say in reply to Mrs Moreau that this is not a kind of wild west-style liberalisation or privatisation .
In our opinion it is a gradual , cautious but very resolute attempt to ensure a future at last for rail freight .
We all know that the market share of the railways has declined in recent years .
That trend has to be reversed , and I think that these proposals are a good start .
Mr President , European railways need to undergo far-reaching reforms that tend towards liberalisation but that do not jeopardise their role as a public service .
The proposal to end monopolies and separate infrastructure management from railway undertakings is an interesting one but how are we going to guarantee the adequate maintenance of lines that are less profitable in economic terms but that are needed by society ?
We cannot forget that railways are a strategic element in vital development in many regions . Let me give you an example : service on the only international link through the central Pyrenees , through Canfranc , has been interrupted as a bridge collapsed on the French side and it has not been repaired .
It has not been repaired for 30 years .
The reason for this is very simple : the line was not very profitable for the publicly-owned undertaking that was operating it and , as a result , the line is now closed . Moreover , there is no possibility of other more efficient undertakings using it .
In other words , the deterioration of infrastructures is hindering the liberalisation process .
This means that we must find ways to ensure that networks are maintained , no matter what their current uses and profitability may be . In contrast , liberalisation will only lead to reduced services , particularly in the less developed European regions .
Mr President , first of all I will resist the temptation to list all the stations on the West Coast main line in my constituency and also on the trans-Pennine route .
But I note that Mr Hyland has left .
First of all , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank Pavlos Sarlis and Hannes Swoboda for their work in this very important area .
It has been , for a long time now , a priority of my group to revitalise the railways of the European Union .
We have also recognised that the action that needs to be taken to enable our railway industry to survive has to be radical in its approach , innovative in its conception and courageous in its actions .
The scale of the problems facing the railway industry cannot be underestimated .
At a time when the overall transport market is expanding , we find that rail 's share of that market has been reduced to no more than 6 % of the passenger - and 16 % of the freight - sector .
Put simply , the railway sector throughout the EU is in such a perilous state that we have to question whether international passenger services or freight services will still exist in 15 years ' time .
Therefore , if I can use a medical analogy here , we have a very sick patient who is in need of major help , and I believe that our two rapporteurs , along with the Commission , have given us the medicine to make our railways fit and healthy well into the next century .
There are some in the railway industry , and indeed , some in this Parliament , who believe that we can carry on with a system that is based on old working practices , functioning only within a national network based on the ideals of the 1930s .
My group believes that the status quo is not an option in this case , and that those who believe it is will contribute to the death of our railways .
If we are to ensure that railways have a future outside of commuter services , particularly in freight , then we have to take the actions that have been outlined to us by our rapporteurs .
Rail cannot compete in the freight sector against road haulage if the service it has to offer takes 67 hours to travel 850 kilometres in comparison with 13 hours by truck .
However , my group recognises that there are concerns amongst railway workers - after all , we are proposing a shift in emphasis that is quite radical .
This is why we have supported a more guarded approach to the introduction of free market rules in other areas outside of freight , coupled with social protection measures , and with the public service obligation a high priority .
We have an opportunity today to lay the foundations for a new railway age in the new millennium .
My group welcomes that opportunity and supports the Commission and our rapporteurs in their efforts to secure a future for Europe 's railways .
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to welcome the Commission proposals presented to us this evening with the intention of liberalising European railways and opening up the markets to greater competition .
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate both rapporteurs on the exceptionally hard work they have put in on each report .
It gives me particular pleasure , in the presence of the British Commissioner here tonight , to recognise a historic moment at which the Commission has caught up with Britain ; Britain being the first country to liberalise its railway network , which was , at the time , a brave move , foreshadowing these Commission proposals , and bringing , in my view , very positive results : more passengers travelling by train , more freight travelling by rail and therefore off the roads , with high levels of safety achieved .

The main proposals contained in the Commission proposals and Mr Sarlis ' and Mr Swoboda 's reports , and the three main developments , are very welcome : greater transparency , separating the provision of the infrastructure from the operation of services on it ; for accounting purposes , taking infrastructure , passenger and freight operations and putting them into separate business units ; extending the current E regime for licensing international operators to all rail sectors , both domestic and international , across the European Union ; making track charging and train path allocation based on principles regarding how the charges should be set and what conditions should apply in the allocation of train paths .
I welcome these proposals and the developments towards the liberalisation of the rail sector .
But these are modest steps .
We think we should have progressed much further to open up the European market for all types of international freight .
The challenge is to make this a truly single market for European railways .
More needs to be done , especially on the licensing system , requiring operators to participate in certain common arrangements for networking and resolving the question of marginal cost pricing .
Mr President , the Commission is proposing a package of directives which seek to modernise the rail sector , but its assumption that intermodal competition is the only way to develop Community railways is incorrect .
The French members of the ARE Group oppose the direction that is being taken here , as it does not seem capable of resolving the present difficulties in the rail sector .
Why is this ?
Introducing more competition in rail transport at this time will serve only to undermine a sector which is already in difficulty .
The privatisation of British railways at the start of the 1990s led to dissatisfaction amongst the general public and a deterioration in the quality of service .
According to the Sunday Times , British railways have since been less reliable and less punctual than those in Pakistan , India and China .
We can therefore understand why railway workers protested last year against the shift towards liberalism .
We are not opposed to increasing cooperation between European railway undertakings , in accordance with the examples set in passenger transport by Thalys or Eurostar .
As regards freight transport , we began setting up freight corridors between France and its neighbouring countries at the end of 1997 at the initiative of the Commission ; these have allowed the capacities required for long-distance rail links to be requested for freight .
So why change direction before we have had a chance to develop this approach ?
The Community should instead help to complete infrastructure , set up trans-European networks and facilitate the technical and social harmonisation of railways .
We are therefore fighting to encourage as much coordination as possible between European railway undertakings .
Who better than the public authorities to take up such a challenge by creating vast networks and rail freight corridors across the Union .
While we are not against all aspects of the draft directives , we cannot support the measures seeking to open up the market , as provided for in the definition of authorised applicants in the draft Council Directive 95 / 19 / EC , or Amendment No 10 by Mr Sarlis , seeking to broaden the scope of Council Directive 91 / 440 / EEC .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Sarlis and Mr Swoboda , for their cooperation in committee .

There is no doubt that these are two very important reports .
The whole package of measures is crucial to the further development of European policy on rail transport ; or I could say , looking at the station clock , that we had better run for the train so as not to miss it , that it is high time Parliament and the Council finally tackled this subject .
So I welcome the proposals on gradual liberalisation and boosting competitiveness .
Another important aspect is the separation between railway undertakings , the separation between transport infrastructure management and transport services , between use and maintenance .
This separation is vital to prevent distortion of competition and discrimination .
Let me also point to the importance of the railways in relation to combined transport .
The railways are a more environmentally friendly , safe and expandable mode of transport and must therefore continue to be supported in future .
As we all know , the capacity of the railways is still far from exhausted , in relation to the transport of both goods and passengers .
It is vital for the railways to become competitive and become a serious alternative to road transport .
The EU and the Member States must remedy any shortcomings in this respect if they genuinely are to put forward a credible policy in support of an environmentally friendly transport mode .
That also means allocating the necessary budget funds .
Shifting transport from road to rail will help preserve the environment throughout Europe .
It is also important to promote rail transport with a view to the new Member States we will no doubt be welcoming among us one day .
Mr President , we all realise that the railways have to be improved in order to ensure their survival .
European railways , with their outdated structures , have declined steadily since the 1960s .
The Commission 's White Paper on a strategy for revitalising the Community 's railways and the proposal relating to trans-European freight corridors were the first step in a new direction .
The fact that the work is now in hand is a positive development .
Both the reports before us today represent further necessary steps along the same road .
In particular , today 's debate demonstrates that there is a far greater understanding of the need for continued liberalisation if we are to halt the rapid decline .
There will certainly have to be more liberalisation if constructive changes are to come about .
Amongst other things , there is a need for a division in all the Member States between those who are responsible for the tracks and those who run trains on them .
Presumably , it is perfectly reasonable that the various states will , for the most part , continue to own , build and maintain most of the infrastructure .
However , it is equally reasonable that competition among the operators who use their tracks should be as free as possible .
The infrastructure should be financed mainly by all those who use the tracks paying for the privilege .
Should that happen , the national companies will doubtless continue to be the major operators , but they will have to compete with others on the same terms .
This is the direction in which things are going today .
The Transport Committee 's report supports this type of development , which will allow new railway companies to compete .
The reports we are considering today both take a decisive step in that direction , thereby giving Europe 's railways the chance to develop positively in the future .
However , it is worth emphasising that this is only the first step .
The Commission must continue to come up with further initiatives if the railways are to have a future in the twenty-first century .

Mr President , I welcome the very constructive reports by Mr Sarlis and Mr Swoboda on the Commission 's rail transport proposals .
These reports certainly advance the debate on the future of railways , which is essential to the changes that have to be pursued if rail is to fulfil its true potential in modern Europe .
That is a theme that has been taken up and emphasised by just about every speaker in the course of the debate tonight .
Rail is in competition with road , as Mrs Moreau says , and the tragedy is that rail , for the last three decades , has become an increasingly poor second .
What is evident from all that experience therefore is that carrying on with current conventions simply will not do .
If rail is to have real vitality , then rail is going to have to change .
What we are putting forward in this proposal and , indeed , other proposals is very strictly related to trying to achieve that objective , with all the economic , transport , environmental and employment implications and benefits that stem from that .
I shall begin with Mr Sarlis ' report on the Commission 's proposal to amend Council Directive 91 / 440 on the development of the Community 's railways .
Naturally I am grateful for the support given to our proposals in the report and the very hard work of Mr Sarlis on this issue over a very long period of time .
As I welcome the report , I also take serious note of Mr Sarlis ' observation that the proposed amendments may not be sufficiently substantial .
I am pleased to say that we can accept the majority of the committee 's proposed amendments .
Indeed , I have to say that we do not reject the others because we think they would be unacceptable in principle ; we cannot accept them simply because they would be likely in practice to increase the difficulty of getting wider agreement to this package in the Council .
In short , we share many of Mr Sarlis ' views but if we accept some of his amendments there is a real danger that in pursuing the best we could risk losing the good .
I hope he understands , therefore , that our inability to accept some of his proposals is a product of necessary pragmatism and not opposition in principle .
There are two main areas where the committee favours an approach that would be more radical than that proposed by the Commission , and I should like to concentrate on them .
First , I want to emphasise that I am grateful for the strong support given for further liberalisation of the railway sector through the careful creation of greater access rights .
I also share the conviction that rapid progress is now essential - indeed , that has been the case for some time past .
I hope , therefore , that this Parliament will be able to encourage a similar view amongst those Member States which are still reluctant to accept the need for such advance .
Having said all that , I also have to emphasise that the proposals before the House this evening are not liberalisation proposals .
We have always argued and very strongly emphasised that this package - on the separation of management , on licensing , on capacity allocation and on other relevant issues like charging practices - is required whether further access rights are created or not .
This package is required simply to make the legal proposals that theoretically govern rail in the European Union work as they were intended back in 1991 .
Of course the Council still has our proposal to extend Article 10 of Directive 91 / 440 in a way that is similar to what we are proposing here .
Both of these factors lead me to believe that while fully endorsing the position set out in Mr Sarlis ' report , it would not be productive to include the rapporteur 's proposed text in our proposal and , therefore with reluctance , we have to reject Amendment No 10 .
I sympathise with the view expressed in the report that the Commission did not go far enough in requiring separation of railway undertakings from infrastructure managers .
However , our position has to be to achieve what is legally required while , at the same time , permitting those Member States which do not favour complete separation to retain a single overall railway company .
We have consequently required the separation of those functions which determine access to the infrastructure .
Nevertheless , we have no objection in principle to going further where that is consistent with the practical purposes .
I am glad to be able to incorporate Amendment No 6 in our proposal .
In a similar manner , I could accept the proposed Amendment No 11 , which would require the same separation but in a shorter time period .
However , even with full separation we still have to ensure that essential regulatory functions - licensing functions , for instance - are not carried out by incumbent railway undertakings .
Nowadays this situation borders on the absurd as well as being extremely distortive of potential competition .
I am sure that honourable Members also share that view - indeed it has been expressed in the course of this evening .
That is why we have to reject Amendment No 4 , which would , in practice , have removed this specific requirement .
There are two other amendments which we do not feel able to accept .
The first is Amendment No 3 , which would remove the laying down of safety rules from recital 4 in the proposal .
I believe that this function is as important as the monitoring and enforcement of the safety rules and that it must also therefore be referred to in the text .
On reflection , I hope that honourable Members will accept that point and not pursue the amendment .
The second amendment that we cannot accept is Amendment No 12 , which removes the reference to railway undertakings having to provide rail services .
It results in a less clear definition and is , in our view , an unnecessary change .
In short , therefore , the Commission accepts Amendment Nos 1 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 11 , whilst rejecting Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 10 and 12 .
I now move to Mr Swoboda 's report , which deals with the other two proposals in this package of measures .
With regard to the proposal to amend Directive 95 / 18 on the licensing of railway undertakings , we are glad to accept the first amendment but we have to reject the second amendment , which seems to us not to be based on relevant criterion .
The second part of the report deals with the proposal for a directive on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for use .
Here again I am happy to say that we wish to incorporate almost half of the amendments in our revised proposal .
Those include most of the new recitals , the definition changes and the creation of the charging framework .
I have great sympathy with the view that Community legislation should not be over-prescriptive .
Mr Swoboda proposed a number of amendments that helpfully sought to simplify this proposal .
Some of the simplifications are , as I say , welcome but we felt unable to endorse some others which appear to cut into the substance of the proposal - inadvertently , I am absolutely certain .
Many of these latter amendments deal with the proposed rules for capacity allocation .
In our view , it is important to establish precise procedural rules in order to ensure that these processes , which go to the very heart of being able to offer railway services , are coordinated and fair to all undertakings .
We will therefore endeavour to make some simplifications along the lines that have been suggested by Mr Swoboda , but maybe not to the degree that he envisages .
There are a number of key points that I would like to address before concluding .
Firstly , there are the charging rules .
We believe that the proposal in Amendment No 12 to include a rate of return in Article 8 ( 3 ) is unnecessary since such a provision already exists in the proposal in respect of investments and for passenger services .
Amendment No 13 , to reduce the text relating to external costs in Article 8 ( 5 ) , is not acceptable to us . That is because the purpose of our text was to create clear conditions for the development of these charges for rail while safeguarding rail from undue experimentation .
I feel that the simplified text is insufficiently precise and therefore I have to resist that text .
Similarly , the changes proposed in Amendment No 15 to the discount provisions in Article 10 , set out principles which we believe should apply to this type of business as defined in the ruling in the Zaventem airport charges .
It is preferable for all concerned that these are very clearly understood .
The key proposed change relating to charges is Amendment No 14 on Article 9 of the proposal .
Here again there is a strong desire to simplify the rules and also to permit some of the higher charges for freight traffic .
We can accept those principles though the proposed wording causes some difficulty and we will have to re-examine that .
Secondly , there is the question of authorised applicants in Article 19 .
The Commission strongly believes that whether or not there is further progress on access rights , the concept of authorised applicants can create more attractive conditions for large purchases of rail transport services .
It will encourage them to place greater reliance on this mode of transport .
They have to make a stronger commitment to rail .
One would have presumed that all the rail companies and all indeed working in rail would welcome a real inducement for large rail users and potential rail users to use this facility of authorised applicants in order to strengthen further their commitment or even to make a new commitment to the use of rail .
I know that both Parliament and the Commission want that greater commitment to rail .
I suggest that this is one very practical way of securing that commitment .
In view of that we cannot support the demotion of this concept to a matter for national legislation as suggested in Amendments Nos 19 and 5 .
It is the concept , the authorised applicant , that can be particularly important at international level in view of the fact that there are currently no cross-border railway undertaking .
To use Mr Swoboda 's very useful phrase , we want this application in Community law in order , literally , to Europeanise the prospect of this means of increasing the attractiveness of rail freight transport for major users .
Thirdly , as I mentioned briefly , Amendments Nos 19 to 27 seek to simplify the articles dealing with capacity allocation .
But unfortunately and , I think inadvertently , these would delete important elements such as the requirements to treat all services equally and to consult during the scheduling and coordination process and in the development of enhancement plans .
I subscribe to the objective of simplification and we will therefore look very hard to see how the text can be tidied up .
But the loss of these elements through the adoption of the proposed amendments would be a cause of significant concern .
I would like to deal with the proposed Amendments Nos 17 and 18 and their implication of reintroducing the priority rules from Directive 95 / 19 .
One objective of the Commission proposal which I am certain that the rapporteur and others share is to make freight and passenger rail more commercially attractive , not least because it will ensure better use of infrastructure and lead to consequent reductions in costs for all services .
Clearly where there is an absolute shortage of capacity choices have to be made .
Our proposal does not stop one type of traffic being favoured in those circumstances .
I believe that it would be a mistake , therefore , to seek to grant better treatment to one type of traffic over another during the normal allocation process .
In addition , the ability to grant special rights to enable the development , for example , of new or dedicated infrastructure is already clearly provided for in Article 27 of the existing proposal .
I cannot accept the new proposed amendments to the Swoboda report : Amendments Nos 29 and 31 would change the definition of railway undertaking .
The consequences would be a loss of clarity in the definition and therefore , as I hope the House will accept , unnecessary .
The change to authorised applicants in Amendment No 30 restricts its scope to licensed railway undertakings , thereby negating the objective and indeed the effect of the proposal .
Consequently we cannot accept that .
To sum up , therefore , the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 16 and 28 as well as the principles contained in Amendment No 14 .
I hope that honourable Members can agree with me that our underlying objectives are similar - indeed almost identical - and that even though we cannot accept all of the proposed amendments , we will endeavour to incorporate the objectives of many of the amendments in our revised proposal .
In particular , I am confident that Mr Swoboda 's report will provide significant strengthening for the further discussions in the Council .
Mr Sarlis ' report will also have that beneficial effect .
Obviously we are far from the end of this process .
I warmly welcome Parliament 's continued interest and the pressure for progress .
I conclude by thanking both rapporteurs - Mr Swoboda and Mr Sarlis - and the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their valued support on all of the essentials .
I hope that the whole House will endorse their constructive approach .
Mr President , the Commissioner very wisely said at the beginning of today 's debate that a politician listens - and must listen - but does not commit him or herself .
I hope that Commissioner Kinnock , despite his negative stance today on certain basic issues , listened , and that there will be some scope and some space available for him to reverse his negative views over time , as tomorrow - as I have been informed and as my colleagues are aware - he will be confronted with two proposals which have been unanimously adopted by the European Parliament .
It is impossible for us to move forward , that is , for the Commission not to push through Article 10 and yet to ask us to fully accept the concept of authorised applicant .
This is a position which , I think , no one is going to accept .
I ask , therefore , that we have the benefit of a revision of opinions .

I am sorry , Mr Sarlis , that is the end of the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Ro-ro ferry and high speed passenger craft services
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0061 / 99 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council ( 12893 / 3 / 98 - C4-0004 / 99-98 / 0064 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Directive on a system of mandatory surveys for the safe operation of regular ro-ro ferry and high speed passenger craft services in the Community ( Rapporteur : Mr Watts ) .
Mr President , the history of ferry safety can only be described as scandal : despite the tragic events in the 1950s , 1960s , 1970s and 1980s , next to nothing was done .
Literally thousands of lives were lost before the basic , fundamental , and in some cases outrageous shortcomings in ferry design and operations were addressed , despite repeated warnings from the unions , consumer groups and indeed this Parliament .
In particular , it took the loss of the Herald of Free Enterprise , the Scandinavian Star and , most tragic of all , the Estonia , before ferry companies and governments started to come to terms with the consequences of their negligence .
However , since 1994 we have all at last seen both words and action from the Commission - action this Parliament has welcomed and I believe , as rapporteur , sought at every turn to facilitate .
The latest measure from the Commission seeks to submit regular Ro-ro passenger ferries and high-speed passenger craft to mandatory survey regimes by host states before entry into service and then at regular intervals .
The unique feature is that this will apply irrespective of the flag state .
These measures therefore also close the loop-hole which currently prevents Member States from investigating accidents involving their own citizens .
For the purpose of facilitating the investigation the proposal includes a carriage requirement of a voyage data recorder - a black box .
However , on first reading , the Parliament highlighted the weak wording which would in effect , in my view and that of the Parliament , allow certain ferries to either carry a sub- standard black box or not carry a black box at all .
Hence our reasonable demand that black boxes meeting the latest standards must be fitted to all ferries within five years .
This unfortunately was rejected by both the Council and the Commission .
The Commission commented in its communication to this Parliament that it could not accept this because , in its words , it would render the further operation of the ferry or craft ' economically non-viable ' .
I am , as your rapporteur , informed that to retro-fit a black box to a ferry undergoing a refit would cost a lot less than new carpets or curtains .
I invite the Commission tonight to join with me in putting safety first by supporting our amendment .
On first reading , we also welcome the desire on the part of the Commission to require the data relating to compliance to be made available to the Commission in order to establish a new transparent system accessible to all parties concerned .
However , our demands for public access were rejected .
The Commission commented in its communication that neither the Commission nor the Council could accept the request by the European Parliament that information on the ferries and craft should be made publicly available .
We would point out that such a view flies in the face of the Commission 's own quality shipping initiative , which says : ' exposure of the sub-standard players to public knowledge is essential to the objective of the quality shipping initiative . '
Indeed , the Commission itself is already establishing a European quality shipping information system available to the public .
What better way to shift the initiative and the campaign away from a mere list of nice intentions towards real action ?
After all , what has the industry to hide ?
Of all the interested parties , do the travelling public not have a particular right of access to information about the safety of the vessel to which they entrust their lives and those of their families ?
It is time to make black boxes a mandatory requirement on all ferries and high-speed craft in the interests of passenger safety and confidence .
It is time that ferry safety data be made publicly available so that we can name and shame sub-standard ships and operators .
It is time to put ferry safety first .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the Committee on Transport and Tourism and , in particular , Mr Watts , for the quick and thorough work on the Council 's common position on this important proposal .
As the report acknowledges , most of the amendments adopted at first reading were accepted by the Commission in its amended proposal and incorporated in the Council 's common position .
That obviously signifies a very useful consensus on the main features of the legislation .
For reasons which I well understand and which he has again articulated very effectively , Mr Watts is resubmitting two amendments which the Commission could not accept at first reading , and I should like to respond further to those amendments tonight .
The first amendment deals with the issue of granting derogation from the technical specifications for voyage-data recorders to be installed on board existing ferries and high-speed craft .
When the Commission tabled this proposal , we took due account of the technical difficulties that could arise from fitting these instruments on board existing ships and craft and we therefore made the provision that the committee could agree on exemptions from some of the technical requirements that VDRs have to comply with .
I understand that Mr Watts agrees with this approach in principle but that he wishes to see this derogation limited in time so that after the proposed five-year period , existing ferries and high-speed craft should be equipped with VDRs that comply fully with all the technical specifications that are applicable for new ships .
I understand the principle but it must be said that a provision of this kind would require the replacement of the voyage-data recorder and , in almost all cases , the replacement of navigation and engine-control equipment in order to ensure the availability of the right communication protocols for feeding information into the VDR .
In many cases that would also entail extensive recabling between the VDR and the equipment from which it has to retrieve its information .
Obviously , the cost associated with this re-engineering work would greatly exceed the purchase cost of the voyage-data recorder .
In my view , that would not be justified or proportionate , when we recall that the envisaged objective of the proposal is to make possible the collection of information for the purposes of accident investigation .
In addition , I must also say that ferry companies which have already voluntarily installed VDRs on board their vessels should not be penalised by being forced to replace such equipment , with all the re-engineering that implies .
So , for all those reasons - practical reasons , not reasons of principle - I cannot accept the five-year limitation period that is proposed in Amendment No 1 .
Amendment No 2 repeats the request made at first reading for the information on the particulars of roll-on / roll-off ferries and high-speed craft permitted to operate on regular services , including information about any operational limitation .
It asks for that information to be made public and available by the Commission .
In response , I have to say that the House may recall that at first reading I cautioned about the risk of making public all data on the inspected ships and craft , particularly so far as reliability , security and the possibility of commercial abuse were concerned .
It is that concern which prompted the Commission to propose that it is for the committee , established for the purposes of this directive , to determine the conditions for access to such data .
So there is no question of closing down , there is a question of the practical discretion of the committee .
I hope that honourable Members can accept the validity of that approach .
The ferry survey database proposed in this directive should be considered as a specialised instrument that is designed primarily to assist Member States and the Commission in monitoring and enforcing the implementation of the directive by providing detailed information on the application of this survey regime .
Having said that , I wholeheartedly share Mr Watts ' opinion that any relevant information on matters relating to the safety of passengers should be disseminated to the public as widely and clearly as possible .
On that basis , as Mr Watts stressed in his report , the Commission has undertaken to develop a database on the quality performance of shipping called Equasis , in the context of our quality shipping campaign , and in order to greatly improve transparency of information about the safety performance of shipping in general .
We will meet that commitment .
The Equasis database will be widely accessible to the shipping community and to the general public .
I consider that it will provide the most appropriate means of disseminating all relevant information on the safety performance of ferries , the issue which rightly excites the particular interest and indeed missionary zeal of Mr Watts .
When the conditions of access to the ferry survey database are elaborated in the committee , my services will give full attention to the need to feed as much information as possible from that database into the Equasis database .
I am convinced that , in practice , this approach will ensure the level of transparency that Mr Watts and his colleagues in this House quite rightly are asking for , without having to amend the text of the common position .
Finally , I can inform honourable Members that I support the objectives of Amendment No 3 , since it clarifies the exact scope and extent of inspections for life-saving appliances and equipment in line with the requirements of the Safety of Life at Sea Convention .
I conclude by thanking Mr Watts and his colleagues for facilitating the adoption of this directive , which , together with other measures already enacted and implemented in recent years , will have a direct and beneficial effect on the safety of people travelling on conventional and high-speed passenger vessels in European Union waters .
Mr Watts rightly reminded us of the passenger ship tragedies of recent years .
Let us hope that by the implementation of these measures we will make it almost impossible - as impossible as travel by sea can allow - for any repetition of such tragedies to take place .
When we can say that , I must say that the useful work and the dedication shown by Members of this House will have played a significant part in reaching that desirable standard .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
European capital of culture 2005-2019
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0106 / 99 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the common position adopted by the Council ( 9268 / 1 / 98 - C4-0493 / 98-97 / 0290 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a Community action for the ' European Capital of Culture ' event for the years 2005 to 2019 ( Rapporteur : Mr Monfils ) .
Mr President , the dossier on European cities of culture which has been open since October 1997 will be closed , I hope , tomorrow .
The debate has lasted for more than a year and a half because the position of the Commission and the European Parliament was profoundly different from that of the Council of Ministers .
The European Parliament wanted the choice of city to be based on the quality of the projects , without reference to any contribution made by the Member States or choice made according to Community decision-making procedures , that is , the codecision procedure .
The Council of Ministers had itself opted for Member States to nominate each year , in turn and on a pre-established rotational basis , one of their cities as European capital of culture .
The European Parliament rejected the Council 's common position at second reading by adopting a declaration of intended rejection .
We therefore found ourselves faced with a choice : either to continue a dialogue of the deaf with the Council for several months , exhausting the procedure provided for by Article 189 - and I believe that there would have been no winners or losers at the end of this procedure , which would have continued indefinitely - or to see whether a compromise would be possible .
We chose the second option and proposed to the Council of Ministers compromise amendments which took account of both the Council 's point of view and , naturally , the European Parliament 's position as well .
This procedure , which is rather uncommon in the context of informal contacts , was accepted by the Council which used the paper we submitted as a basis for discussion , and the bargaining ended with an agreement .
I think it is a creditable agreement considering the gap which separated the views of Parliament and the Council .
Admittedly , the Council 's idea of nominating cities in turn for each Member State has been preserved , but the direct choice of city to nominate by the Member State has been abandoned ; several cities in the same country may submit an application .
Moreover , the selection panel which was no longer included in the Council 's common position , was re-established .
It is composed of seven experts on the cultural sector , and it must issue a report on the nominations .
Finally , each nominated city must make a detailed submission on its cultural project ; this is something Parliament had wanted , and was also no longer included in the Council 's common position .
We did not obtain the right of codecision in the choice of city to nominate , but the European Parliament may deliver a prior opinion on the nominations ; the Commission forwards its recommendations , which are based both on the selection panel 's report and the opinion delivered by Parliament , to the Council .
This compromise , which mainly reproduces the European Parliament 's position , has been made possible due to the concern expressed by the German Presidency regarding opening up to other cultures , which I salute .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is not very often that the Council takes Parliament 's point of view into consideration , and this bargaining seems to me to be a positive example of how our institutions work .
However , this compromise would not have been possible either without the constant support of the members of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and its chairman ; they have continually supported the rapporteur 's opinions and have cooperated closely - through the amendments they have proposed - on the improvements to be made to the text , as well as taking part in the negotiations along with myself .
I should like to conclude by saying that I hope these amendments which the Council has obviously accepted will be adopted tomorrow by Parliament , and I am convinced that in the concrete follow-up to this decision , the Commissioner responsible and his staff will pay particular attention to the cultural merit of the projects submitted .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the ' European Capital of Culture ' programme is a success story .
For the Member States , it has become a very strong symbol , so much so that taking away their power to designate and administer the programme has become a sensitive issue .
But it is precisely because the governments do not want to lose control over the cultural capitals that the Commission and the European Parliament feel that a programme of such importance for the public could not remain in the inter-governmental sphere .
The Commission therefore presented , in November 1997 , a proposal to communitarise the programme with the backing of the European Parliament in May 1998 , demanding co-decision for the nomination and selection of cities based on solid cultural criteria .
For the European Parliament , it was vital to involve as many members of the arts world as possible in the events , to instigate forms of lasting cooperation , to foster the creation and circulation of works of art , while enhancing our historic heritage and urban design , opening up initiatives to a wide-ranging public and avoiding Eurocentrism by involving as many non-European cultures as possible .
In a nutshell , the Parliament wanted to ensure that the programme would bring about a real change in the quality of life of the cities and their inhabitants long after the festivities themselves are over .
The divide between the Council and the European Parliament turned into such an abyss that conciliation seemed impossible , yet it has succeeded .
This is a great victory for democracy .
Parliament 's firmness and the negotiating skills of rapporteur Philippe Monfils worked the miracle of forcing the Council to abandon its undemocratic arrogance and come to the negotiating table .
The outcome is an honourable compromise in which neither party loses face : the governments managed to hold on to the right to define a rota system among the Member States to decide which of them is entitled to nominate cities , while Parliament has been given the right to select the given cities within that system .
The governments agreed to the principle of basing the choice of cultural capital on cultural criteria , on the basis of the opinions of a joint panel and the European Parliament , just as the European Parliament intended .
Therefore , as of 2005 , the European capital of culture will enjoy the optimum conditions for using the event as an ideal opportunity for inter-cultural collaboration .
The governments are willing to come up with generous funding for this great joint festivity , as was the European Parliament 's initial wish .
Finally , I should like to say that today we are going to vote on this project and on behalf of my group I would ask you to lend your support to an excellent example of how politics work .
That is because interinstitutional consultations are playing an increasingly important part in the Community 's decision-making process and that is why the Group of the European People 's Party will be voting for this report without any hesitation or regret .
Mr President , we support the proposed compromise in order to optimise the way the European capital of culture is selected .
But perhaps it is not so very important which city is finally chosen .
Perhaps it is especially important , however , to define in precise terms the responsibility that city will have to assume .
What is important here is the content of the submission , as listed in Article 2a for instance , including the need to promote dialogue between European cultures and those from other parts of the world .
There is one thing we must not forget : in a future united Europe the cultural capital of Europe will not just represent itself but will act as Europe 's cultural ambassador for that period .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , not only for his excellent work but also for having been so patient at an awkward stage in our deliberations .
Article 128 of the Maastricht Treaty stresses the importance of cooperation among Member States to conserve and safeguard Europe 's important cultural heritage .
Europe has great cultural diversity : throughout history Europe has been - and still is - a pole of exceptionally rich and varied cultural development , where European cultures are still being shaped and disseminated .
The desire for cultural integration in Europe also means becoming conscious of the European cultural area .
Every city considered as a possible European capital of culture has its own characteristics which can be summarised in four key words : knowledge , tradition , mobility and communication .
These words express the coexistence of attempts to modernise , innovate and safeguard our historical and artistic heritage : a combination of past , present and future which keeps alive the memory of the roles and functions which , down the ages , have led to a cross-fertilisation of cultures , knowledge and hence communication , by which I mean a diverse pattern of mobility and interaction .
As the rapporteur has indicated , the European Parliament wishes to see greater Community involvement in the process of choosing the European Capital of Culture in the years 2005 to 2019 , by altering the system of automatic nomination originally drawn up by the Council .
The suggested changes to the common position include the possibility of having several cities nominated in any one year and the establishment of a panel of independent experts , appointed by the Community institutions to provide opinions on these nominations .
The overwhelming majority of delegations in the Council are minded to endorse Parliament 's suggestions and have called on the German Presidency to reach an early consensus with us .
This consensus needs to be found rapidly , so that each European city which is nominated can , firstly , draw attention to cultural trends shared by the European people which that city has inspired and to which it has contributed significantly ; secondly , promote cultural events in association with other cities in EU Member States , designed to bring about lasting cultural cooperation ; thirdly , circulate these around the European Union ; and fourthly , foster dialogue between the cultures of Europe and the rest of the world , but above all enhance that city 's historical and artistic heritage by improving the quality of life there .
Europe 's architectural heritage is the expression of our different identities and , at the same time , of our common origins , in that materials , elements , forms and spaces meet , unite and divide in constant search of a balance between old and new .
Knowledge and understanding of our architectural heritage are therefore key factors in determining our cultural identity and bear witness to our origins and our history .
Mr President , I admit that I was greatly relieved when I saw the agreement that had been reached and when I saw how it had been reached because , at one point in time , I was seriously worried as I doubted that we would be able to reach an agreement at all . The lack of such an agreement would have been very serious indeed as it would have meant the loss of the European Capital of Culture , one of the most symbolic results of all cultural Community actions .
For this reason , I should like to thank Mr Monfils in particular for having had the determination and , at the same time , the flexibility needed to reach these agreements .
Also , I should like to thank the President of the Commission who , through his enthusiasm and good judgement , helped make this outcome possible .
As you will remember , on 30 October 1997 , the Commission presented a Community initiative for the European Capital of Culture . The Commission 's proposal centred around three main elements .
First , the Member States notify the Commission of their candidate city or cities that are competing to organise the event .
Then , the Commission forms a selection panel composed of independent members that will draw up a report on the cities nominated and submit it to the Commission . Lastly , on the Commission 's proposal and after prior consultation with Parliament , the Council will select the European Capital of Culture by qualified majority .
In effect , what we discussed was replacing the intergovernmental procedure that had been used until that point and had also proved to be increasingly cumbersome as a Community procedure that involved Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
Then , in its common position of July 1998 , the Council arrived at a solution that was barely satisfactory and that was based on a rota system linked to the Presidency .
The selection procedure was significantly different to the Commission 's proposal and , furthermore , Parliament was virtually excluded from the procedure .
The determination of this House and the declaration of intent to reject the common position announced on 13 January gave rise to the so-called ' mini-conciliation ' procedure and today we are reaping the benefits of negotiation between the two arms of the legislature , to which the Commission has also contributed .
The eight amendments we have before us , and which the Commission accepts , reintroduce the panel of leading independent figures back into the body of the text along with criteria that allow us to ensure the cultural quality and European dimension of the city 's programme .
Lastly - and this is important - as an exceptional case the Council will adopt its decision on the basis of a recommendation by the Commission rather than a proposal . The recommendation will be drawn up after considering the European Parliament 's opinion and the panel 's report .
In this way , a Community dimension going beyond the simple rotation of the Presidency will be introduced .
We are therefore delighted by the outcome of the negotiations and we hope that both arms of the legislature will be able to accept the agreement that is today being put forward .
And I should once again like to thank the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , as well as the rapporteur , Mr Monfils , for his active involvement in this procedure .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11 a.m.
The sitting was closed at 12 midnight
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I refer to yesterday 's Question Time , and in particular page 24 of the Minutes .
At that point , I actually asked Mrs Gradin a question in connection with the false statement which Mrs Cresson made before the Committee on Budgetary Control ; I asked her whether Mrs Cresson should resign because of this .
Mrs Gradin did not answer the question .
This course of events is now recorded in the Minutes as follows .
It simply says : ' Mr Posselt spoke ' . I should like to point out , however , that I asked a perfectly proper supplementary to which no answer was given .
Loud applause
We shall ensure that the Minutes are corrected so that they reflect exactly what took place .
The Minutes were approved
Mr President , I do not want to comment on the Minutes .
I should simply like to point out to this noble House that today is the 40th anniversary of the occupation of Tibet by the People 's Republic of China .
Mr President , I have a complaint .
It is true that I often speak in languages other than my own , but now I can no longer hear the Dutch interpretation on channel 5 . I believe this is a deliberate act on the part of the administration .
So in future , I will always speak in another language and I will also listen in other languages .
We shall carry out the necessary technical checks straight away , because you do also speak Dutch .
Laughter
Agenda
Mr President , on today 's agenda one of the items under the heading ' Votes ' is the vote on the De Giovanni report on the scrutiny of the exercise of the Commission 's powers .
You all know that the question of how far the European Parliament 's right to information extends , pursuant to Article 206 of the Treaty , was the subject of fierce controversy with the Commission in connection with the UCLAF report on the ECHO affair .
As a result , it was agreed that negotiations should be held between the Commission and Parliament with the aim of laying down rules on how Article 206 should be applied in the future .
These rules are now on the table in the form of an agreement between the Commission and Parliament , and are supposed to be adopted today under the procedure without debate .
Given the complex nature of this issue , and therefore the contents of the agreement , I do not believe that this is appropriate .
In this agreement we undertake to waive our right to information in the case of , for example , final reports on administrative inquiries , which are internal Commission reports on administrative procedures .
I would therefore request , pursuant to Rule 99 of the Rules of Procedure , that we do not simply put this to the vote today without having a debate .
Parliament must have an opportunity to debate this complicated and sensitive issue , and I have just submitted the necessary 29 signatures in support of this request .
Mrs Müller , your request has been made correctly in accordance with the Rules .
However , I would like to say two things to you . Firstly , the UCLAF problem must not be mixed up with this other problem .
They are totally separate .
A working party made up of representatives of Parliament , the Council and the Commission has been established to look at the UCLAF problem .
When they have completed their work , they will report to Parliament .
Secondly , this is a different issue .
This issue concerns one of the other points raised by President Santer : the forwarding of confidential information to Parliament .
At this stage , we can choose one of two solutions , but I do not wish to prejudge the matter and I would like to know what the groups ' opinions are .
The first solution would be to enter the item , with debate , on today 's agenda ; the second would be to enter the item , with debate , on the agenda of the next part-session .
Irrespective of what you decide to do , it is clear that no amendments can be tabled since the report concerns an interinstitutional agreement .
As has been the case with all the interinstitutional agreements , we must either approve it or reject it .
However , we can consider the two options available and I would like to ask the groups if they would prefer to include the item , with debate , in today 's agenda or to wait until the next part-session .
Mrs Green , you have the floor .
Mr President , it is my view , given that Parliament and its Members have not had a chance to really see the proposal , let alone talk about it , that we should defer the vote until the next part-session .
In particular , the Committee on Institutional Affairs and the Committee on Budgetary Control should have the chance to look at it and discuss it before it is put to the vote .
Mr President , we - the three persons mentioned - had the task of drafting this proposal for an agreement , and that follows from the resolution which Parliament adopted in January .
We started work on this very quickly , but worked very intensively , and negotiated it at political level .
As far as budgetary control is concerned , I might tell you that UCLAF is excluded until the arrangements for OLAF - its replacement , which is also under discussion - are complete , which means that the provisions for UCLAF are not affected by this agreement ; the same applies to the question of information we receive through the financial controller .
The task we were given needed to be completed quickly .
That was also what Parliament wanted .
On the procedure , I would like to tell you that I did not have to determine this myself .
It was the Conference of Presidents which approved the proposal put forward by the three experts , and I had assumed that the groups would have been informed of how their chairmen voted .
I do not therefore see why we should protract this process , and I would certainly be in favour of voting , so that these arrangements can be applied accordingly .
Mr President , when I gave my reasons for making my request , I only referred to UCLAF because of the row over handing over the report on the ECHO affair .
I understand that these rules are not about UCLAF .
On behalf of my group , I should like to support what Mrs Green has said .
I believe that we should give the House the opportunity to read this carefully and in full , because we are formulating certain rights and conventions here which affect a fundamental right contained within Article 206 .
It should be examined with the utmost care .
This week is very busy , so I suggest we postpone the issue to the next part-session , and then we can take our time over our decision .
Mr President , it is important to say that , whilst we approved it quite clearly last Thursday - and I added my support to that in the Conference of Presidents - it is not available in all the languages and it had not been seen by Members , even as late as yesterday .
My Group , I am sure , will add its support to an interinstitutional agreement of this sort , but we need at least for Members to be able to read it .
I would have thought that Mrs Theato could have agreed to that .
I see that there is no agreement between the groups as regards changing today 's agenda .
I shall therefore ask the House to decide whether or not we enter the item , with debate , on the agenda for today 's sitting .
Parliament rejected the proposal
Therefore , since we are not going to take the item with debate today , we shall put it on the agenda for the next part-session , pursuant to Rule 99 and as requested by Mrs Müller and other signatories .
The report will be referred back to the committee responsible , which is the Committee on Institutional Affairs , since we are dealing with an interinstitutional agreement .
As with all agreements of this type , I would remind you again that no amendments may be tabled .
We can merely approve or reject the agreement , after giving it the necessary consideration , of course .
Mr Elles has the floor .
Mr President , as that decision has now been taken by the House , could we be assured that the same procedure will be used for the report of the Committee of the Wise Men , which will be distributed in all languages and available to all Members before it is brought to the floor of this House and to go to the appropriate committee , which is the Committee on Budgetary Control , before it is voted on ?
The report of the Wise Men will not only be distributed to all Members but it will also be put on the Internet , so that everybody can look at it .
In fact , the Conference of Presidents decided that the procedure would be resolutions by groups .
Nevertheless , the Committee on Budgetary Control will be familiar with this report when approval of the 1997 discharge comes before the House .
That is a different question .
It can use the report of the Wise Men or anything it thinks useful at that time .
The will of the House on the report of the Wise Men will be expressed through resolutions tabled by the groups as they see fit during the week following presentation .
Mr President , I should just like to seek clarification on the timetable .
Obviously I accept that we will not be voting on the agreement on information today .
I would simply like to know whether it will therefore be put on the agenda of the mini-session .
I have to know so that I can plan a further discussion of it .
I think that the same goes for the Committee on Institutional Affairs ; it might also need to discuss it again , since it is of course the committee responsible .
It is , after all , the one which has tabled this report here , not the Committee on Budgetary Control .
In any case , we want to discuss it again and I just need to know whether it will be on the agenda then .
It will be taken at the next part-session in Brussels .
Mr President , a Kurdish demonstration is currently taking place outside Parliament 's premises .
I should therefore like to ask the President whether he intends to send a delegation to meet the Kurdish representatives who are assembled outside to hear what they have to say .
I think it would be wise to do so if we are to show the same consideration to everyone who wishes to express their point of view to us as Members of the European Parliament .
Until now , Mr Lindqvist , we have had no request to receive a Kurdish delegation .
When we had such a request in Brussels , during the last part-session , we received the delegation and they presented us with their requests .
If they make the same proposal today , they will obtain the same response .
In other words , we will meet the delegation and listen to what they are asking for so that we can then consider it in the House .
Preparation for the extraordinary European Council in Berlin on 24-25 March 1999
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the preparation for the extraordinary European Council meeting in Berlin on 24 and 25 March 1999 .
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen , President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to have this opportunity today - immediately before the foreign ministers begin the final round of Agenda 2000 negotiations at their informal meeting this coming weekend - to give you an overview of developments in the Council and inform you of how the negotiations on Agenda 2000 will proceed in the run-up to the European Council in Berlin on 24 and 25 March .
Some weeks have passed since this subject was last debated here in the plenary on 10 February , and in that time the Council has made considerable progress in its search for a balanced overall package .
Of course , I am not giving anything away when I tell you that on some pivotal issues a compromise has not yet been reached .
That is entirely due to the nature of the project and was not to be expected ; it simply illustrates the need to find a balanced solution across all the sectors .
As the holders of the presidency , we assumed from the outset that the overall package could only be tied up in Berlin , and this will indeed be the case .
Over the last few weeks , however , it has been possible to make significant progress on the necessary preliminary work which is intended to prepare the ground for the Berlin summit .
For example , the conclave of foreign ministers in Luxembourg on 21 February made substantial progress on a number of issues .
I should like to outline this for you briefly .
It is now generally acknowledged that the use of constant 1999 prices for drawing up the financial perspective offers a number of practical advantages .
As far as accession and pre-accession expenditure is concerned , it is agreed that expenditure intended for the applicant countries will be set aside and clearly identified as either pre-accession expenditure or expenditure solely for accession , so as to ensure that appropriations for the new Member States cannot be used by the present 15 Member States and that , by the same token , appropriations earmarked for the present 15 Member States cannot be used to cover the costs of enlargement .
The presidency has put forward a proposal on this which meets with the approval of the vast majority of the Member States .
We were also able to note a large measure of agreement on the amounts proposed by the Commission for pre-accession aid in the immediate future .
The fact that we already reached a broad political agreement on the pre-accession instruments under the Austrian Presidency therefore sends out a clear signal to the applicant countries that we attach particular importance to the pre-accession instruments , as they will enable enlargement to come about quickly .
It has already been possible to reach agreement on several key aspects of the future financing of the common agricultural policy : it was agreed to keep the agricultural guideline and review it before the first enlargement , and to set a ceiling below that which better reflects actual expenditure .
As regards structural expenditure , further consideration is being given to a presidency proposal which takes account of both the need to stabilise expenditure and the need to consolidate the cohesion effort .
This plan proposes stabilising Structural Fund expenditure ; this will involve the average per capita level of aid for the three objectives being consolidated at current levels for the forthcoming period .
In general , there is support for reducing the number of Community initiatives to three , provided that the existing scope of other initiatives , which have proved to be effective , is covered by the core objectives .
For Categories 3 to 5 , as a basis for further negotiations , the delegations set ranges within which the final annual ceilings will lie .
A large measure of agreement could be noted on Category 6 , reserves .
On the subject of own resources and budgetary imbalances , the ministers made an initial assessment of the elements which might form part of a comprehensive agreement .
It was generally felt that a final agreement - if it is to improve the balance of the financial framework - will require a combination of measures on both the expenditure and revenue sides .
At the same time , account will be taken of the effects the political reforms contained within Agenda 2000 will have on the Member States , and also of the need to implement measures of this kind in several phases , with the first phase beginning in the year 2000 .
On the basis of the foreign ministers ' deliberations , the Heads of State and Government met on 26 February at Petersberg near Bonn and discussed Agenda 2000 as a whole for the first time , exploring the scope for an overall political compromise .
It was clear from the outset that the aim could not be fundamental decisions or even an overall agreement .
Neither were we surprised , therefore , when the compromise paper presented by the German Presidency attracted not only support but also criticism .
I would , however , like to point out that the criticism came from both sides .
We were criticised both by the Member States which want to save more and by the Member States which want to spend more .
I think that this puts us more or less in the middle , and if we agree that a compromise certainly has to be found somewhere between the extreme positions , then I have a feeling that the presidency is not so very wide of the mark .
Applause
In the end , a number of important and useful pointers came out of the meeting of the Heads of State and Government , and these will form the basis of the further work of the Council - in its various configurations - in the run-up to the special summit in Berlin .
The most important point is that all the partners have once again reaffirmed their determination to comply with the instructions of the Cardiff European Council , and to achieve an overall political agreement by the end of March 1999 at the latest .
On behalf of the presidency , I should also like to make it perfectly clear and state in all seriousness here that we will not abandon this goal and that we will strictly refuse to engage in any discussion on a possible extension of the deadline , also because this is in Parliament 's interests .
Applause
The principles governing the negotiating procedure , which were agreed at the Vienna European Council , were confirmed : Agenda 2000 to be treated as a complete package ; all the Member States to be willing to compromise , and a need for all the elements to be on the table .
That was on 26 February ; today it is 10 March and all the elements are no longer on the table .
In terms of substance , it became clear that no one is seriously calling into question the need for budgetary stabilisation and budgetary discipline .
The feeling prevails amongst all the Member States that at a time when national budgets are characterised by austerity , it would be unacceptable to deliver anything other than this to the public .
There is a general conviction , therefore , that at the end of March in Berlin it will be possible to reach an overall compromise which respects the own resources ceiling of 1.27 % .
The discussion which the Heads of State and Government had on the future financing of the common agricultural policy also took account , to a large extent , of the need for budgetary stabilisation .
A majority of the Heads of State and Government came down in favour of giving the agriculture ministers clear instructions to reconcile agricultural reform and genuine stability , and in this context also to examine various models for making step-by-step reductions in agricultural subsidies .
In the course of their deliberations this week and last , the agriculture ministers have been endeavouring to produce a basis for a genuine and reasonable reform while satisfying the austerity constraint .
Progress is being made as we speak which , given the diversity of different interests and the complexity of the subject , is to be judged favourably . It also makes me all the more confident that it will be possible to finalise a result in Berlin which will be acceptable to everyone .
In structural policy , the overall approach to be adopted towards appropriations for the Structural and Cohesion Funds remains controversial .
Support was expressed for the presidency proposal to provide EUR 200 billion for the period 2000 to 2006 for Category 2 , that is including the Cohesion Fund , but - and I must be quite clear about this - it was also violently opposed .
The issue of the appropriations to be allocated is being given further careful consideration at the present time , along with various models .
I am assuming that it will only be possible to resolve this issue in the very last phase of the negotiations , that is in Berlin itself .
In principle , there is agreement on the transitional arrangements for regions coming off aid , although some details are still to be decided .
On the issue of own resources and budgetary imbalances , there is a general willingness in the Council to review the decision on own resources , provided that this initiative is part of a balanced package which also takes account of the expenditure side .
This will be a question of combining the right measures with a phased or staged approach .
It might also be appropriate to incorporate a safety net into the overall package .
Since the summit at Petersberg near Bonn , the presidency has once again stepped up negotiations at all levels .
The scope of the negotiations was revised in the light of the discussions and will once again be presented for discussion to the foreign ministers this weekend and the ECOFIN Council next Monday .
In his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , the Chancellor will tour all the capitals between 15 and 19 March ; he will discuss the results achieved so far with the Heads of State and Government and will try , as a result of the tour , to bring home with him the makings of a compromise .
Following this , the General Affairs Council , meeting on 22 March , and a preliminary conclave , meeting on 21 March , will make the final preparations for the European Council in Berlin .
The President of the European Parliament , Mr Gil Robles , was invited by Chancellor Schröder to meet the Heads of State and Government at Petersberg and to present Parliament 's thoughts on Agenda 2000 .
This is what happened , and it underlines the great political importance which the Council attaches to dialogue with Parliament .
In this context , Chancellor Schröder emphasised that this dialogue is not a one-way street , but that it should allow both the Council and Parliament to influence each other 's opinions .
My stay here in Strasbourg today and tomorrow will include further informal consultations on the Structural Funds and the pre-accession instruments and will therefore promote cooperation between the Council and Parliament , which is vital if Agenda 2000 is to be resolved on time .
Our Minister , Mr Funke , will also be taking part in separate discussions with Parliament on agricultural policy shortly .
I can assure you that the presidency will do its utmost to ensure that Parliament will be able to see its concerns reflected in the results of the Berlin summit .
I think that we all want this great challenge that is Agenda 2000 to yield workable results for the future of Europe .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
I now give the floor to Mr Santer , President of the Commission .
Mr President , the coming weeks will be crucial for the Union 's future .
We are preparing to take decisions on Agenda 2000 which will be decisive in meeting the challenges of the 21st century and which will pave the way for the Union to welcome a substantial number of new Member States .
The European Council has repeatedly expressed its commitment to conclude negotiations by the end of this month and to adopt the necessary reforms .
I should like to stress once again why this deadline must be met .
First of all , we must maintain the new momentum which the Union has shown with the euro .
Secondly , we must make proper preparations for the new structural programmes for the period 2000 to 2006 . Finally , we must send a clear message to the applicant countries .
There is nothing to be gained by procrastinating , and much to be lost .
The European Council must now assume its responsibilities .
It is one thing to express the political will to conclude this package .
It is another thing to accept the compromises needed to implement it .
This means respecting several principles at the same time .
First of all , there is budgetary discipline , to which the two arms of the budgetary authority have attached considerable importance in recent years . Then you must also have the necessary resources to finance the Union 's projects : growth and employment , solidarity through economic and monetary cohesion , a viable agricultural policy and , finally , enlargement .
I would add that the Commission is keen to ensure that the issue of financing the Union does not get reduced to pushing figures around on paper .
While budgetary discipline is most certainly necessary , it must not become an end in itself with no attention being given to our actual ambitions for Europe .
Mr President , in this context , I should like to make a comment which in my view is important .
In our proposals on Agenda 2000 , we drew attention to the resources which should be made available to the institutions , and to the Commission in particular , in order to achieve the stated ambitions .
I want to say very clearly that the Commission is no longer be prepared to accept ever-increasing tasks without receiving the means to execute them .
A compromise must be reached in Berlin and this is perfectly possible .
It is possible because a great deal of headway has been made with the preparatory work , especially on the legislation .
In this respect , I would congratulate Parliament on its commitment and its attitude to the legislative process .
A lot of progress has also been made in terms of the interinstitutional agreement .
Moreover , with regard to those matters not yet resolved , all the elements are now on the table to put together a package which should be acceptable to all .
Allow me to briefly review the three key areas in which we must make further progress .
First of all , I would like to look at the common agricultural policy and rural development .
The negotiations in the Agriculture Council are difficult and are still going on .
I cannot therefore go into the details .
The real problem facing us is the call for genuine stabilisation of expenditure on the one hand and the need for a real reform of the common market organisations on the other .
There are different ways of reconciling these objectives .
Some have spoken of phased reductions , others of cofinancing .
The Commission is prepared to consider all the options , but there is one direction it refuses to take , that of a diluted and distorted reform .
This would be contrary to the interests of Europe and its farmers .
It would be irresponsible to allow expensive intervention stocks to build up again which would eventually send CAP expenditure through the roof .
We must also take action straight away to prepare the ground for the forthcoming negotiations within the World Trade Organisation .
The second problem still to be resolved concerns economic and social cohesion .
By way of a preliminary remark , I would like to point out that the solidarity implied in this concept is , and must remain , one of the cornerstones of the European Union .
There can be no question of the Commission going back on what was achieved with the last financial perspective , though this area too must be subject to budgetary discipline .
I believe that a reasonable compromise would involve consolidating the solidarity effort on the basis of the level of aid achieved in 1999.But resources must be targeted more on the regions and groups within our society that need them most .
It cannot be right for more than half the Union 's population to be dependent , in one way or another , on aid from the Structural Funds .
As always in the Union , we will find the appropriate transitional solutions that enable us to avoid excessively brutal shocks .
We will also take account of certain specific situations .
I come now to the third item of Agenda 2000 , the financial aspects .
In its October 1998 report on own resources , the Commission placed a number of possible options on the table .
It added that it was prepared to make the necessary proposals if there were signs that the Member States could reach an agreement .
At Petersberg I saw that most of the Heads of State and Government do not believe it is possible to achieve a balanced compromise unless action is taken on the issue of how to finance our policies .
In particular , the question of fairness of contributions to the Community budget was raised .
We have to admit that this is a political issue , but at the same time , we must not allow everything to hinge on the highly ambiguous concept of net balances .
Everybody at Petersberg stated what they wanted and how far they were able to go .
We can now sketch the outlines within which a compromise will have to be reached .
Personally , I do not rule out a phased solution .
In fact , some of our financing mechanisms were devised at a time when enlargement to include Central and Eastern Europe was no more than a distant prospect .
We therefore have a very difficult task on our hands .
In recent times , and in particular in connection with the launch of the single currency , the Union has shown that when faced with important occasions , it is able to overcome national differences .
Each time , the political will of the College has been there to see us through .
The Berlin summit is another such important occasion .
Agenda 2000 is essential for the future of the Union and for the future of the European continent .
Day after day , the conflicts around us show just how important it is to make progress on the path towards the peaceful reconciliation of our continent .
It is something I have said frequently but I will say it again to you here today : for the first time in 500 years , we have the unique opportunity to achieve this objective while our people live in peace and freedom .
I am confident that this process , guided by the Community method , will be crowned with success .
Applause
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to thank the President-in-Office and the President of the Commission for the detailed accounts they have given us of the current situation .
However , I do not believe that they have told us anything new .
All three institutions are concerned about the need to reach a political agreement this month if we want to fulfill the objective of approving all of Agenda 2000 during the German Presidency .
The Socialist Group naturally shares the concern of the President-in-Office and the President of the Commission that we have not as yet reached a definitive agreement . Nevertheless , we hope that we might be able to lay the foundations of such an agreement , particularly after Chancellor Schroeder 's tour of the capitals which begins on 15 March .
Our main concern in the Socialist Group is to ensure that we do not destroy what we have already achieved , namely Agenda 2000 itself .
The Commission 's document was supported by a broad majority in this House and we still believe that it is the key element for the future funding and the future financial perspectives of the European Union .
Within the Agenda 2000 package , the financial discussions should not allow us to forget that there are certain basic aims forming part of the European Union 's policy which we must not renege on .
The first is the principle that there must be sufficient funding to develop Community policies .
I do not know of any type of policy that can be implemented without funding .
It may be that in recent years we have devoted too much time to discussing exclusively financial issues and that this has tarnished the Community 's image in the eyes of the public . There is the risk that all we appear to do is haggle between governments over what each must pay , despite the fact that this clearly forms part of politics too .
However , it is absolutely clear that no policy - be it national , regional or local - can be implemented without sufficient funds .
I therefore believe that the principle of having sufficient resources for Community policies is a key element .
Parliament has set out a series of priorities that , in my view , are similar to those of the Member States and the Commission . For example , we all believe that employment is a priority and it is a major concern of our citizens .
In a Europe where 18 million people are unemployed , the issue of employment is extremely important . In fact , this priority was marked by an extraordinary European Council , the Luxembourg European Council , and I imagine that it has not been forgotten in the Council 's deliberations .
In my opinion , it is not enough to have national policies to combat unemployment from now on .
As President Santer pointed out and as was confirmed by the Luxembourg summit , what we need is a Community employment policy .
My second point - and this is no less important - concerns the question of cohesion .
A community cannot be built at two different speeds where some countries or regions are more developed and others are less so .
The last report by the Commission on cohesion policy highlighted the fact that the Community policies have been effective in reducing the differences between various regions in terms of the level of development .
The creation of a community where there are different levels of development would harm not only the less developed regions but also the more developed regions and sectors , as they would find that the levels of consumption would be too low in the regions with a lower purchasing power .
Finally , one very important issue for the European Parliament 's Socialist Group is the environment .
It is clear that we need sustained and sustainable economic development .
There is no point in pursuing economic development that cannot be maintained in the long run , and one of the elements or pillars of that economic development is , in fact , the preservation of the ecological balance .
This is something that all our people are calling for at the moment .
There was a time when ecological issues were perhaps only raised in the more developed countries . However , today we can say that all Europeans are ' green ' and that the ' green ' label can no longer belong to a single political group because , at least within the Socialist Group , we are naturally very concerned about environmental issues .
Therefore , I believe that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is aware of the same contradictions as the Council .
We have exactly the same ideas as those you have to discuss within the Council .
Moreover , we fully understand the difficulties the Council faces and our concern is to ensure that the timetable is met .
The Socialist Group believes - and the President of the Commission also highlighted this - that it is extremely important to meet the timetable set for 1999 .
Our group is doing all in its power to adjust to that timetable and if the Council fulfills its duties , the European Socialists will make every effort to ensure that the European Parliament can do the same .
In short , we are now at a stage where we are doing the hard work in the engine room to further the construction of Europe .
The German Presidency has had some thankless work to do , but without it the European Union would not move forward .
The Socialist Group hopes that once this hard slog is over , once this work has been done properly - which is what we expect of the German Presidency , and this German Government in particular - we might be able to strike off on a new path .
The end of the German Presidency should mark the end of these lesser discussions on strictly budgetary issues and a new beginning along a path set out by the Presidency of the Council and by the Presidency of the Commission in Agenda 2000 .
This path should lead us to a wider Europe into which we can welcome the millions of Europeans who are currently facing enormous difficulties and whose problems are much greater than our own .
Indeed , our reach should also extend even further , as it is not only the countries of Central and Eastern Europe that have expectations of us , but also the Mediterranean countries , Latin America , Africa and the third world in general .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , I hope that the President-in-Office was right when he said that he had a feeling that the German Presidency was close to the mark .
I hope that he is not mistaken , because of course the German Presidency did not make life very easy for itself from the very start .
It made grand speeches at the end of last year setting itself high standards .
It also said what Germany ought to gain from all this , and we will see how this measures up .
In any case , there has been no improvement on the initial position of finding a compromise solution for the negotiations .
We in the European People 's Party will be prepared to play a constructive role in this process - despite all that has been said - and to help to find a solution which will allow us to steer the European Union forward .
If you are to bring about an agreement which will benefit the European Union , you will of course also need the support of our group .
But this has to be a good agreement , not an agreement for its own sake , not an agreement at any price , but an agreement which makes sense , which respects budgetary discipline and which contains the necessary reforms , if we are to be able to support it , and if at the same time we are to retain scope for enlargement within the 1.27 % which you mentioned .
I believe that this is of crucial importance .
In addition , we must of course also say that the debate on rural areas and agriculture is a very important one for our group .
If degressive models are agreed which mean that farmers ' income is reduced and if appropriations can only be spent in certain areas without being of benefit to agriculture itself , then this is a point which we will have to consider very carefully in terms of the overall balance .
This is certainly not something you did not already know .
Furthermore , it should also be said - and this is in the joint motion - that we are not prepared to put at stake the principles underlying the internal market in the negotiations on structural policy , and that controls on subsidies must continue to be recognised as one of the basic preconditions for the proper functioning of a common market and should not be abolished as part of the structural policy .
Of course , nor must we allow discussions held in connection with the employment pact to jeopardise the largest project which we have tackled for years , namely the introduction of the euro .
At this stage , we should stop reducing interest rates - this is also a request to the President-in-Office of the ECOFIN Council - as this will cause the value of the euro to fall still further .
We must make our contribution to stabilising the euro , and the German Presidency has a particular responsibility here .
I believe that this responsibility can be assumed in an appropriate manner in the latter part of the presidency .
With your permission , I will briefly address one final point .
The Cologne summit will establish a mandate for the next intergovernmental conference , and we should like to know from the German Presidency whether , when it is preparing this mandate , it will engage in a dialogue with the European Parliament about the issues which should take priority and be dealt with at an intergovernmental conference of this kind , and whether it is also prepared to involve the European Parliament in the negotiations on amendments to the Treaty , changes to the decision-making structures and so on .
Let me draw your attention one last time to one of Parliament 's resolutions .
You will respect democracy in the European Union if you nominate the President of the Commission after the European Parliament elections , because if you make a nomination beforehand , which does not take account of the outcome of the Parliament elections , then you run the risk of the Council proposal being rejected by this House , and that is why we should rethink this timetable .
Mr President , in a sense of course it is true that the Community is approaching the moment of truth .
As both President Santer and President Verheugen were saying , if there is to be no agreement by the end of this month then there will be difficulties .
Indeed it is very useful that there is no speculation about delay .
In this time of difficulties in the Commission , I would like to say that Agenda 2000 , which was put forward two years ago by the Commission should still be the basis of the overall approach .
It is only on that basis that a balanced approach can be found .
It is necessary that , irrespective of the haggling about individual finance , that approach should be kept .
The Liberal Group , especially , will judge the overall outcome on whether or not it deviates from the future development for a viable European Union .
Against that background we welcome the fact that the President-in-Office of the Council has indicated that already , at this stage , there is an agreement that money available for enlargement will be set aside .
It is essential that our internal haggling is not at the expenses of the new candidate countries .
Only in that way can we identify the real political will which was our starting-point .
We really want to move forward .
On the CAP , President Santer indicated that there is a basic conflict , on the one hand between stabilisation , and on the other hand a real reform .
We , in the Liberal Group , accept real stabilisation .
It has perhaps taken too long for us to become aware that there is a limit to financial growth .
At the same time , real reform is necessary .
It is essential that we do not have a make-believe reform .
The Liberal Group believes that within the overall envelope it is possible to carry out reforms but rural development should be part of a structural policy , which takes a broader view than the purely agricultural .
That is an essential point .
Finally , on the question of own resources .
We still believe that the approach in the Haug report - namely that the corrections should primarily be made in terms of expenditure rather than in the area of revenue - is important .
Why ?
Because a special rebate which has now been there for a very long time should not be the model for future financing .
If I understand the President-in-Office of the Council correctly , the phased approach also means that individual adjustments will finally be phased out and we will arrive at an equitable and balanced approach where all countries can really feel that they are participating .
That would be the right approach for the future .
I wish the presidency and the President of the Commission every success for a positive result in Berlin .
Mr President , the Agenda 2000 negotiations now under way are among the most difficult which the European Union has faced as an institution and political entity since the foundation of the European Economic Community .
The Union can take credit for the bold and innovative initiatives which it has taken over the last 10 years in order to improve the competitive performance of European economies .
European leaders and European Union institutions can equally point to the fact that an internal market has been put in place , allowing free movement of goods , persons , services and capital , as well as the creation of a new single currency regime which commands so much influence within the European Union itself .
The negotiations which brought about the internal market and the single European currency were difficult but were always based on the premise that stability of the European Union is paramount at all times .
This must be the overriding consideration of European Union leaders as they search for agreement on the key aspects of future EU policies under the Agenda 2000 programme .
The EU governments must look to the issue of reforming the EU budget , the common agricultural policy and the EU structural funds in a balanced , even-handed manner .
The partnership approach involving all European governments and all the institutions in order to develop and formulate key EU policies must always be preserved .
We should remember at this time that the European Union budget only amounts to a little more than 2 % of the overall spending undertaken by the 15 Member States of the Union in any given year .
One option to reform the European Union budget which is not acceptable is the renationalising of the common agricultural policy back into the remit of the individual Member States .
The common agricultural policy is a uniform European-wide programme .
Its operation will clearly be fragmented and distorted if national governments within the EU have to contribute 25 % of all CAP payments to their respective farmers .
From an Irish perspective , I welcome the recent support given by the Commission for Ireland to continue to receive cohesion funds until the year 2003 .
17 % of all expenditure carried out on improving our roads , water treatment and transport networks under our capital programme originates from the European regional cohesion funds .
Mr President , the decision on the Union 's financial perspectives is becoming extremely difficult politically , giving the impression of a confrontation of national interests without a common vision of European integration .
Moreover , the economic outlook is not positive . Economic growth is lower than expected , exports and investment have fallen , and inflation has reached an all-time low , forcing us to consider the problems that affect a deflationary economy .
I might add that we share some of the concerns expressed by Mr Lafontaine .
The previous enlargements of the European Union were always preceded by a considerable increase in the budget , but the Agenda 2000 budget is so inadequate that it does not allow us to guarantee internal solidarity and cope with the new members .
When we talk about enlargement , what we are really doing is endangering the economic and social cohesion of the Europe of Fifteen , without any thought to the future , with less solidarity , without a social dimension and without a genuine employment policy .
Regardless of how much rhetoric we use , it is not possible to enlarge Europe with this budget .
The Commission 's initial proposal was better in that it reflected a possible and reasonable balance , with the contributions from the Member States more in proportion in terms of the Community 's gross domestic product . However , the Council disregarded this proposal and focused the debate on reducing expenditure .
As a result , the approach adopted by certain governments , who are calling for a reduction in their net contribution to the Community budget without taking account of the commercial advantages of the internal market , is making the negotiations very difficult .
The German Presidency is at fault in that it has not helped to solve the problems in a situation where the Commission no longer has the ability to mediate .
In that respect , we must point out that we cannot accept the philosophy of net balances . We should instead move towards reaching a solution that we can all support .
In our view , it would not be acceptable to make drastic cuts in the Structural Funds and agricultural spending , thereby unfairly penalising certain countries and certain production sectors .
As far as the agricultural policy is concerned , we have already rejected the negative proposal to cofinance expenditure . The best economic and social solution would be to introduce a fairer differentiation of aid : the current system is unfair as 20 % of farmers receive 80 % of the aid distributed .
With correct differentiation , we could ensure that aid was distributed more fairly and we could provide specific solutions for producers of milk , beef and veal , and cereals . We could also reduce budgetary expenditure .
The financial perspectives must be approved unanimously in the Council and by a sufficient majority in Parliament .
It would therefore be better to reach a balanced solution .
The agreement must be acceptable to all , not only a majority .
Moreover - and I would like to address this specifically to the Council - we want to see very practical political deliberations .
We are convinced of the importance of a strong and legitimate Commission for the future of the Union .
We would therefore call on the European Council to postpone the nomination of its candidate for the Presidency of the Commission until after the European elections , and we would like a response on this matter .
In conclusion , I would point out that the extraordinary European Council on 25 March in Berlin will coincide with the anniversary of the Treaty of Rome .
Given the uncertainty that exists , we call on the German Presidency and on all the Heads of State and Government to unite once again and commit to a common political project .
We urge them to fulfill their responsibilities .
And an essential condition is to reach a fair agreement on Agenda 2000 so that no government or country is the winner .
The only winners should be the European Union and all its people .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Berlin summit must succeed in tying up the Agenda 2000 package .
A delay would send out a fateful signal to the EU and the outside world and would only encourage nationalist forces .
We must not allow this to happen .
If next year we are to continue to provide structural support - the internal bridge between poor and rich regions - then we need an agreement on Agenda 2000 which , in small matters and in large , is characterised by solidarity , will be workable in the future and leaves no room for national egoism .
Outwardly , the failure of the summit would mean the failure of the great pan-European project of eastward enlargement .
That is why there is no room here for exaggerated national demands .
We make this plea to the Council : all the Heads of State and Government must travel to Berlin prepared in all earnest to close the gap between them .
That applies just as much to the German Government as it does to the southern countries .
Because when huge efforts have been required of the applicant countries for years , it would be a fateful sign if the EU were simply not to hand in its homework .
The European Parliament has proved through the compromises in its reports that an agreement is possible , including on the crucial points .
The demands are balanced and they are before the Council .
So it is possible !
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Minister , in his speech to Parliament of 12 January , Mr Joschka Fischer sketched the framework for a vast and ambitious European policy and led us to hope for an active and effective German Presidency , which is what we need .
We have become somewhat concerned over recent weeks , the difficulties seeming more serious than expected .
In such a climate , the Berlin summit assumes great importance .
It is essential for Berlin to provide new momentum and to demonstrate that the initial differences are now being overcome .
A European Union without optimism and without the will to act would be in very poor shape to tackle forthcoming key events such as the parliamentary elections on 13 June .
I would stress one point : budgetary resources .
We are perfectly aware of the need to reform the public finances of our Member States but , for all that , and even if it is not exactly what certain governments state , it would be a dangerous calculation to refuse the Union sufficient resources to succeed in doing what is requested of it .
By this I am not of course speaking of the waste and malfunctioning in the Commission 's management practices , which have already been denounced .
Leaving aside these errors , which must of course be corrected , I am speaking of deep-rooted problems , for example , the preservation of the European agricultural model , the policy of cohesion and solidarity , and Europe 's competitiveness in the high technology sector .
I am also referring to the success of enlargement , as without a minimum of resources the tension will jeopardise European integration as a whole .
Finally , I am referring to the Union drawing up and implementing economic , social and employment policies - within the framework of the Treaties of course - which are worthy of the name .
This also calls for a minimum level of resources .
It is a good thing to manage the Union 's finances with care .
But it would be dangerous to manage them sparingly .
Not only do the Union 's policies risk running out of steam , but there is the danger that the Community spirit might weaken .
Today we are again discussing renationalisation and direct national contributions .
Fortunately , the German Presidency seems to have abandoned this dangerous idea with regard to the common agricultural policy .
We are also again discussing net contributors , positive and negative balances , British cheques , and so on .
I do not deny that it is sometimes necessary to have a close look at the accounts and to seek new balances , but we must not recreate the climate of 1984 .
Mr President , the Berlin summit will largely decide the survival and even the strengthening of the Community spirit .
I hope that we will be heard .
The road to hell is paved with good intentions .
I am not sure whether this excellent and instructive proverb is also found in the other ten official languages .
It exists in Danish at least , and I am reminded of it almost every day in the institutions of the European Union , because these institutions - the Council , the Commission and this Parliament - have never grasped the wisdom , the very simple wisdom contained in the Norwegian handbook for mountain walkers , which says : ' in the event of disagreement between the map and the terrain , you should follow the terrain ' .
In this Parliament - and in all the EU 's institutions , including the Commission and the Council - people consistently and with an almost religious zeal follow the once adopted map and ignore the terrain .
The terrain will have its revenge , and I shall mention three points without going into detail , because my speaking time will not allow that .
Firstly , in our opinion - and in the opinion of many Danish andNordic citizens - the enlargement project is heading in the wrong direction .
On the one hand , the process which is taking place is humiliating for the applicant countries and , on the other hand , it has - to put it mildly - not been properly thought out in political terms . It is not a project which is based on democratisation , but one which is about empire-building .
Secondly , the political conditions have at best not been properly thought out and the financial conditions , which are the subject of the extraordinary summit in Berlin , leave the gigantic money machines which the European Union has built up over the years in total chaos , in particular the common agricultural policy and the Structural Funds .
This is a sharp reminder that you cannot ignore the terrain without the terrain taking revenge at some stage .
Thirdly , this summit is taking place only days after we in Parliament were discussing the most serious constitutional crisis the institutions have yet faced , and I can imagine that - as so often in the past - the agenda of this summit will be different from the one which reflects the current political reality .
Mr President , the extraordinary Berlin summit has been convened to unravel a complex tangle and solve a fairly knotty problem .
Budgetary adjustment , the cost of enlargement , the future of the CAP and structural policy reform are all on the agenda .
We shall never tire of repeating that the complexity of the problems and solutions would have been less traumatic if the institutional structure had been overhauled prior to enlargement and , consequently , the balance of power within the Union redressed .
But now the thorny problems already on the table are compounded by the bombshell of Germany 's call for a reduction in its budget contribution .
Forgetting the overall input from Community coffers to the development of the five ex-Communist Länder , the German Government is now playing the card once used by Mrs Thatcher , a tactic which blocked Community activity for quite some time and has left an unpleasant aftertaste .
Our first request to the German Presidency is that it should spare the Union a repeat of past performance , whereby problems are bounced from one summit to the next and resolved to the disadvantage of one group or another , one country or another , poisoning minds and keeping the public away from the ballot box next June .
There is a risk that agricultural reform will be confined to a mere cost-cutting exercise , rather than aiming for quality production and safeguarding the certificate of origin , the sole guarantee that a product is typical and meets consumer demands .
Extensive , American-style agriculture , rather than intensive farming as preferred in Europe , would destroy all that is distinctive about our specialities in the various production sectors .
Germany 's point that agriculture accounts for only 4 % of EU GDP is too narrow-minded : we must not overlook related sectors , the agri-food industry , processing and farm machinery .
But even if the contribution to GDP really were so minimal , let us not forget that farming in Europe also represents a civilisation , a way of life and tradition which it would be criminal to abandon in favour of canned foods from the hypermarket shelves and futuristic transgenic products .
Why not set up a European agency to manage any surpluses generated , dispatching these to countries experiencing production shortfalls or lean years ?
By the same token , monetary donations to humanitarian associations could at least partly take the form of foodstuffs , thereby indirectly compensating for market fluctuations .
Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , a few days before the EU summit in Berlin , where a decision will also be taken on the future of policy in rural areas , it is timely to repeat two demands made by the European Socialists .
Firstly , Europe needs a socially responsible support policy which assists the weak and demands practical solidarity from the strong while also giving them the necessary freedom .
Secondly , through its structural and support policies in rural areas , Europe must also make determined efforts to safeguard existing jobs and create new ones , because for Socialists throughout the Union , labour market policy must be the number one priority .
The decisions made in Berlin must and will be positive for the EU .
Given the diversity of the issues and the fact that they are crucial to the EU 's future , compromises are obviously going to be necessary , as they are in any democratic system .
Anyone announcing to the House here and now , for the benefit of the media , that they alone will come back a winner is certainly about to become painfully isolated .
Those who are already talking in terms of a crisis , dispensing advice in the manner of a schoolteacher and heavily criticising the way in which the German Presidency is conducting the negotiations should recall , Mr Brok , that many of the problems which are having to be tackled here have been put off for years , and that there are a good many who watched without a word of protest while two thirds of the agriculture budget of DEM 75 billion disappeared for entirely economic reasons and was not even spent as we intended , but was instead poured into export subsidies and storage costs .
This is a policy which is unsocial , if not even antisocial !
The evidence is clearer in agricultural policy than in any other EU policy that if the old support system is continued , smaller concerns will be - as they have been for years - the ones to suffer , not to say the foolish ones , and basically this is the way it will stay .
In the meantime - and this too needs to be stated in this House - lobbyists on the look-out for a convincing policy have hit upon a new idea .
Suddenly they are saying : away with all subsidies , away with all bureaucracy .
We only want a regulated market .
But if you take a look at this system or this new proposal , this regulated market turns out to be a European Union which is closed off to the outside world , managed , as it were , like a sandpit .
However , a fortress state of this kind , in the 19th century style , would not only mean an end to the common market and the free movement of goods .
Those who advocate such utter foolishness - because they have run out of ideas and people are running away from them - are also , and with a complete lack of responsibility , leaving the 6 % who still work in rural areas to face the anger of the remaining 94 % of Europeans , who then rightly point out that a ' philosophy ' of this kind will not only cause jobs and social security to disappear for ever , but will eventually cause the downfall of the successful model which is the European Union , and which is unique in the history of Europe and the world .
Mr President , two weeks before the Berlin European Council , I believe it is pointless to try to hide the pessimistic atmosphere that prevails .
Frankly , I cannot see what progress the Council representative was referring to .
On the contrary , some of the proposals by the German Presidency have not exactly given us much cause for hope , not to mention the decision to resort to the unusual mechanism of presenting them in the name of the German delegation .
I do not know if that is what the Council representative calls a happy medium .
But perhaps the most worrying thing is the confusion that exists , with constant changes of direction and a lack of impetus from those who are supposed to be in charge .
The European Parliament has the right , not to mention the duty , to demand that the debate be more focused .
We must remember that what we are discussing is how to finance the European Union until 2006 and how to reform the Structural Funds and common policies in the light of enlargement .
The debate is not about determining how a specific country might pay less , but rather how to finance a range of common policies in a fairer and more effective manner .
The aim of this is , of course , to create more jobs and reduce inequalities . In my view , the Presidency would do well to set aside the debate on net fiscal balances and look for solutions to its problems that keep faith with the Treaty .
I do not think I have to remind you that the final agreement requires consensus .
In other words , the automatic application of the system of majorities leads us to a dead end , to failure . And nobody - I would imagine - wants this Presidency to be remembered as one that failed .
It is up to the German Presidency to put forward proposals that bring us closer to a final agreement , that accommodate the different interests involved , but that also set out a future objective of integration that all the people of Europe can identify with .
The European elections in June will allow us all to measure our representativeness through the exercise of democracy . Only then should the Council propose its candidate for the Presidency of the European Commission as provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mr President , on the eve of the year 2000 , it is commonplace to hear of the need to breathe new life into Europe .
The least that can be said , unfortunately , is that the Berlin Council is not part of this approach .
There is no question of a more social , more democratic Europe , nor of a Europe of solidarity , as budgetary discipline and reduced contributions for some - and not the least important among us - are at the centre of the debates , and this at a time when we are preparing for enlargement .
This is very worrying , as any rejection of the notion of financial solidarity in Europe can only favour increased globalisation , dominated by American ambitions .
I note that there now seems to be movement on the question of cofinancing agricultural expenditure , demanded by some and rejected by others , including France .
I welcome this , without being entirely reassured .
In order to arrive at an agreement which is global , positive and acceptable to all , we must move beyond complicated calculations and develop financial solidarity on new bases in order to promote economic and social cohesion , which is under pressure from unemployment and growing poverty .
The ceiling of 1.27 % must therefore remain so as to respect the constraints of the stability pact , although it would be better to replace it with an employment pact and find new sources of finance , based on a corporation tax or a capital gains tax , for example .
To arrive at a more balanced budget , the share of each Member State must be in proportion to its share in the Community 's GNP .
A limit must be placed on farming subsidies and they must be designed to be of more benefit to small and medium-sized farms , as well as to employment .
Mr President , I listened with great interest to the President-in-Office of the Council when he said that central questions have not been resolved .
I think that will go down as the understatement of the day .
Quite clearly the Council and Commission have been able to make no progress in the whole area of the reform and everything that goes with it .
Everybody talks about reform and says that reform is needed and required .
I think we all accept that change is always necessary and we have evolved with that change .
What I want to make very clear to both the Commission and the Council here today is that if they are going to have reform it must not be at the price of destruction of our rural communities throughout the European Union .
There is a grave danger as we go forward that is what will happen .
We must defend European Union farmers against the threats of the Americans and everyone else in the world who want to destroy the European agricultural industry .
If you destroy the European agricultural industry you will destroy vast parts of the whole rural community and the whole infrastructure throughout Europe .
This reform will be like all the reforms in the past .
It will not save one ECU .
It will not save one D-mark or one pound .
In fact , by the time it is finished , it will cost more .
The real truth is that the time has come for some of these countries who have benefitted very well over the past years from membership of the European Union , and who tell us that they are great Europeans , to begin to delve into their pockets and pay their way .
I think that is the challenge .
I noted with interest President Santer 's comment that he will take note of certain specific situations within the European Union .
I hope he will do that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when Jacques Santer and the European Commission presented Agenda 2000 in July 1997 with a view to preparing for enlargement towards Eastern Europe , they did not think that they would be jeopardising Europe 's cohesion , and the Franco-German axis in particular .
It is true that just a few months before the European elections , national concessions are difficult to win amidst this vast bargaining process of European reform .
Germany is both judge and interested party as for six months it is presiding over Europe 's fate while at the same time itself demanding a substantial reduction in its contribution to the Community budget . But it is finding it very difficult to impose sacrifices on its partners , each one being more or less agreed to support the idea of stabilising expenditure .
Even the euro is showing signs of weakness against the dollar , proof if ever there was that a single currency is not something which can be forced upon us .
Of the three reforms included in Agenda 2000 - reform of the CAP , reform of the Structural Funds , and the review of the financial perspective for 2000-2006 - only the first has been discussed at length by the ministers , and the only tangible result is that Germany has abandoned the idea of national cofinancing of direct subsidies to agriculture .
In these difficult negotiations , France has made two enormous mistakes .
First , it put its cards on the table much too early , the others keeping their joker for the end of the game .
Also , it is very dangerous for France to try and reach agreement on the CAP without reforming the Structural Funds and Europe 's future financial framework since , with 23 % of the EAGFF Guarantee appropriations , it is Europe 's leading agricultural nation and most vulnerable to budgetary restrictions .
Do we blame the United Kingdom for defending the annual rebate granted to Mrs Thatcher in 1984 , or Spain , Portugal and Ireland for defending the Cohesion Fund and the Structural Funds , or Germany for defending a reduction in its contribution , or Italy for defending the system of own resources , in particular VAT , which is to its advantage ?
We certainly do not .
The France of Mr Chirac and Mr Jospin is the only one not to clearly defend its national interests , to sacrifice its farmers , its regions and its tax-payers to the European illusion .
I must say here very solemnly that the phased reduction in direct agricultural subsidies as proposed by France is a bad idea because it will lead to a further decrease in farmers ' incomes , but also because these subsidies only partially compensate for the price reductions .
In the name of what principles should farmers alone bear the cost of this technocratic Europe which is responsible for their extinction ?
As for the reform of the Structural Funds , Corsica and French Hainaut will see their regional aid cancelled , while fragile rural areas that enjoyed Objective 5b status will only receive the minimum share of a new inconsistent package .
Given these conditions , ladies and gentlemen , the Berlin European Council on 24 and 25 March is likely to produce a fool 's bargain .
In 1918 , France said that Germany would pay .
Times have changed .
Now it is France that will pay for the new eastern Länder , for southern Europe 's infrastructures , and even for Ireland , which has a growth rate that is much higher than our own .
Later , it will pay for the Eastern European countries .
The National Front , which I am honoured to lead , rejects the federalist excesses of Agenda 2000 which lead to destructive free trade and reductive globalisation .
We call for a Europe of nations , of peoples and of national identities , a Europe which gives renewed hope to our fellow citizens who have been exploited for the last 40 years .
Mr President , it will come as no surprise that my main plea today is for the Council to make the effort to meet its timetable to enable Parliament to fully exercise its democratic mandate and add democratic legitimacy .
But let me repeat what I believe is now coming loud and clear from our regions , municipalities and partners : those on the ground who are using these funds will continue to need funds , but they need to have the certainty and security that agreement can be achieved in Berlin .
Programmes will not start on 1 January 2000 , but we need to minimise delays in order not to fall into the problems and traps of the previous round of funding where late starts led to problems of underspends , delays in projects , project cancellations and difficulties in sustaining matched funding .
We need to avoid this for future programmes .
But precisely because of these potential programming delays it is important that in Parliament 's priorities the idea of transitional programmes are the same length for all objectives : six years to allow regions coming off regional aid adequate time to put into place self-sustaining programmes by using financial opportunities of loans and venture capital .
This takes time .
That is why we again make the plea for the same transitional period .
This will give these areas a soft landing , when they come off regional support .
Last week I was engaged in my own tour and mini-summit , as it were , in Berlin .
I was there to speak on urban policy .
I was even more convinced of the need to retain the URBAN initiative in the European Union .
Across the European Union , even in areas of relative wealth , we encounter severe deprivation , and communities which are not getting fair access to opportunities .
While we acknowledge the need to continue to concentrate our resources on the poorest and declining areas , some of which are in my own region Merseyside , we still have to have solidarity as a two-way process .
We have to retain the capacity to invest and support in our marginalised groups and communities which are not necessarily in Objective I or Objective II areas .
The URBAN initiative is a small programme with a big impact .
I make the plea that we continue to support this .
I was also in a northern industrial suburb in Milan .
We took the opportunity to look at a steel restructuring works .
You know of course , that the Resider funds will no longer be there to support these kinds of areas .
They will probably not qualify for Objective II .
This means that we also have to have a crisis initiative in order to enable us to support the future crisis sectors .
We need an initiative to enhance our credibility and to prove that Europe is capable of responding to economic and social crisis .
Which of us knows today what will be the crisis sectors of the future ?
I thank the President-in-Office for the continuing support , particularly for investment in Northern Ireland .
My latest visit indicated that the peace process there is incredibly fragile , but people take tremendous heart from the fact that Europe is supporting their cause .
There is an imperative to continue to invest .
I am pleased that the German presidency has also made a priority of support for Northern Ireland .
We need to have partnership .
The partnership principle is fundamental to enhancing the democratic credibility of the funds that we use back in our regions .
I know that the presidency has accepted that partnership is a key principle .
We do not want to be prescriptive .
We simply want evidence that a partnership pact is going to be an operation with local authorities , with NGOs and , indeed , with the social partners .
Let me commend your efforts to try to meet the timetable .
We know it is no easy task to achieve a fair , equitable and acceptable outcome for 15 Member States , but a fair and equitable outcome has to have democratic legitimacy in the European Parliament .
The final package must perforce reflect Parliament 's priorities .
I look forward to seeing these reflected in the final regulation .
Mr President , I would endorse Mr Santer 's opening remark , to the effect that the decisions now facing us are vital to Europe 's future .
I also concur that an agreement , compromise or meeting of minds must be found in Berlin .
The European Union must be given a new lease of life on the eve of the elections and , as Mr Galeote has just said , we cannot ignore the scepticism and pessimism currently pervading Europe because of the difficulties confronting the euro : the disagreements , the uncertainties , the misguided statements being made on the stability pact , the wrangles over the autonomy of the European Central Bank and the pressure for a further drop in interest rates are all creating a climate of uncertainty and gloom at the very start of the euro 's life , raising some extremely serious , inescapable problems such as the completion of institutional reform .
The ECB President , Wim Duisenberg , recently stated in an interview that he had been asked to defend the value of the euro , our common currency , and price stability .
If he is to pursue these aims single-handedly using monetary means alone , he will undoubtedly create more unemployment .
There is a need , therefore , for economic and political governance : the Central Bank can only be independent if a political government assumes responsibility for economic policy-making .
This is a matter of the utmost urgency .
This aspiration is not universally shared within the EU at present , nor by this presidency : this morning 's speech by its representative was scarcely encouraging in this regard .
The Berlin Council , and then that of Cologne , needs not only to produce agreements on figures and sums , but to focus on what is important and give centrestage to the issue of job creation - as called for by the Socialist Group .
Ways to boost employment include the promotion of more liberal labour market policies , progress concerning Mr Monti 's proposals , the exclusion of public expenditure and investment from the deficit , and fiscal policy harmonisation : none of these subjects have been mentioned this morning .
A commitment is required above all to reconciling the need for a redistribution - and not a reduction - of financial contributions to the Union with the need to keep intact the policies of the Cohesion and Structural Funds , since these are geared to generating employment .
We wish to hear the German Presidency confirm these commitments , and expect them to be followed up at the Berlin summit .
Mr President , no-one is any doubt that the extraordinary summit in Berlin will be of great importance to the future of European integration and , as a result , to the farming sector .
I have listened to you , Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , and I must admit that I am not satisfied , as you fail to sufficiently tackle the underlying issues , preferring to make politically correct general statements .
It is not enough to say that the future of the common agricultural policy will be preserved . You must say how , and why !
We all know , President Santer , that we are facing a budgetary problem .
The question here involves the CAP 's future share in the budget .
Faced with planned price reductions , the Commission 's proposals increase direct subsidies to farmers .
This partial compensation will lead to a progressive and steady fall in the incomes of European farmers .
And I know that statistics can be used to say anything you like .
You can say , for example , that farmers ' incomes have increased since the CAP reform of 1992 .
But in reality , Europe 's farmers have had to adapt and have been forced to increase their productivity either by having larger farms or by adopting more intensive farming practices .
The 1992 CAP therefore led to the desertification of the countryside , due to the fall in the number of farmers and to an increase in intensive production systems .
It seems that nobody has learned from the lesson of BSE .
In future , in their search for productivity , certain producers are going to have no alternative but to use genetically modified organisms , or hormones , or who knows what else .
Given this budgetary problem , the Commission has proposed a number of paths .
First , there is cofinancing , which we reject in its present form as it will inevitably distort competition between farmers in the various Member States and cause problems for the only common policy , whose legitimacy - I would remind you - is based on the Treaty of Rome .
The farmers believed in Europe because they believed in the CAP .
I ask you not to disappoint them .
Other Commission proposals are now circulating , particularly that involving the phased reduction of subsidies of up to 3 % a year .
This proposal fails to take account of the differences between the various types of agricultural production as the farmers most affected by this measure will be those who are most dependent on agricultural subsidies .
I am thinking , for example , of sheep farmers and of beef cattle farmers , who will have to give up farming altogether if they do not receive a sufficient level of compensation .
A phased reduction of 3 % a year , in addition to the currency depreciation , which we can now estimate at 2 % a year for the period 2000-2006 , means that farmers must increase production by 5 % a year .
That objective is hardly compatible with the food and health safety of European agriculture .
We are becoming increasingly dependent on the agricultural production of third countries and will no longer be able to guarantee the quality of the products European consumers buy .
We are now faced with a budgetary problem and I understand its origins and constraints . The European Union must therefore make a strong political choice .
It must give preference to those policies for which it is entirely responsible , and in which the CAP must clearly be a key component .
I would inform the House that I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , reaching a compromise in Berlin which is acceptable to everyone is not only about keeping to our timetable for Agenda 2000 ; it is also - and this should be made clear to the German Presidency - about our credibility .
It is about our credibility in the eyes of all the people in the Union , but above all it is about our credibility towards the 27 million who are unemployed , whom we repeatedly assure that both the Member States and the European Union itself will make every effort to combat unemployment as effectively - and above all as quickly - as possible .
The Social Fund is the only instrument of labour market policy which we have at European level , and that is why it needs to be pressed into service for the employment strategy as soon as possible .
It is not without reason that we also want , in the future , to use the Social Fund throughout the European Union to combat youth and long-term unemployment .
Unemployment is not a problem which is only confined to particular regions ; it is a problem which extends across the Community and that is precisely why it would be wrong , if appropriations for the Structural Funds were reduced , to cut Social Fund appropriations outside the eligible areas by 40 % , as allowed for in Council plans .
If you cancel Objective 3 resources in this way , how do you expect people to continue to believe that the Social Fund is going to help to make the employment strategy , which we want so much , a reality across the European Union ?
In fact , we all know from past experience that it was not least the Social Fund which time and again forced Member States and regions to adopt new and innovative methods , in order , with European money , to get people back to work or indeed to shield them from unemployment .
Let us take the example of preventive labour market policy , which is today one of the four pillars of our employment strategy .
In 1994 , however , when the Social Fund introduced this prophylactic approach to labour market policy in the Member States for the first time , many Member States - and also the German Länder - fought it tooth and nail .
But its success speaks for itself , and it really does show once more the significance of European added value .
The same is true of vocational training in Italy .
Without the Social Fund , the relevant measures would perhaps still not exist today .
I am also thinking of the certification system for training courses which has been developed so successfully throughout Greece , and of the support provided by the Social Fund for the disabled , which has moved the United Kingdom from the bottom of the European league to the top in terms of integrating the disabled , or I might think of the school drop-out rate in Ireland , which has been reduced by almost half .
This is not just progress in terms of labour market policy ; the Fund also works to create social change and makes Europe something people can experience in a very practical way in the place where they live , which also increases its acceptance .
In Portugal , they can tell you a thing or two about this .
For example , without the Social Fund , illiteracy here would not have fallen by anywhere near as much as it has done .
Or you only have to consider mainstreaming .
Here too , and this is long overdue , Europe is forging the way ahead , although - and I am under no illusions here - the path is certainly still a hazardous one .
That is why we must ensure that no Member State is able to avoid implementing specific support measures for women .
That applies equally to the four other spheres of intervention : measures to combat youth and long-term unemployment ; social integration ; general and professional training ; and preventive labour market policy .
I will conclude , therefore , with this urgent plea to the Council : do not free the Member States from their obligation to take action in each of the five spheres of intervention of the Social Fund .
Cherry-picking does not give European added value ; instead , it reinforces national single-track approaches .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have now been discussing the Agenda 2000 proposals for 21 months but never before has our debate been so specifically focused on budgetary and financial matters .
The debate about the major choices facing Europe has now been overtaken by a debate about budgets and the Member States ' ' give and take ' , in particular the question of how much the Union 's most prosperous States should pay in and get back .
I think it is vital to assess whether one or more States are still contributing too much to the budget while other Member States , equally prosperous , are paying in too little .
But once that has been established the European Union must decide to reform its system of own resources in which the only fair basis for contributions is that of relative prosperity or gross national product .
We cannot afford a situation in which major European decisions have to depend on solutions being found to these budgetary matters and , above all , it would be tragic if it were the poorer Member States or regions that ended up paying for those decisions and the restoration of a financial balance .
On this score , I should like to emphasise three points .
The first is that the Structural Funds , including the Cohesion Fund , should be strengthened , especially in the Objective I regions , for which at least two thirds of the funding should be earmarked .
The figure of 0.46 % of GNP for the Structural Fund should be seen as a target but not a ceiling .
The second point is that the 0.13 % of GNP necessary for funding pre-accession measures for the new Member States must not be obtained by redirecting funds previously channelled into the weakest regions of the current 15 Member States of the European Union .
The third aspect that I would like to emphasise is that of all the reforms of the CAP that I have witnessed , none of them until this one has been a reform worked out on the hoof - in other words , any old solution , even one that is cobbled together , provided that it brings down farm spending to the level set by the Ministers of Finance .
Just as we were hoping for a new balance to be struck in the CAP to help producers and crops that so far have barely benefited from it , for stronger rural development benefiting agri-environmental and forestry measures and in particular increasing aid to the less favoured regions , what we now see on the negotiating table of the Agriculture Council are proposals for equal cuts in aid for everyone without the slightest suggestion that any attempt could be made to introduce the principle of fairness into the CAP .
As if all farmers had benefited equally from it in the past .
I hope that a solution will come out of the Berlin summit , one that will serve Europe .
After all , Europe has only made progress when it has been able to demonstrate solidarity and look beyond its ambitions .
If we are now going to start contemplating our navels and counting every penny to be paid in and taken out , it does not bode well for the future .
The Prime Minister of my country is always saying that Europe lacks political ambition and leadership .
How right he is !
But perhaps I should add that this is happening at a time when 13 of the 15 governments and 11 prime ministers are all Socialists .
Mr President , the last comments were about lacking vision - I just want to make a comment about losing sight of something : the interinstitutional agreement .
Whilst all our minds seem to be concentrated on Berlin , and quite rightly so , the present meeting of the Agricultural Council is a considerable distraction .
Among all this we have the on-going discussions between Parliament and the Council on the interinstitutional agreement .
Let me remind Members and the Council President that without an interinstitutional agreement there is no Agenda 2000 .
Without an interinstitutional agreement we go back to Article 203 and Agenda 2000 is dead .
It is therefore imperative that both we and the Council find an amicable solution to getting an interinstitutional agreement .
The old process that we are talking about is one of compromise , as President Santer said .
We have problems , especially in agriculture .
Those problems are about expenditure and reform but the message that needs to be put across is that without reform of the CAP , as proposed by the Commission , we will not have enlargement .
Those Member States that are opposed to reform will have to ask themselves whether they are serious about enlargement or not .
Without reform of the CAP we simply weaken our position in the WTO at the next round of negotiations .
We should be pro-active and taking a lead .
Without reform we will just see the United States in the key position and we will be reacting once again to everything the Americans say .
Without reform of the CAP we end up with food surpluses .
We are back to food mountains at great cost to EU tax payers - back to the bad old days - and none of us want to see that .
I need to make a comment to the President-in-Office which relates to what is going on with the Agricultural Council .
I hope they can come to a solution but if they cannot and it drags on , then quite frankly the General Affairs Council has to start taking decisions for agricultural ministers .
We cannot allow that item to jeopardise or weaken Agenda 2000 .
On financial matters , we have the situation where Agenda 2000 is linked with agreements on future financing .
I have said for quite a long time that need not be the case .
It is obvious why it is the case but there is no need to link a new own resources system with Agenda 2000 and I hope that if that is a problem then we can get an agreement on Agenda 2000 and afterwards continue to look at future financing .
The options proposed by the Commission on own resources are worthy of long and further discussions .
The Council should not be rushed into decisions that will not solve deep-rooted problems of such financing and we should not let this procedure distract us from getting the right solution to Agenda 2000 .
What we want from our side are those policies which will stimulate employment , which will build social cohesion and which will protect the environment - objectives we can all agree on .
They must not be jeopardised by narrow-minded nationalistic attitudes - and that goes for all the Member States .
Mr President , the German Presidency 's report and the way the Agenda 2000 negotiations stand - or perhaps I should say the state they are in - give cause for serious concern .
The political rhetoric and the financial perspectives are significantly out of kilter .
We are seeing a repeat , on a large scale , of the complaints made at the last part-session and , on a small scale , of those made during the Socrates debate .
The Commission comes along with an ambitious proposal : it proposes more tasks , more partners and higher quality .
And then along comes the Council of savings club ministers and hardly any of it is possible any more !
If we take a look at the figures and the proposals on structural and agricultural reform , we are faced with the same dilemma .
Two weeks before Berlin , we are still a long way from the noble aims of which the Treaty itself speaks - solidarity , cohesion and the common agricultural policy .
For the current year 1999 , for example , EUR 216 billion is budgeted for regional policy .
In the longer term , the Commission has requested EUR 240 billion and at present a whole series of Member States is offering EUR 190 billion .
That cannot add up !
The gap is almost wider still for the agricultural funds .
The President-in-Office spoke of austerity constraints , but obviously some see making savings as the true objective of agricultural reform .
That would be a catastrophe for rural areas .
Many issues also still need to be clarified in greater detail , in particular those associated with the phasing-out arrangements : how much money will there be here , and for how long ?
Only sketchy information has been given about the Community initiatives , and we can only hope - and I am also directing this request to President Santer - that the detailed proposals will actually be presented before the end of March .
You see all of this adds to the importance we attach to a fundamental question .
On 1 May , the Treaty of Amsterdam will enter into force .
Parliament will then have full powers of codecision for the ERDF and the European Social Fund .
How are we supposed to exercise these if the texts are not available in good time ?
Mr President , in the debates in Council on Agenda 2000 it is clear that there is a certain indecision .
The reason for this is that there is a discrepancy between the objectives that are being put forward and the funds that are available to pay for them .
We agree that there must be a policy for farmers .
We agree that there must be a policy for economic and social cohesion .
We agree that there must be a policy for enlargement .
However , no one wants to pay to attain these objectives .
But there can be no policy without money and I want to be clear on this point .
Countries which contribute the most to the Community budget must know that they get a lot back in other areas , such as , for example , in increased exports to weaker Member States .
The Structural Funds were set up as a mechanism to counterbalance the effects of the single market .
Those who complain that they are paying too much must not forget that the budget of the whole of the European Union is currently equal to that of just one Member State , Spain .
I have two comments to make , firstly on agriculture and secondly on the Structural Funds .
It is absolutely clear that the common agricultural policy has created distortions , that agriculture needs to move in a new direction , and that the World Trade Organisation is bringing about a new reality .
We therefore need a new CAP which can help the really weak Member States .
These weaker Member States are the economically poorest countries in the European Union which will be badly affected by any partial renationalisation of the CAP .
Also weak are the small producers , on whom we must focus our attention .
Mediterranean products have been unfairly treated and we must not deal them any more harsh blows .
Regarding the Structural Funds , this House approved the financial package which the Commission initially introduced , which is why we are opposed to any attempts to further reduce it .
I shall reiterate three basic tenets expressed by the European Parliament back in November : firstly , expenditure on the Structural Funds and on the pre-accession funds must equal 0.46 % of Community GDP ; secondly , Objective 1 must have allocated to it exactly two thirds of the resources of the Structural Funds ; thirdly , the Cohesion Fund must continue to support all countries whose per capita GDP is less than 90 % of the Community average .
Indeed , this is provided for in the Treaties .
I want to point out that , especially with regard to the Structural Fund regulations , the agreement of the European Parliament is required .
It is crucial , therefore , that the Council and the European Council meeting in Berlin consider our proposals seriously .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank the groups and those Members who have spoken for making this debate a very constructive one .
Valuable comments and suggestions have been made and we will take these on board .
Overall , I think this debate has been encouraging in so far as we agree on the objectives and also on how they should be achieved , namely to actually conclude Agenda 2000 now so that we are once again free to devote our energies to the major tasks of which several speakers rightly reminded us today - the fight against unemployment in Europe , the fight for a better environment and the fight for greater social justice .
However , this is not what Agenda 2000 is about .
All those who are critical of the fact that there was no mention of this in the Council statement are forgetting that this Council statement concentrates - and indeed had to concentrate - on the Berlin summit .
Agenda 2000 is clearly defined and I warn against weighing it down with major new issues , some of which it is intended should be resolved at the Berlin summit and others at summits thereafter .
I note with due respect the criticism made of the way in which the negotiations are being conducted and the progress made so far .
I would permit myself to tell you , however - since some proverbs have already been cited - that there is also a very interesting German proverb which states that you should not praise the day before nightfall , and you should not criticise it either .
Those who are criticising the progress made in the negotiations are basing what they say on information which is passed out from confidential discussions and channelled to interested parties .
The presidency knows all about this .
We are very interested and sometimes also amused to see how events are reported in the individual capitals and in Brussels , obviously with the aim of making particular national interests appear in the right light and improving the starting position for representing those individual interests .
The presidency 's motto in these matters is : a gentleman does not boast of his conquests !
We will make no further comment on this , but will simply put in the necessary work on an overall compromise .
Admittedly , there is a noticeable difference here between the way in which issues can be discussed in Parliament and how they are discussed in the Council .
That is due to their different roles .
Parliament can decide with majorities : in the Council , we need all 15 to agree .
That is why it makes no sense whatsoever for us , as the presidency , to adopt any dogmatic positions or make categorical demands , or at any point to insist that certain conditions should be met .
Anyone who does that will fail completely when they need the agreement of 15 !
Please try to understand that . I would be delighted if it were possible to say to the Heads of State and Government : ' My friends , this is not actually about how much money goes to particular regions of Portugal , Spain , Ireland or Italy ; it is about the great European vision !
Forget the issue of who pays what and who gets what for once , and think instead of our great common goals ! ' It would be nice if this were the case .
I do not know a single European Head of State or Government who would be willing to discuss this for even a minute .
It is a shame that Mr Cunha from Portugal is no longer here ; I would like to advise him to say what he said in Lisbon and point out that it is not so important after all who pays what and who gets what .
It is actually about the great European vision !
I understand that ; it is to do with our different roles .
Unfortunately , we cannot operate in this way in the Council .
As a prerequisite for resolving the issues on which we have to agree , we have to try to reach a consensus .
This consensus must encompass the financial perspective .
That includes both sides , the revenue side and the expenditure side .
It must encompass the reform of the agricultural policy .
I fully agree with all those who have said that there are many reasons why we need a reform here . And it must encompass the future use of the Structural and Cohesion Funds , and of course the purpose of these funds is to put the principle of solidarity into practice within the European Union .
No one is calling this principle into question !
Those are the points on which we need to reach an agreement , and that creates the framework within which the individual policies can then develop and within which we tackle the problems .
One final word on net balances , an issue which was addressed several times .
Firstly , it is wrong to think that this is a German problem .
It was a group of states which , a long time ago , made this topic part of the discussions .
Incidentally , all the Member States recognise this .
When , if not in connection with a seven-year financial perspective , should this subject be discussed ?
Now is the only time it actually can be discussed .
The German Presidency is not at all happy that the issue has to be discussed now when we ourselves hold the presidency .
I can tell you now , as a German politician , that we could have represented our German interests much more forcefully , much more effectively , and probably also with a great deal more success - we would have been able to secure a much better result - if we had not held the presidency at the present time .
At one point I heard the Presidency being accused of representing its own national interests , and I cannot take note of this without giving a wry smile .
The opposite is true .
The reality of the presidency can be described in a classic French expression which was coined many years ago : la présidence coûte cher !
That also applies to Germany ; we know that very well .
We remain determined to conclude Agenda 2000 .
The prospects of doing so are good , now that some key benchmark figures have already been agreed .
Parliament 's support is important .
It will be particularly important after Berlin for there to be very close and trusting cooperation between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
At this stage , I can only extend to you the offer of this close and trusting cooperation .
Applause
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Welcome
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome the delegation from the House of Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina chaired by its president , Halid Genja 'c , and colleagues of this delegation representing all major political groups and three constituent ethnic groups of the country .
Applause
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been a special country for this Parliament and since the beginning of its mandate in 1994 we have followed carefully the events and tried to contribute to a just peace and the hope that multi-ethnic coexistence would be re-established .
May I wish you , on behalf of the European Parliament , all the best in your demanding work for a peaceful , flourishing and democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina where new generations will grow in the spirit of mutual understanding , tolerance and cooperations .
I should like to express my wish that the discussions you will have today at the first inter-parliamentary meeting with our delegation for relations with South-East Europe will be fruitful .
Situation in Kosovo
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Kosovo .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you are certainly keeping me busy today !
But we now turn to an extremely grave matter .
In this regard , I should like to give you the following information : in a few days ' time , the negotiations on resolving the crisis in Kosovo will resume in France .
At this stage I should like , on behalf of the presidency , to underline once again the European Union 's willingness to do all it can to bring the negotiation process begun in Rambouillet to a successful conclusion .
All of us would certainly have liked Rambouillet to have produced a more positive result .
Unfortunately , an agreement was not signed , but nonetheless these negotiations were not in vain .
They prepared the ground for both sides to give a written undertaking to continue this process , and that is an important step forward .
Our particular thanks go to the co-chairmen of the Conference , the foreign ministers of the United Kingdom and France , Mr Cook and Mr Védrine .
I should also like to say how much I appreciated the tireless efforts made by the three leaders of the negotiations : the EU special envoy , Wolfgang Petritsch ; the US special envoy , Christopher Hill ; and the special envoy of the Russian Federation , Boris Mayorski .
It was only through the international community presenting a united front that it was possible to bring the belligerent parties to the negotiating table and to lay the foundations for a possible final peaceful settlement .
In our view , the draft Rambouillet agreement achieves a fair balance between the interests of both sides .
While respecting the territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , it provides for substantial autonomy for Kosovo with a high degree of local self-administration , legislative bodies and its own judiciary .
Kosovo 's final status would then be determined three years later at an international conference .
An important matter , on which both parties still need to agree , is the military back-up to be provided for civilian implementation .
In their opening declaration at the Rambouillet talks , the Kosovar Albanians explicitly called for the rapid deployment of NATO troops , while the Belgrade side did at least say that it was prepared to discuss the scale and make-up of an international presence to implement the agreement .
That is a point on which a final agreement remains to be negotiated on 15 March .
In the meantime , the moderate political movements of the Kosovar Albanians have stated that they are willing to sign the agreement .
This is an encouraging sign and , above all , a warning sign to Belgrade not to stand in the way of a peaceful solution .
Our Foreign Minister , Mr Fischer , has just returned from a trip to Belgrade and Pristina , where , in his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , he once again impressed on both sides the fact that they would be the first to suffer if the peace process begun in Rambouillet were to fail .
The Kosovar Albanians would lose the opportunity for far-reaching autonomy , safeguarded by international troops .
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia would have to be prepared for increased international isolation .
At the same time , Mr Fischer reaffirmed the intention of the international community not to stand and watch if the belligerent parties refuse to cooperate .
NATO 's threat is meant seriously and is still real , because this is about the people of Kosovo .
They are the ones who are having to bear the burden of this conflict .
Well over 200 000 refugees and displaced persons still do not dare to return home to their villages .
The persistent local fighting and the Yugoslav army 's stepping-up of training exercises in recent weeks have caused further waves of refugees into Macedonia .
Both sides have to show , in the interests of their people , that they are equal to the political responsibility resting on them .
The international community is prepared to play its part .
The European Union already signalled during the negotiations that it would be involved in implementing the agreement .
This intention was confirmed by the General Affairs Council of 22 February 1999 .
The European Union will therefore take on a leading role .
The Commission has said that it is prepared to host a donor conference at an early stage , so that the work of reconstruction can begin as quickly as possible .
According to the Commission 's initial assessment , the damage runs to around EUR 330 million .
Houses which have been destroyed need to be repaired or rebuilt as swiftly as possible .
Refugees and displaced persons must be able to return home quickly .
Farmers need seed .
All of this is a basic precondition for peaceful everyday life to resume in Kosovo and for the situation to stabilise and get back to normal .
We know that the population will not be able to do this on its own and is dependent on our help .
We are prepared to give it , provided that the leaders of the Kosovar Albanians and the leadership in Belgrade show sufficient courage and are sufficiently far-sighted to accept the Contact Group 's proposals on 15 March .
In Rambouillet , a decisive step was taken towards reaching a peaceful settlement .
I urge both sides to follow this road to the end on the basis of the compromises already reached , and to refrain from taking any measures which might put at risk what has been achieved so far .
It is thanks to the international community 's determination and unity that the negotiations in Rambouillet have achieved some degree of success .
The European Union has made a decisive contribution to this and it will continue - both at the forthcoming talks in Paris and in the possible implementation of the agreement - to play the role incumbent upon it , in order to maintain peace and stability on its south-eastern border .
Mr President , the President-in-Office , Mr Verheugen , has provided you with a complete summary of the present situation in Kosovo .
There is no doubt that this is a crucial time and we hope that when the international community and the parties involved meet again on Monday in Paris , they will be able to sign an agreement , despite the news we have received of the recent clashes at the border with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The Commission is also concerned at the recent news about the separation of men and women in the southern part of the region .
As the President-in-Office already mentioned , Mr Fischer and my colleague Commissioner van den Broek visited Belgrade and Pristina on Monday , which is why I am standing in for the Commissioner today . Their aim was to put pressure on the parties to sign the Rambouillet agreement and arrange an international military presence to guarantee its application .
The talks in Belgrade did not give rise to much optimism and the three delegations were warned that they should not underestimate the resolve of the international community .
A meeting was also held in Pristina with the political leaders , who all expressed their support for the outcome of the Rambouillet Conference .
The Commission hopes that the Kosovo Liberation Army will overcome its hesitation and sign the agreement .
Some members of the KLA are perhaps suspicious of the fact that they will have to hand over their weapons when the agreement comes into force under international military supervision . But they must realise that it would be a grave mistake to delay or to reject the agreement .
Under the agreement , Kosovo 's autonomy must be established by promoting economic and social development in the region .
The European Commission is naturally prepared to fulfill its obligations in this respect , and once the agreement has been signed , reconstruction will be our main priority .
Measures have already been taken to assess the damage , and the results were analysed recently in Brussels with the international donor community . Although not all of Kosovo could be assessed , it is estimated that a minimum of EUR 350 million will be required for reconstruction work alone .
As soon as the agreement is signed , the Commission will organise a meeting of donors with a view to raising the funds needed to cover the costs of reconstruction .
The Commission itself will guarantee an adequate presence on the ground and it hopes to play a prominent and visible role in the reconstruction work .
At the same time , the development of civil society in all its dimensions must be encouraged , and this is an objective to which the European Union hopes to contribute along with other international organisations such as the OSCE .
This is therefore the Commission 's position on this important issue .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I should like to fully endorse the picture presented and the views expressed by the presidency and the Commission on this matter .
Our biggest problem is , of course , that for peace we need partners , but that we still only have two opponents who are hardly prepared to become real partners .
It is also difficult to become a partner under pressure , but we have no alternative other than to exert this pressure on both the Serbian and the Kosovar-Albanian sides .
As far as the Serbian side is concerned , and there is no need to waste words in passingmoral judgement on Milosevic and other Serb leaders , I just have one concern - and I do not know whether the presidency would like to comment on this - which is that the actions , in themselves perfectly understandable , of the High Representative Carlos Westendorp with regard to Republika Srpska , by being taken at this particular time , just a few days before the Conference reconvenes in Rambouillet , might harden the resolve of the Serbian side .
I am thinking here of the decision made in Brcko , but even more of the decisions on staffing concerning Poplasen , which ultimately also led to Dodic 's resignation , who is of course to some extent our ' ally ' on the Serbian side in Republika Srpska .
That is a question I am asking myself .
I hope that this has been well coordinated and well thought out .
As far as the Kosovar-Albanian side is concerned , I should like once again to say loudly and clearly here that all of us who hold talks with liberation movements or resistance movements , whether it is the Kurds on the one hand or the Kosovar Albanians on the other , have a duty to insist that they adopt a peaceful , cooperative position , a position on the basis of which a compromise can be reached .
I believe - as the Commissioner has also said - that some things have already started to happen : on the KLA side too , forces which are more willing to compromise have come to the fore , and I still say that if these resistance movements want the solidarity and support of the international community , then they too must be prepared to cooperate and compromise .
The final point which I should like to underline clearly once again , and which I would ask to be taken into account in the position we adopt at the talks in Rambouillet , is as follows : without military back-up , the whole initiative does not make any sense , and it will be years - as we have of course also seen in Bosnia - before a real solution is reached here .
Please , stand firm where the military back-up for peace is concerned !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we discussed Kosovo here four weeks ago , it was clear to those who know the facts that nothing tangible in terms of agreements would come out of Rambouillet .
The fear that Milosevic is above all playing for time has , of course , proved to be well founded .
The deadline 's being put back three times was also only to be expected .
Milosevic knows our weaknesses , but he does not know how determined we are .
This is now also true of the hardliners on the Albanian side .
Despite Rambouillet and despite the agreement reached in October last year between Mr Holbrooke and Milosevic , Serb soldiers have , in the meantime , moved into Kosovo and are creating a gauntlet which has to be run to cross over into Macedonia and Albania .
There are 4 500 new heavily armed soldiers on the Macedonian border and 1 500 on the Albanian border .
This warlike activity is frightening the Albanians and of course putting them to flight , and we are standing by and watching , as is our wont .
We are not doing anything ; we are thinking about reconstruction , but I think that first we need to make sure that there are no refugees before we think about reconstruction and go grovelling in Belgrade .
At the same time , the inglorious Lord Owen - of whom we all still have painful memories from the war in Bosnia - puts in an appearance and makes the abstruse proposal actually to offer Milosevic compensation for Kosovo by separating Republika Srpska from the State of Bosnia , which is recognised under international law , and allowing him to annex it .
As long as ideas of this kind lurk at the back of the mind of a good many negotiators , Milosevic will succeed in stalling us and keeping the source of the blaze , Kosovo , alight .
He will continue to drive the Kosovar Albanians out ; he is of course experienced in ethnic cleansing .
And in the end there will simply be fewer Albanians in Kosovo , in whose minority rights no one will really be interested any more , still less in defending them .
That , then , is my realistic assessment of the situation and those are the reasons for my fears .
But against my better judgement , I am still hoping for an agreement in Rambouillet and I have done all I can to influence the Albanians .
Only it must be clear - as Mr Swoboda has already said - that there should be no agreement unless it includes military monitoring !
Unless this is the case , any talk of reconstruction is likewise to no avail .
I wish the negotiating parties , and above all the Europeans , who thank God are also sitting at the negotiating table , success with all my heart , because the implementation of the Dayton Agreement in Bosnia - and it has already been pointed out that this is , unfortunately , like trying to square the circle - would also be made easier if Milosevic were finally to consider his real duties as a Yugoslav politician and abandon his aim of a greater Serbia .
However , it would be better for everyone in the region , and in particular the Serbs , if Milosevic were at last forced , as indeed he should be , to answer for his war crimes in The Hague .
Mr President , many people in Europe , not least in my own country , are opposed to the idea of too far-reaching a process of Europeanisation .
They are made uneasy by the prospect of national self-esteem being replaced by a far stronger sense of European identity .
The developments in the Balkans show just how wrong they are , and how important it is to ensure that the process of Europeanisation makes rapid progress in every European country , without exception .
We all possess our own national historical heritage .
It helps us to retain our sense of identity in an ever-expanding world , whether we be Bavarians or Germans , Gascons or Frenchmen , Smålanders or Swedes .
In view of this we need a common European identity , based on a recognition of the freedom and equal worth of individuals - values that constitute Europe 's most valuable contribution to the world community .
In our time , no area of Europe has had more ground to cover in this respect than the Balkan countries .
They still retain the ethos of national self-interest and intolerance which the European countries , thanks to a deeper level of cooperation , have managed to overcome , although the pace has sometimes been slow .
It is both right and essential that Parliament and the EU as a whole should concentrate their efforts on reaching an agreement that will put an end to the bloodshed in Kosovo and pave the way for a lasting peace .
As Liberals , we regard Rambouillet and the continuing negotiations as a step along that road .
There is no call for an international military operation in Kosovo .
However , our commitment in the Balkans should go considerably further .
We have to help the people to overcome their petty , narrow-minded nationalism so that each race can see itself in a broader context than as exclusively Orthodox Serb in the case of the Serbs , or Albanian Muslim in the case of the Kosovans .
When the guns fall silent and the killing stops , then we will have to face the real challenge , namely to spread a sense of being European throughout the Balkan countries , in order to create a society characterised by tolerance and a recognition of the freedom and equal worth of individuals , so that in the future it will be possible for the people of the Balkans to be part of the wider European community .
Mr President , I should like to make a few comments .
Firstly , it is our opinion that there can be no military solution to the problem in Kosovo .
Secondly , because of their unilateral nature , the threats made by NATO , the USA and the European Union are simply helping to reinforce the most extreme elements and are making it more difficult to find a political solution .
Thirdly , focusing attention on the acceptance of NATO troops by the new Yugoslavia underscores the priorities of NATO , which is pushing for military presence for its own geopolitical aims in the context of the new order of things .
Fourthly , the solution that is going to be reached , leaving open the question of the independence of Kosovo , threatens to open up a Pandora 's box in the Balkan region and to embroil all the countries in that region .
Finally , is it not perhaps hypocritical for us to speak about the Kosovar Albanians , who indeed need our support , while ignoring the fact that thousands of Kurdish refugees are facing expulsion in Turkey and we say nothing about this ?
Mr President , naturally the Greens are in favour of an international commitment to achieving a peaceful solution in Kosovo .
We also support the presence of a peacekeeping force , should one be required , on condition that it complies with international law and has a mandate from the UN .
However , it is clear that the really vital work will remain to be done once a peace treaty has been signed . In such a situation , a European civil peace corps , like the one decided on by Parliament on the basis of my report , could play a major role .
There is also a need for a stability pact in the former Yugoslavia and south-east Europe generally .
I cannot help thinking of my own region , namely the Nordic countries , where during the last 200 years , in the wake of centuries of warfare , we have managed to find satisfactory ways of cooperating without damaging the sovereignty of the individual countries .
During the past 200 years , some new Scandinavian states have come into existence , and in all probability there will be more in the future , just as has come about in the former Yugoslavia .
The setting-up of new states need not pose a threat to freedom , provided there are stable and close cooperation procedures in place .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I cannot help but detect a whiff of Munich in this whole European approach to the Kosovo issue . We continue to refuse to speak of the attackers and the attacked , placing the Kosovar Albanians and Mr Milosevic 's regime on the same footing and believing that they must reach a compromise .
Yet we know very well that it is mainly Belgrade that is blocking progress . We know and must never forget that there have been thousands killed in Kosovo , that there are hundreds of thousands of refugees and that this tragedy was certainly not provoked by the so-called Kosovar extremists , but was planned by Mr Milosevic , as has been established , both politically and legally , in reports .
We hope that you will succeed in obtaining an agreement and that you will be able to implement it .
But we also have serious doubts since we know that as long as that man is in Belgrade , there will be no peace for the Kosovars , nor any democracy for the Serbs .
We will continue to be confronted with the threats of destabilisation , as we saw once again last week in Bosnia .
Therefore , the structure you are building with so much skill , patience and imagination is a structure that is not founded on any real principle of democracy or the rule of law .
It is a structure that ultimately simply serves to shore up this tyrant in Belgrade who has massacred in Bosnia and who has massacred in Kosovo , and who will continue to do so because his power rests on massacres , on the negation of democracy and on the negation of the rule of law .
I have no illusions , but the Council must finally implement a common European policy and confront this problem of democracy in Belgrade and then clearly confront it in Kosovo too .
Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his statement .
I have to say , however , that I cannot agree with Mrs Pack 's negative view of what has been achieved so far .
I believe there has been some considerable progress .
But I recognise the point she is making that , until we get final agreement , we actually have nothing .
Therefore the events of the next week or so are going to be crucial .
We must have an agreement .
I am not as concerned as Mrs Pack and other speakers have been that there has been delay in the agreement .
What we must try to get out of these negotiations is clearly an agreement that works and will be enforceable .
The price for that is a few weeks ' delay .
After all that has gone on it is probably a price that is worth paying .
But we have to keep to our principles here : firstly , we have to keep the contact group together and on board ; we have to make sure there is full solidarity between EU Member States - any weakening by any one of the Member States will undermine the push for a final agreement ; we have to recognise again that what we are talking about is autonomy for Kosovo while respecting the territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
Also , we have to make it clear that we will not tolerate war crimes and other criminal activities and that we have the clear intention of bringing criminals to book once there is an agreement .
We are not prepared to let people get away with some of the activities they have got away with in the past .
We still very much need to push that message home in relation to Bosnia .
I have to say , in disagreement with at least one speaker , that I do not believe this agreement will work without a military presence .
We all have to recognise the sensitivity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to having foreign troops in its territory but , nonetheless , it will not work without a military presence .
But we must not commit a single fighting man until we are sure we have a peace agreement .
We must not endanger the lives of European or American troops without that agreement .
Similarly , the European Community must be prepared to spend not a single penny on reconstruction until we are sure we have an agreement .
When we are clear that we have agreement then we should push very hard to reconstruct Kosovo and , in particular , deal with the question of refugees and displaced persons .
If we really want peace then the European Union has to be very proactive once there is agreement .
But we have to have an agreement first .
Mr President , I should particularly like to say that I fully agree with my friend , Mr Dupuis .
The real problem is Mr Milosevic , just as the problem in Iraq is Saddam Hussein .
To make peace , you need two people : to wage war , one is sufficient .
We should not forget that .
In our view , that means two things : firstly , we need credibility on our side , and we need to demonstrate our credibility when we talk about democracy .
In an international context , democracy is nothing other than peoples ' right to self-determination , which is something people love to talk about , but which , once they have won a war , they quickly forget .
This has time and again proved to be a curse for humanity .
Secondly , we should not labour under any illusions , and here I agree with Mr Titley : without a military presence , there will be no peace here .
It is absolutely essential .
It should not be prolonged indefinitely , but it must be there , it must be perceptible , and it must actually ensure that the commitments or promises signed up to are kept .
We certainly do not want to shut out the Serbian people ; Serbs are also Europeans and some day they too will have a right to belong to Europe , but that can only be the case under a genuinely civilised regime , and not under a totalitarian dictatorship , which is what Milosevic 's system is .
Applause
Mr President , the tension over Kosovo has risen in the last few days .
It has come to be a kind of political cliff-hanger , and in a few days ' time we shall see the start of a new phase in the talks process .
What will be the follow-up to the conclusions of Rambouillet ?
That is the question which is naturally exercising people 's minds both here and elsewhere .
The international clock is running , and which of the two parties will be the first to accept the Rambouillet conclusions ?
What steps will be taken against those who do not accept them ?
These are the most pressing questions at the moment .
The Kosovo Albanians appear to be close to accepting the conclusions , but Milosevic is still wrestling with the question of his sovereignty .
Can he agree to having military forces in his Federal Republic ?
The Serbian presence in Kosovo has intensified , and that too is cause for concern .
What is Milosevic 's aim here ?
These are questions which will have to be answered in the next few days .
My hope is simply that the parties will accept the conclusions of Rambouillet .
They contain the germ of a solution for the longer term , even though no one will be happy with every aspect of them .
But it will not hurt anyone in the region to learn how to compromise .
That has always been my group 's line in this conflict too .
Unilateral solutions lead to unilateral consequences , so they are not real solutions .
But if Rambouillet is step A , then step B has to be an international military presence .
And that certainly has to be a longer-term military presence .
How are we to organise that ?
As a question , that is at least as interesting as the question of when Rambouillet will be concluded .
What role will the European Union play in that ?
I think we have to seize the opportunity to debate how the Amsterdam Treaty is to be implemented and how the European Union can play a part in this kind of area in future .
That will doubtless require unanimity within the EU .
And I hope unanimity will be maintained in the immediate future , because without it we shall not be able to play a meaningful role here .
We must also be prepared to enforce the Rambouillet agreement by military force if necessary , if the Serbs persist in rejecting it .
But ultimately a political solution must of course be preferably to a military one .
Mr President , we too hope that the Rambouillet accords will be signed and will somehow bring peace to Kosovo .
Regrettably the first signs do not augur well , not only because of the troops being deployed around Kosovo by the Serbian Government , but also because of an extremely disquieting episode , namely the issuing of a warrant for the arrest of certain KLA representatives , three of whom have been negotiators at Rambouillet .
Clearly we cannot turn up with mere aspirations , but must have a proper policy demanding that the treaty be signed and not postponed indefinitely .
I disagree with Mr Titley , who believes that an agreement must be reached , even if it takes time : more time means more deaths and a further deterioration in the situation .
The deal must therefore be clinched immediately , and it must be a tough one with peace as its goal .
One question which must be addressed is the need for the members of the contact group to speak with a single voice , and for there to be close cooperation between the European Union and the USA so as to maintain a united front .
We must not fall out of step , because Milosevic exploits any gaps to pursue his policy of procrastination in an effort to avoid the day of reckoning when harsh conclusions will be reached .
What is also needed here is a broader view of the Balkan problem .
The signing of an agreement cannot be the end of the matter : a more general plan is now needed to bring peace throughout the Balkans .
A conference should be convened to this end , and I believe that the Council , under the German Presidency , could begin working in this direction .
Mr President , the Rambouillet peace process should be supported for one simple reason .
We have nothing better !
Nevertheless , we are forced to realise that it has not been possible to square the circle .
Milosevic is still refusing to allow a military intervention force in Kosovo , and the KLA is refusing to disarm and be satisfied with autonomy .
The Kosovars ' weakness , their political fragmentation , is Milosevic 's strength .
You cannot help thinking that both sides have simply used the break in the negotiations to arm themselves for the forthcoming spring offensive .
The flurry of political activity , on the part of both the European presidency and the United States , has done nothing to change this .
Once again , as has been the case so often before in the Balkans , this situation is exposing the weaknesses of the so-called international community .
NATO is , admittedly , still ready to give the order to go into action , but the credibility of the only western military alliance to remain intact has suffered in Kosovo , not only because of the jealousy which keeps on surfacing between the United States and France , but also , and above all , because of the European partners ' hesitation to become involved in a cost-intensive military operation which might last for years .
We can only continue to note this lack of political will with regret , and call on the Europeans finally to make up their minds about what we call the common foreign and security policy !
Mr President , I too would like to stress that the basic condition for a just solution to the problem in Kosovo is solidarity among Member States of the European Union .
I have to say , however , that reaching an agreement comes first and in this I agree with Mr Titley .

We must reach an agreement which will guarantee the integrity of the borders in the Balkans , a request that has been put forward by all the Balkan countries : Bulgaria , Albania , Greece and Romania . Only if a specific agreement can be reached on how to solve the problem of the autonomy of the region will we be able to say that military presence will have a positive impact .
At present , this region is full of memories .
Today in Greece we have French , English , German and Spanish people who are visiting the cemeteries of English , French , German , Bulgarian and Serb people who died in the First World War .
I would therefore like to stress the need to reach an agreement which , as I said , must guarantee current borders .
When this agreement has been reached , the armed forces which are currently massing in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will be able to play a more constructive role .
In European terms , Kosovo is not another Iraq .
While we welcome the American presence in the region , nevertheless this issue is essentially a European Union issue , which is why we need solidarity among all Member States of the European Union in dealing with it .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon

VOTES
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , I would ask that the reports by Mr Sarlis and Mr Swoboda be referred back to committee pursuant to Rule 129 .
These two reports present the European Parliament with a heavy responsibility : promoting the liberalisation of international goods transport by rail .
The Commission directives , to which these reports refer , contain no more than technical provisions and do not recommend this solution .
In the Council , the governments of the Member States are divided on this issue .
Moreover , the railway workers , their unions and the European Trade Union Confederation expressed their opposition to such an approach through a European day of action and strikes , which was widely respected , and during talks with each of the two rapporteurs .
For all these reasons , I call on Parliament not to go down this road and to refer these two reports back to committee .
Mr President , I can oppose this both as rapporteur and on my own account .
I should like to make the following quite clear : firstly , rail freight has been declining for years , as has employment in the sector .
That is why it is absolutely essential and high time to reform the railways .
That is the idea behind my own and Mr Sarlis 's reports .
Secondly , it is unfortunate that the Commission rejected some of our points yesterday .
That is why it is also high time to explain our point of view clearly to the Commission .
We are not calling for unlimited , broad-brush liberalisation ; we are calling for a sensible approach towards giving the railways more of a European dimension .
We have to achieve this , and that is why I really do ask that we put this to the vote today .
We have discussed it at length in the committee ; Mrs Moreau was the only one to vote against .
That is why it is important for us to vote today .
Applause
Mr President , I should like to express my support for Mrs Moreau 's proposal .
The Treaty of Amsterdam includes the concept of general interest services .
In a field such as rail transport , it is clear that this concept must take precedence over a liberalisation of rail transport services .
Yet today we have no framework directive that defines what a general interest service actually is .
We believe it is impossible to liberalise this key sector or open it up to competition . Indeed , it is a sector in which , as Mrs Moreau said , workers are very active in defending not just their jobs but also the general interest .
I believe it is premature to discuss this subject before we have a framework directive on general interest services .
Like Mrs Moreau , I would also ask that this report be referred back to committee .
Mr President , first of all I have to say that I am against referral back to committee .
Today Parliament must vote on both of these reports .
The majority opinion of all the groups in this House is that the issue of the gradual liberalisation of rail transport must at last move forward .
I repeat that , at this stage , we are talking about gradual liberalisation only in respect of the transport of goods .
We have been debating this matter in the European Parliament since January 1998 , when we adopted a special resolution in which we said that we wanted to go forward with gradual liberalisation .
The majority opinion , if not the unanimous opinion , in the Committee on Transport and Tourism led to the findings that we are putting before the House .
I must also say that since 1970 there has been a Commission directive which calls for partial liberalisation .
Nothing has been done in the 27 years since then , while we have liberalised sea transport , air transport and road transport .
We must now move forward and show the Council and the Commission what we can achieve .
Applause
( Parliament decided against referral back to committee )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , it is a well-known fact that the construction projects relating to the trans-European transport network are virtually at a standstill as a result of a lack of political will , regardless of the many speeches of goodwill and good intentions .
That is why we are backing the amendment tabled by the rapporteur , who rejects the Commission 's suggestion to revise and amend the guidelines by producing new White Papers .
We simply cannot accept the proposal that only those seaports with an annual goods turnover of at least 1.5 million tonnes can be considered as interconnection points for developing intermodal transport .
We are voting against this amendment as it will most likely be detrimental to the seaports in my country and elsewhere , condemning them to isolation and cutting them off from funding that would enable them to create intermodal systems and establish satisfactory links with the major transport networks . It would prevent them from developing on an equal footing with the others .
Proposals to extend those same criteria to seaports in the ultraperipheral regions are doubly unacceptable . They would affect , for example , the seaport of Ponta Delgada in the Azores .
The implementation of the single market is leading to a constant increase in mobility , especially in the transport of people and goods .
The needs of sustainable development and the Union 's international commitments in this area make it essential to ensure that production of CO2 and other greenhouse gases falls .
These two factors are leading to the introduction of an integrated trans-European transport network , including an intermodal dimension which is set to develop .
Given the ever growing traffic jams that are increasingly suffocating our towns , this approach is ultimately likely to generate substantial savings , not only in terms of environmental costs but economic costs too .
I share your rapporteur 's view that it is very prudent of the Commission to propose the inclusion of inland ports and intermodal terminals in addition to sea ports , as they form interconnection and transshipment points within the trans-European combined transport network .
Moreover , I fully agree that the motorway or road element providing the initial and / or final transport of goods and passengers within the trans-European combined transport network must be as short as possible .
In the interests of clarity and coherence , I also believe that Parliament should stand by its opinion that Community aid for the trans-European transport network must be allocated to port infrastructures but not extended to include superstructural investments .
The latter can be eligible for aid under the Cohesion Fund or the Structural Funds .
I voted for the Piecyk report both for its intrinsic merit in that it clarifies the issue of the intermodal connections within Europe and , in particular , for Amendment No 13 referring to the intermodal links joining Spain and Portugal .
It seems to me both appropriate and timely to replace Essen project No 8 , the Lisbon-Valladolid motorway , with the new definition to be found in this amendment .
That would provide central and northern Portugal with rail and port infrastructures as well as a complete road network once extensions have been made to the IP5 highway , which is scheduled for rapid conversion into a motorway , as planned in the annex .
The objective of this report is to clarify the situation of sea ports , inland ports and airports in the overall framework of the workings of trans-European transport networks .
For the internal market to operate efficiently and to ensure that all regions within the EU can compete on a competitive basis then the completion of the trans-European transport network must be made a priority for all national EU governments .
However , it is clear that European Community financing does not meet the requirements and challenges to complete trans-European transport networks despite the beneficial effect that such investments have in developing local and national economies .
It is clear that the development of such networks will create a higher number of jobs as well as put in place infrastructural projects which could improve the economic competitiveness and productivity of particular regional economies .
The European Commission commissioned a report on the issue of whether public / private sector partnerships should be given a role in the development of trans-European transport network projects within the European Union as envisaged by the Maastricht Treaty .
This report concluded that public / private partnerships would be an integral part of such developments .
The European Commission has now , quite rightly , invited Member States to identify specific projects which will be suitable for the public / private partnership approach .
Member States are invited to involve the private sector as soon as possible in the development of such infrastructural projects .
From an Irish perspective , I welcome on a broader level the initiative of the Irish Government which has sought to give private firms the opportunity to fund major public projects under the partnership approach within the workings of the Irish economy .
We must be realistic about the state of play of European Structural Fund receipts for Ireland after the conclusion of the next Community Support Framework .
In the year 2006 , Ireland will be receiving only 20 % of its present allocation of EU structural funds .
The Irish Government must be innovative and proactive in devising new ways of compensating for the reduction of EU regional and cohesion fund monies .
I welcome the opportunity given to the private sector to have a tangible role in addressing how best public project initiatives and programmes which have previously been funded by EU monies can , in the future , be funded by the private sector .
Commission Neil Kinnock has already noted the role that the private sector can play in the transport sector .
Representatives of Irish and European businesses from the economic and social sectors which will be receiving a shortfall in EU structural funds should take the opportunities being afforded to them to see how best they can enter into partnership with the state for the development of their respective regions .
The situation in France is serious : our ports are less and less competitive , shipyards are closing and there are fewer and fewer seafarers .
The report by my colleague Mr Piecyk forgets that a port can only exist as part of an overall maritime chain , that is , repair , construction and trade itself .
Yet these three activities have been progressively separated to each die a slow death .
A good example of this is the independent port of Le Havre .
This is a jewel among French shipyards .
It was where some of the greatest ships were built , such as the ' France ' and the ' Club Med 2 ' - a superb cruise ship with five masts , 134 metres long , with sails measuring 2 000 m2 , and steered by computer - as well as oceanographic vessels , cable ships , ferries and , above all , liners .
But now that is all over .
Already dealt a blow in 1979 by the sale of the liner ' France ' , the town , with its 30 years of communist management and CGT co-management , has just lost its port which will be shutting down in two years ' time .
On 9 November , the European Commission deemed illegal the FRF 1.8 thousand million in aid granted by the French Government to Le Havre 's workshops and shipyards , demanding that it be returned in accordance with the rules of competition .
Anybody taking over the port would therefore have to pay this back . As you can imagine , there have been no takers .
After having destroyed our agriculture and our farmers , our public services , our textile industry , our mines and coal industry , as well as our merchant navy , Brussels has now turned to our ports and our shipbuilding industries .
Brussels is refusing to adopt a policy of European preference in the building and repair of ships flying a national flag .
Brussels is banning all state aid and subsidies aimed at bailing out companies . Brussels is forcing any company that takes over a firm that has received aid to pay back all the public funds received .
Brussels is opening up our ports and shipyards to competition from those with cheaper labour costs .
Enough is enough ; there is no doubt that this sector is going to die a slow and painful death .
We refuse to accept this .
That is why the National Front proposes a fundamental reform of the sector , a reform of the tax system for shipowners and investments in port infrastructures .
We must encourage maritime investment , either through direct aid or fiscal measures .
We must protect the industrial know-how of our highly skilled workers and re-introduce Community preference for the use , construction and repair of boats flying a national flag - as the United States did long ago - while penalising by means of compensatory taxes those vessels that fail to respect these preferential measures .
With its moves towards free trade and deregulation , Brussels is trying to drown our seafarers , eliminate our workers and sink our ports .
We must resist such measures .
Mr President , we have just voted against a European Parliament report on the liberalisation of the railways , an issue which , judging by what has happened in the UK , could have serious social and economic consequences for the European rail sector .
For the time being the report deals with the liberalisation of international goods transport , but there is no doubt that the aim is also to liberalise passenger transport , both domestic and international .
It opens up the possibility for any entity , person or group , not necessarily with previous experience of or links with the rail sector , to gain access to a business , regardless of their national origin and the Member State in which they are applying .
That business would enable them to use infrastructures built with state money and gain access to profitable parts of the rail network , while maintenance costs - in other words , the unprofitable aspect - would generally remain in state hands .
Instead of investing in improving the quality of public services in the various countries , linking up regions nationally and internationally - a vital task up to now and one that should continue - instead of accepting the need to modernise and rationalise the management of the railways in general in order to serve communities , instead of considering the very positive experience we have had of cooperation between public services , instead of improving the conditions of competition with other forms of transport , we are opting for unacceptable liberalisation , the consequences of which can only harm the sector as a whole .
To complement the judicial process of removing frontiers and allowing the free movement of people and goods , in January 1998 we adopted the Commission 's White Paper on rail transport in the European Union .
A number of key ideas were set out in the document .
The important thing at that time was to implement an ambitious and quality programme for national rail companies which were often in debt .
A year later , we are calling for the same thing : liberalisation of Europe 's railways for international freight transport , then progressively for national goods transport and for international passengers .
The gradual extension we are calling for is getting off to a very timid start .
Revitalisation is more necessary now than ever before and the only way to achieve it is by extending the laws of the free market to this vital area of the economy .
Our networks are finding it very difficult to move to a European scale .
The interconnection of existing networks poses both material and legal problems .
The grand axes are not being extended and free access to rail infrastructures is not always fully applied in practice .
Our national rail companies - together with our respective governments - are finding it very difficult to distinguish between managing transport infrastructures and operating railways .
We therefore still need to plan new measures and to define additional approaches to complement the existing provisions .
The ones I see as most necessary are flexible management that is better adapted to customers and open competition in a free market .
I therefore approve this new Sarlis report because I do not believe that roads should be the only modern and competitive infrastructures .
Rail has a fundamental role to play , especially on the eve of enlargement .
After the White Paper entitled ' A strategy for revitalising the Community 's railways ' , the European Commission is now proposing an ' infrastructure ' package , that is , a package allowing us to modify existing directives .
What is its aim ?
Essentially , it is designed to divide up the railway market and thereby speed up the move towards the liberalisation of goods transport .
We cannot accept this under the present circumstances .
Why seek at any price to redefine Directive 91 / 440 without even agreeing to first assess it ?
Between 1985 and 1995 , 500 000 jobs were lost in this sector .
How can we possibly believe that the Commission 's proposal to liberalise the market will provide an effective solution for the railway sector ?
We are not fierce opponents of the concept of liberalisation when it is well measured and well considered .
But in this case it is a matter of advocating blind competition , of opening up the lines to organisations other than the railway companies .
And what about passenger safety ?
What are going to be the respective responsibilities of these newcomers and the railway companies ?
The rail sector needs new impetus and we must encourage what is already taking place , namely , cooperation between national networks .
With the help of the reports submitted for our scrutiny , the Commission is giving a free hand to the implosion of this sector , and that is something we cannot accept .
Yesterday 's debates on the liberalisation of the railways were particularly important .
While not denying the solid work done by Pavlos Sarlis and Hannes Swoboda , I strongly oppose the Commission 's desire to impose a uniform liberal system on the railway sector .
It is not for us to question the forced march of the British towards the complete deregulation of their rail network , but the experience has clearly been a failure , from the point of view of both the consumers and the operators .
For the former , this privatisation has not led to the improvements previously heralded .
For the latter , the initial birth of several operators is now giving way to the reconcentration of the sector in the hands of a single company .
Although I accept that certain services cannot be run by the public sector alone , I believe that in the case of rail transport , only the public sector can absorb the costs of this operation which directly affects large numbers of people , falls within the scope of town and country planning and has many consequences for the environment .
When it comes to freight transport and the transport of certain sensitive goods in particular , the public sector is best placed to guarantee safety due to its status and its ethics .
Finally , the proposals submitted to us , which threaten to dismantle the very nature of universal service , forget two things .
The first is that the government will have to bear the cost of infrastructure investments , which means that it is the tax-payer who will initially pay .
The second is that if the operator is going to be able to satisfy its shareholders , it is going to have to make a profit .
We are therefore deluding ourselves if we believe that the consumer will see any reduction in fares .
On the contrary , he will often pay more as a result of higher fares .
These arguments may perhaps cause some people to smile .
But I believe that they cannot simply be brushed aside .
I shall therefore vote against these two reports and would call on the Commission to put forward new proposals that are more realistic .
There must be no more cursory deregulation .
As it seeks to increase the share of the railway sector in the transport of goods and persons , the liberalisation of rail transport naturally relates to sustainable development and respect for the European Union 's international commitments in terms of environmental protection .
As our rapporteur pointed out , the European Parliament 's wish , as expressed in its resolution of 13 January 1998 , is indeed to achieve the widest possible liberalisation of rail transport , even if this should take place in successive stages .
It is therefore very unfortunate that the Commission is making no proposals to this effect .
The liberalisation of rail transport principally rests on two pillars , which must be acted on as quickly as possible .
The first is the need to institutionally separate the business of operating rail services from that of maintaining railway infrastructures .
The second is the need to open up access to national networks under fair conditions and to grant the right of transit to new operators in order to allow them to face their competitors on an equal footing .
In this respect , our rapporteur 's amendments go in the right direction and are perfectly in keeping with the route outlined by Parliament .
Liberalisation must not of course result in reduced safety for railway users .
On the contrary , the very highest levels of passenger safety must be achieved .
It is therefore essential - and on this point I totally agree with the rapporteur - that those who manage the rail infrastructures take responsibility for operating and supervising the safety systems .
The challenges linked to developing the single market for rail transport warrant an in-depth analysis .
Today 's debate is therefore very welcome .
There is indeed a very real need to revitalise rail transport in Europe , and goods transport in particular .
Among other things , rail transport can reduce the nuisance caused by road transport .
But ideology - I would not go so far as to say dogmatism or excess - must not result in a total disruption of the rail sector .
I am thinking in particular of the desire for liberalisation , as proposed or sought by the Commission .
I am aware of the extent to which the Commission is committed to the virtues of competition .
But in this instance , excessive development of intermodal competition would most certainly prove damaging to the rail sector as a whole .
That does not mean that nothing should be done , that the status quo is a solution .
On the contrary , we should prepare the rail sector to face its own future .
That is why the market may be opened up , but progressively and between equals who must bear the same responsibilities .
The provisions relating to authorised candidates , which provide simple intermediaries with the power to reserve capacities , are a threat to the railways .
They actually introduce discrimination between the players : rail undertakings would continue to bear investment costs , and often the debts of the past , while being relegated to the role of a sub-contractor vis-à-vis these new intermediaries , which would be free to select the most profitable market segments .
If the Member States want to allow companies other than rail undertakings to reserve rail capacities , then let them do so by means of their national legislation .
They do not need the authorisation of a directive .
I would like to end by reminding you that rail undertakings are not just commercial companies . They also fulfil a public service role and play an important part in town and country planning .
Everyone today agrees that for transporting people and goods over short and medium distances , the railway is an instrument of the future more than ever before .
That is why it must be developed , modernised and adapted commercially to stand up to the fierce competition from the road network .
The decline of railways over recent years , and goods transport in particular , is very evident .
Faced with this situation , European policy has been to liberalise the railways .
Since the early 1990s , a whole series of first generation directives have contributed to this .
Some of these have yet to be fully transposed into the legislation of all the Member States .
Before moving any further in this direction we must therefore take stock of the present situation and assess the effectiveness of the decisions taken to liberalise and internally reorganise public services .
Yet the Commission is already seeking to take liberalisation even further and to totally open up goods transport by rail to competition , when liberalisation has to date been limited to combined transport .
The Commission believes that logistics companies should also have access to railway infrastructures .
Railways must clearly be made more competitive in comparison to roads .
Their very survival depends on this .
However , to totally open up the railways to competition risks dismantling the public service , not to mention the fact that the system established by the directives to allocate rail infrastructure capacities is both costly and bureaucratic .
Those in charge must be independent of the railway company , and there must be a supervisory body to control all elements .
I therefore share the opinion of Mr Wibe , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , when he states that ' The cost of increased administrative burden in the Member States could easily outweigh the benefits in terms of increased efficiency ' .
It is for this reason that I am voting against the Sarlis and Swoboda reports .
We would like to express our satisfaction today with the two texts proposed by the Committee on Transport and Tourism concerning the 1991 directive on the development of the railways and the 1995 directives on the licensing of railway undertakings , and the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the charging of infrastructure fees .
The two rapporteurs should be congratulated on their excellent work .
These directives are a step in the right direction .
After having liberalised air transport and the gas and electricity market , the European Union could not ignore the railways for much longer .
Rail transport , which is very frequently used in Europe , has been experiencing a serious crisis for some years .
After having tried planned methods - nationalisation of railway undertakings , public status for employees , inflexibility within the market , significant deficits , and so on - which proved catastrophic in the Member States as a whole , the only way to now revitalise the railways is through liberalisation and a return to the market realities .
In this respect , some Member States have been able to react quicker than others and we must draw inspiration from the successful experiences in each of the Union 's Member States .
Europe 's consumers are demanding when it comes to both safety and also quality , particularly in terms of delays , prices , services , and so on .
Over recent years they have tended to move away from this form of transport .
Today we must give rail the means to regain a potentially large customer base .
This liberalisation must naturally be progressive and take place in stages , as our two rapporteurs have indicated .
The railways are a form of transport for the future for passengers and goods . But there is more to it than that .
Rail transport makes a major contribution to town and country planning and plays a very important role in rural and isolated regions , for example .
Moreover , in the fight against air pollution , rail - and the combined transport of goods in particular - is a political choice that we have always defended .
I am opposed to opening up rail transport to competition and to the deregulation proposed by the Commission and the Council .
The Amsterdam Treaty refers to general interest services but there is in fact no directive that defines its framework or guarantees the logic of public service , namely , equal access by people and territories to rail transport infrastructures and services on the one hand , and the adjustment of costs that guarantees the right to transport and movement on the other .
In the absence of such a framework , liberalisation is dangerous even if it is gradual .
It will increase the inequalities between the regions and the people of Europe , dismantle public services and , in most cases , be accompanied by a deterioration of social conditions for the workers in question .
Europe 's trade unions representing the rail transport sector were right to express their opposition to this plan .
Unfortunately , the areas that have already been liberalised have experienced a deterioration in the service to users , particularly the more modest of them .
I will be voting against the Sarlis and Swoboda reports and the related proposals for a directive .
Some liberalisation of the rail sector has already taken place , but without any proper evaluation exercise having been carried out .
Nevertheless , we know that in many cases the experience has not been especially encouraging .
Before any further steps are taken , the long-term implications of directives that are now in force and the effects they have produced must be considered .
Without questioning the philosophy of free enterprise in the use of rail infrastructures , we have to be realistic and realise that while agreeing in principle , it is vital to have attractive conditions for the exploitation of those services .
That being so , the sine qua non for those attractive conditions to exist must be modern infrastructures , and these can hardly be expected to exist in a country like mine where , for decades , nobody believed in trains and road transport won a huge advantage .
The railways have to be seen as a means of transport that is closely linked to others , since that is the only way to guarantee users satisfactory services and to ensure that all means of transport achieve maximum profitability .
For example , to take an issue in the news at the moment , it is inconceivable that a new airport is being built that will not be served directly by a major rail link , thus , incredibly , making access for over 10 million passengers a year possible only by road .
But what is at stake here is not only the existence of railway lines , however modern . It is equally vital to have a regular rail service , one that can only be provided by intercity rail links linking conurbations that have several million inhabitants .
Otherwise , in the case of a thinly populated hinterland near an airport , we inevitably fall into the vicious circle of laying on fewer trains because of the lack of demand ( only or nearly only airport users ) , which then puts people off using the trains because they are so infrequent ( after all , nobody wants to wait an hour for a train after a one and a half hour flight ) .
The three reports being put to the vote this week in the plenary should make it possible for the railways to enter the next millennium as a popular and successful means of transport .
The railways are an environmentally friendly transport system for goods and passengers which have a promising future , but whose potential is not being exploited adequately at present .
For it to be possible to take full advantage of this potential in the short term , far-reaching reforms need to be set in motion today .
There is no avoiding partial liberalisation in the railway sector .
Firstly , however , liberalisation is not the same as privatisation and , secondly , this partial liberalisation will be introduced progressively and with due consideration of the social aspects .
In this way , the ground will be prepared for developing the railways into an efficient and reliable mode of transport for the future - not least in Luxembourg , in the centre of Europe .
The European People 's Party and its Luxembourg members will ensure that this process of liberalisation in the railway sector is not half-hearted , but balanced and objective-driven .
Make no mistake : this is about the survival of the railways .
Action is needed now .
We have discussed three proposals for moving towards a liberalised rail system .
Although I too believe that going back to the railway policies of the past is no longer an option , as a politician and trade unionist the various strategies for moving towards greater liberalisation fill me with fear for the future .
After all , the heritage of a hundred years is being broken into pieces here , and we do need to ask ourselves whether the Commission 's policy - which always sees the liberalisation of the national and international economy as the only answer - is the right one , because where this policy leads is best illustrated by the example of a country with a highly developed rail system , such as Germany .
There is simply no end to the series of train accidents there ; this shows that making savings in the wrong place can be rather expensive and , even worse , that the staffing cuts which the railway companies have been forced to make are being made at the expense of safety .
Although Luxembourg was one of the countries which had the most to lose from a decline in rail traffic , it has held on to its railways , modernised them and downsized , in the only operation of its kind in Europe , and yet at the same time care was taken to ensure that no social hardship was suffered .
And is all of this now supposed to have been in vain ?
We are right to ask why directives such as Directive 91 / 440 , which has not even been transposed in all the countries yet , should now be hastily amended and whipped through Parliament and the Council of Ministers , and why they have not been given a longer trial .
In general , it seems to me that the Commission has once again been too perfectionist .
What is the point of having separate accounts for freight and passenger transport ?
Instead of simplifying matters , this is once again increasing bureaucracy .
It is true that there are proposals on the independent management of railway undertakings , on debt remission and the improved management of public finances , but at the same time the governments are reminded of their duty to guarantee access rights to international groupings for international rail transport .
On top of this , even at this early stage when the discussions have not even been concluded , the Commission is also being asked to take action on route pricing .
Does that mean that in the not too distant future , prices on routes through Luxembourg are to be calculated on the basis of the cheapest supplier ?
If so , then some interesting pay negotiations are in store for the unions .
At present , the impact of the new measures seems impossible to assess .
But a desire to ensure optimal infrastructure use is not , on its own , sufficient to yield improvements .
The best example of this are the ' freeways ' , which were announced with great ceremony .
Large maps were unveiled showing 25 of these lines , only seven of which are in operation , however .
And that too is only because the smallest railway company , the Luxembourg one , brought all its diplomatic skill to bear in the ' bureau unique ' .
The various railway companies have proved here by their exemplary cooperation that they can achieve something across borders .
Whether the Commission 's interfering in this way will improve matters , I have my doubts .
In any case , I do welcome the fact that the majority of the European Parliament has spoken out in favour of a more moderate approach and is proposing that the new directives should be introduced progressively - and this in spite of the Commission 's negative stance .
I shall therefore be voting against the Sarlis and Swoboda reports .
With its new proposals the Commission is delivering a coup de grace to public railway undertakings , while insisting on pushing forward with liberalisation , to the advantage of private interests and to the detriment of transport safety , public service and the rights of transport sector workers .
These proposals retain the basic philosophy which underlies the liberalisation process and which is characterised by the separation of the provision and maintenance of infrastructure on the one hand and the provision of rail transport services on the other .
In other words , public budgets are being asked to continue to bear the burden of infrastructure funding , while private railway undertakings are exploiting the capacity of the rail networks .
The Commission , however , does not stop at that . It has decided that infrastructure managers who will operate along private lines may also be private undertakings , in the context , of course , of the more general move towards privatisation of infrastructure by means of the funding and exploitation of infrastructure by private capital .
However , there are no safeguards for rail sector workers .
On the contrary , large-scale redundancies are being forecast and a regime of total flexibility in relation to the number and working conditions of rail sector workers is being promoted .
The reports under debate go much further than the Commission proposals . They call for the liberalisation of international passenger and freight transport both within Member States and internationally .
Neither the reports nor the package of proposals put forward by the Commission make any reference to the impact these measures will have on rail sector workers .
The easier access private undertakings will have to infrastructure is preparing the ground for the privatisation of the profitable activities of public railway undertakings and the overhaul of labour relations .
Furthermore , the bill that went through the Greek Parliament recently , which aims to bring Greek legislation into line with Community directives , is moving in the same direction and provides for the axing of thousands of jobs over the coming years .
The liberalisation of rail transport that is being put forward will not lead to the revitalisation of the railways , as has been hypocritically claimed , but it does jeopardise the notion of public service .
Against this background we can look forward to further increased charges . As one of the rapporteurs put it , ' the main reason why there are so few companies competing in railway operation is ( ... ) that the profitability in railway operation is too low ' .
Closing down unprofitable lines necessarily entails reducing rail networks , to the detriment of regional growth and the environment .
The repercussions we are already seeing in the other transport sectors that have undergone a process of liberalisation , our concerns for the fate of the public service , for the protection of the environment and regional growth , our diametric opposition to the practices of social dumping and to the policies aimed at overhauling labour relations , lead us to vote against these reports .
We are calling for a policy in the rail sector to support public undertakings and the development of the network so that it can meet the needs of the national economy , of rail users and of rail sector workers .
We are calling on the Commission to withdraw its proposals and we are calling on the governments of the Member States to reject these proposals in Council .
We hope that rail sector workers will make a concerted effort to overturn this unpopular policy , which promotes the profit-making management of the railway to the detriment of transport safety and the rights of rail sector workers and rail users .
Development of the rail sector and greater cooperation are both desirable and necessary , particularly from an environmental point of view .
The ever-increasing volume of traffic on our roads brings with it an increase in the number of road traffic accidents and the human tragedies that ensue .
However , the Commission 's proposals do not provide a solution to the problem . On the one hand , they represent further liberalisation and increased competition within the rail sector and , on the other , vice-like control and detailed regulation .
In my view , it is absurd for decisions on changes to train schedules , the drawing-up of discount schemes , reservation charges and so on to be taken at EU level .
The railways play a tremendously important role in large and sparsely populated countries such as Sweden .
For obvious reasons , certain sections of the railway network have never been profitable , but it is still essential for the traffic on them to be maintained if the main objective is to ensure that the whole country ' lives ' .
The future of the rail sector must therefore be discussed thoroughly in the Member States themselves before any further directives are adopted at EU level .
In view of the fact that transport networks cross borders , there is a need for cooperation in the framing of transport policy , which also includes rail transport .
However , this report is far too detailed , particularly when it descends to the level of timetables .
I have therefore voted against paragraph 21 in the report .
Mr President , the Tamino report is extremely important in that it describes how the increased use of electrical appliances , computers and cellular phones has led to the presence of more sources of microwaves and electromagnetic fields in the environment .
How radiation from these appliances affects people 's health in the short and long term is something we know very little about .
One might say that we are guinea pigs in our own development .
Nevertheless , we suspect that radiation can cause cancer , changes in the workings of the nervous and immune systems , cell activity and so on .
The conclusions reached by the Commission and the committee of experts are clearly at odds with a large number of scientific publications , which have been ignored in the Commission 's proposal .
In its recommendation to the Member States , the Commission states that there is no convincing evidence to suggest that extremely low-level magnetic fields cause genetic damage and that they are therefore unlikely to lead to the onset of cancer .
In fact , it is not possible to make such an assertion when no one really knows the answers , and when there are others who take a different view .
In this case , the precautionary principle must be applied .
According to the World Health Organisation , it is not possible to guarantee that electromagnetic fields do not cause harm , and people are becoming increasingly concerned .
Italy , Luxembourg and Sweden all have stricter provisions than those proposed by the Commission .
We should be following this path too , until our knowledge is more complete .
Therefore , the precautionary principle must be applied .
We should lay down minimum safety distances from housing and workplaces for the siting of structures which generate electromagnetic fields .
I sincerely regret that we have not adopted all the amendments tabled by the Greens as well as by Mr Tamino , in particular those relating to safeguards and quality criteria for the long-term effects of electromagnetic radiation .
The Commission 's recommendation for limiting the exposure of the public to electromagnetic fields is concerned with avoiding recognised acute effects of using such things as telephone equipment and electronic equipment , and the acute effect of the growing number of high-voltage transmission lines in residential areas .
Generally speaking , the June Movement is a great supporter of applying the precautionary principle .
However , we also think that the application of the precautionary principle should be critically assessed case by case .
And in this case , we have come to the conclusion that the European Parliament should resist the desire for very restrictive recommendations in this area .
In his work on the report , Mr Tamino wanted to take into account the possible long-term effects of magnetic fields .
This topic has attracted the interest of the general public for many years and has been the subject of intense research over the past 20 years .
However , it has not been scientifically proven that there are health effects , such as the development of cancer , in the long term .
At the moment , large-scale research projects are being carried out to assess the significance of electromagnetic fields in the development of cancers , for example .
We therefore believe that it is inappropriate to react to isolated studies , and that the EU should wait for the imminent completion of the WHO 's major evaluation project , amongst others , before embarking on legislation dealing with possible long-term effects .
Research in this area , such as that carried out by the Anti-Cancer Association in Denmark , is very extensive , and on the basis of the results of this research , we unfortunately cannot support Mr Tamino 's very restrictive amendments .
If the research results expected soon from the WHO and others provide supporting evidence , we would of course be glad to assist in legislation to protect people against possible long-term effects .
But until then , we will stand by the advice we have received from the Anti-Cancer Association .
Nobody in this House can reasonably dispute the fact that the health of our populations and the protection of consumers and the environment are major concerns which must guide our thoughts and our actions .
Nor can anyone claim that our societies could do without electrical energy and the electromagnetic fields it creates without suffering catastrophic results .
Our task is therefore to ensure that its use is nevertheless accompanied by the harmonising and preventive measures needed to protect our populations .
It is therefore essential that our decisions be accompanied by all the necessary scientific precautions .
I therefore share the views of our rapporteur .
Protection measures must be regularly updated and reassessed in the light of the increase in our scientific knowledge and the patterns of usage of energy transport systems and types of device likely to increase the exposure of consumers and the population to electromagnetic fields . This is not to impede technological progress , but to optimise the benefits by constantly reducing the risks .
Given the current absence of a single Europe-wide system for measuring the conformity of devices and the need to introduce a uniform control system which is not an obstacle to the single market , it is wise to call on the Commission to propose in the very near future a system to continuously review devices that generate magnetic fields which takes account of their relative intensity and the actual length of time they are used .
I will therefore support the proposal for a recommendation , as amended .
We voted in favour of the Tamino report on restricting exposure to electromagnetic fields , both because we agree with what it says and because we wish to highlight the importance of laying down rules that will not result in Sweden having to make its own rules any less exacting .
The Commission 's proposal gives rise to such a possibility , since it contains less stringent rules than those currently in force in Sweden ; Italy and Luxembourg are in the same situation .
We should also like to say that we are most surprised that the Swedish Government , in the Council of Ministers , according to the minutes of 5 February , did not support Italy 's demand for a tightening-up of the rules relating to both the short-term thermal effects and the long-term risks , for example of cancer , which largely corresponds with the Tamino report .
On the contrary , it seems that Sweden , in some instances , recommended a watering-down of the Commission 's text .
We find this remarkable in the extreme .
The report is extremely important from an environmental point of view , but it also contains a great deal of detail .
Nevertheless , I think that the environmental aspects should prevail , and I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
Mr President , the Amsterdam Treaty sets new standards for health policy in Europe .
The Commission has provided us with information on this .
Some aspects of the approach adopted in the Needle report are good , but in other places it oversteps the mark .
The fact that there are unsuccessful health policies in some Member States is no reason for shifting the responsibility to European level .
That is why I have voted against the Needle report .
We must use the little money we have in Europe for specific projects , and not distribute it here , there and everywhere .
The Treaty of Amsterdam will reform many previously traditional procedures and , above all , in accordance with the new Article 152 , it should make it easier to achieve a level of convergence in the health sector .
Community public health policy needs to be somewhat adapted in line with new priorities and new structures .
The serious ' mad cow ' crisis unfortunately brought home to us the importance of improving the information distributed when it comes to promoting public health .
Collecting data on the health of the people of Europe is more useful today than it has ever been before .
Disseminating the subsequent analyses has become essential , not only for the general public but also for the professionals who need to make changes to their national health systems .
On that basis , we can promote and consolidate the activities of the Member States in the various fields and disseminate information on the best practices .
But it is not enough to merely provide information .
We must also react quicker to health threats .
Speed is a crucial factor in medicine and one which requires increased monitoring and the introduction of new forms of coordination within the Community .
This would involve many fields : rare diseases , food safety , blood safety , ecological threats , the side effects of medicinal products , etcetera .
We could also give more consideration to the unique medical situations in each of the Member States and implement appropriate policies , particularly for problems such as drug addiction , cardio-vascular diseases , nutritional problems , and so on .
I therefore approve the Needle report due to the way in which it has been able to turn to good account the beneficial effects of the Maastricht Treaty in the crucial field of public health .
Health protection is a fundamental right recognised in the European Social Charter ( Article 11 ) and an objective enshrined in the Treaty ( Article 3 ) .
Community action is therefore justified , in so far as cross-border aspects are concerned .
Just as water or air pollution has consequences which are not confined to one Member State or another , similarly viruses , bacteria , microbes and other pathogens are not discouraged by national borders .
Just as environmental policy has a cross-border dimension , public health policy has a European dimension .
The need then is to distinguish clearly between what should and what should not be covered by Community action .
The relevant articles here are Article 52 ( formerly 129 ) on public health and Article 5 ( formerly 39 ( b ) ) - plus a protocol and two declarations - on subsidiarity and proportionality .
Both talk of complementary Community action consisting on the one hand of policy measures and on the other hand of cooperation by Member States and with third countries or international organisations .
But Member States must fully discharge their ' responsibilities ... for the organisation and delivery of health services and medical care ' .
This means that the role of public health systems and the provision of medical services as such is not a European responsibility .
When the rapporteur calls in paragraph 6 for ' a prime objective of Community action to be focused on fostering equality in health ' , he is overstepping the boundaries not only of subsidiarity , but also the letter and spirit of the Treaty .
Firstly , there is no legal basis for that kind of measure . Secondly , ' equality in health ' is not a Treaty objective .
The Treaty speaks of ' ensuring a high level of health protection ' .
The Treaty also says that Community action must be directed towards the improvement of public health and the prevention of human diseases , in particular the major health scourges .
So the stated aim is not maximum equality in public health , but as high a level of human health protection as is possible .
And that kind of aspiration is dangerous , because equality is attained not only by raising poor standards but also by lowering good ones .
I would therefore urge the rapporteur to withdraw the first part of paragraph 6 in order to avoid a split vote on this demand , which is meaningless in terms of the Treaty .
Of course , it could be said that a subsequent Treaty revision may address a problem of this kind .
But we are not talking today about a mandate for an intergovernmental conference .
The Commission says after all that its communication contains no new proposals for a new Community policy on public health .
In the communication it notes ' disturbing inequalities in health status between social classes ' , but makes no suggestions at all for remedying that state of affairs .
Understandably so , since the Commission does not have a leg to stand on - legally or politically - when it comes to preventing and combating social inequality in European health .
We must not be reactionary .
The Maastricht Treaty includes a separate title on public health , and the Court of Justice , with the Decker and Kohll judgments , has ruled on the Community dimension of certain social security services .
So there is some leverage in favour of a European health policy .
But we must not go too far and outrun or circumvent the Treaty .
Rather than making plans for an intergovernmental conference even before the Amsterdam Treaty has been ratified , we must first of all apply that Treaty in such a way that the European citizen above all benefits by it .
It is his taxes which are being spent , and it is his health which is at issue here .
People expect cross-border health hazards to be tackled effectively , and therefore at European level .
Cross-border health hazards have increased considerably as a result of trade and mobility - both recreational and occupational .
Food and food poisoning come from factors not only at home but also abroad .
Thus BSE , salmonella , antibiotics and hormones threaten to invade our food and our bodies too .
Health protection is therefore unquestionably an issue of consumer policy as well . And consumer policy , like public health , is a title in the Treaty .
The Maastricht Treaty laid the basis for a European contribution to consumer and health protection .
The Amsterdam Treaty has broadened and adapted that basis .
So for the most part , we must make do with what we have .
An effective health policy cannot reasonably be envisaged without taking a look at all the other policies implemented by the European Union and the Member States .
The Treaty of Amsterdam is therefore right in stating that a high level of health protection must be guaranteed when defining and implementing all the Community 's policies and actions that are likely to affect health , and in subsequently defining the role of the Member States in organising and supplying health services and medical care .
This issue is so important that it may even be appropriate to set up a directorate-general specifically responsible for managing the various aspects of public health policy , including questions relating to resources and health expertise .
It is also an area in which the principle of subsidiarity must be fully applied .
There is therefore no question of the Union replacing the Member States in the field of health .
Its role must be to support and complement the action of the Member States .
That is why I am also of the opinion that in addition to the search for greater consistency with socio-economic policies and programmes , Community action in the field of health must also make it a priority to actively promote real equality between people in terms of free movement .
To achieve this objective it will be necessary to combat inequalities and fight for equal access to health care for all . We will also have to increase the scope for health professionals to improve their knowledge and practical skills , perhaps even by creating priority health areas .
In addition , we must provide the population with better information on the inherent risks of their lifestyle and diet , while actively preventing the causes of illnesses .
With regard to public health , according to Article 152 of the Treaty , Community action should ' complement national policies ' .
There clearly seems to be a danger that , in setting its sights so high , the Community believes that it should take over the Member States ' responsibility , instead of merely complementing it .
A telling example of this is to be found in the proposal to appoint a Commissioner and establish a directorate-general with responsibility for health , which would encompass all aspects of public health policy .
It should be made abundantly clear that overall responsibility for people 's health , including the political and economic aspects , rests with the various Member States .
The European Union should perform a complementary role and not try to usurp the Member States ' responsibility .
In general terms , social policy should be a national responsibility .
However , health is often an aspect of both social and environmental issues .
This makes it hard to distinguish clearly between what constitutes a national question and what should be decided at European level .
I support the report in so far as it sets out to improve public health .
Cooperation between the Member States , and indeed worldwide , needs to be strengthened in order to improve the health of men , women and children .
Nevertheless , the relevant legislation and its implementation should in the first instance be dealt with at national level .
Minimum standards of care can be a way of resolving questions where a clear-cut decision is difficult , but those countries with higher standards should be allowed to keep them .
The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.

EU Mediterranean policy
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0042 / 99 by Mr Colajanni , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication : ' The role of the European Union in the peace process and its future assistance to the Middle East ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0715 - C4-0114 / 98 ) ; -A4-0095 / 99 by Mr Sakellariou , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a recommendation to the Council on the European Union 's Mediterranean policy .
Mr President , this House , which has always followed events in the Middle East with attention , dedication and passion , does not need to be told how critical the present situation is , not just because the peace process has been on hold for 18 months and because the painstakingly achieved Wye Plantation agreement has not been implemented , but also because of the continued building of new settlements and the non-completion of the corridor which is supposed to link the West Bank to Gaza , not to mention the matter of the airport , the port and the prisoners : the causes of contention are legion .
I would point out above all that the outcome of the Israeli elections will be crucial .
It is not up to us to tell that country what type of government to vote in ; naturally we hope to see a victory for parties which desire peace or can put together a grand coalition that is not influenced by extremist groups .
Circumstances in the region as a whole are worrying : nothing has been settled in Lebanon or Syria , and nor is any headway being made on implementing the Barcelona agreement and process , because it is quite impossible to contemplate a massive programme of investment if there is no security for individuals .
The Palestinians are in an untenable situation .
Huge efforts have been made by the EU over the past few years , without which the Palestinian Authority could not have been formed ; the Palestinian Authority owes its existence to the European Union .
Our assistance has been vital to the survival of the Palestinian Authority and also to the life of the Palestinian people , especially in Gaza , a tiny patch of land where a million people live as if in a sort of concentration camp .
Even though our assistance has been granted under extremely difficult and quite abnormal economic circumstances , it must continue .
Is it fair to demand that the Commission guarantee transparency and combat waste and fraud ?
Much has been done in this regard , but it is unfair to ignore the fact that any action carried out in that region is hampered by security measures and other constraints which defy economic reason .
Unless we understand this , we cannot understand what has been achieved there .
I shall now turn to a particularly sensitive matter .
We must realise that we have both asked and obtained a great deal from the Palestinians : free and democratic elections which are a model for many free countries in the region ; the nullification of the PLO Charter provision pledging to destroy Israel ; an intensification of the fight against terrorism ; a curbing of Hamas activity .
We are rightly continuing to demand more democracy and lawfulness within the Palestinian Authority .
Now , however , we must ask one more thing of the Palestinians , and this is the key point of my resolution .
The date of 4 May is a landmark which could prove disastrous .
We must now ask the Palestinians to make one last effort , namely to turn back the clock , to postpone their unilateral declaration of independence .
But we must give them a good reason to do so , and I believe that a solemn political undertaking must be made by the guarantors , by which I mean the United States , European Union , Russia - in other words , the major Oslo powers .
We must issue a binding political statement confirming the aims of the Oslo accords and , above all , guaranteeing that the Palestinian people will retain their full right to self-determination beyond the deadline of 4 May 1999 , which was set five years ago in Oslo .
I believe that the Palestinians understand the sensitivity of this situation and are awaiting a move from their main partners in dialogue and international guarantors .
Furthermore , in my opinion they realise that a unilateral declaration of independence on 4 May could provoke a reaction from the Israelis - as already announced - and that such a reaction would damage the peace process .
I believe they understand that such a step could bring victory at the Israeli elections for parties hostile to the peace process , and are therefore disposed to put back the date .
But an initiative is required from the EU , the USA and Russia , and this is the most useful thing that can be done at present for the Middle East peace process .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , which began so promisingly at the Barcelona Conference in November 1995 , has today not yet really got underway , having been in existence unofficially for three and a half years .
I have presented two previous reports to the House on the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , which led to corresponding resolutions by the European Parliament on 11 October 1995 , shortly before the Barcelona Conference , and on 13 March 1997 , shortly before the Malta Conference .
I am pleased to say that in both cases the European Parliament voted by an overwhelming majority in favour of the proposals put forward , and I hope that this time too our position will be adopted by a similar majority .
What we have before us this time is a recommendation to the Council , which has deliberately been kept very short so as not to repeat the proposals of the two previous resolutions , which are already known and have been adopted .
I would like to draw your attention to four points , Mr President-in-Office , and I would ask you to comment on these .
Firstly , the deadlock caused by the Netanyahu government in the Middle East peace process has also had a very negative influence on the Barcelona process .
Mr Colajanni has just spoken about the Middle East peace process , so I do not need to explain this further .
If we wish to take the Euro-Mediterranean partnership forward we must also take on a more active role in the Middle East peace process .
I am not referring to our financial role , as in terms of payment we are top of the league .
I am referring to the political area of the negotiations , where our envoy , Miguel Angel Moratinos , must finally be allowed to sit at the negotiating table in the peace talks .
Secondly , we must involve the whole of the Mediterranean area in the partnership , leaving no gaps along its shores .
So I agree with my colleagues from the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Forum that Libya should also be invited to participate .
In my opinion , the recent developments in resolving the Lockerbie problem have created more favourable conditions which might allow Libya to be invited to the next conference .
The Balkan states , which were not able to be present from the beginning , should also be invited , at least as observers this first time .
Increasing the number of participants could prove to be a positive development by providing the conference with fresh momentum .
Thirdly , we need new impetus not only in terms of participants but also in terms of content .
In the area of security policy in particular , we could present old proposals in Stuttgart , such as confidence-building measures and a stability pact for the Mediterranean , and new proposals , for example arms limitation and disarmament agreements .
We could also breathe new life into the Barcelona process in the area of domestic policy by including immigration issues .
My final point concerns the indebtedness of the countries concerned .
We were prepared to commit a very considerable sum to this Mediterranean policy , but any investment or efforts here will be fruitless unless we can agree on a reasonable way to write off their debts beforehand .
I am thinking here of Chancellor Schröder 's proposal at the G8 summit that the money repaid as debt write-off could at the same time be used and invested for the development of the countries in question .
If we try to take this approach , to give the process new momentum , Stuttgart could actually be a success .
Mr President , the politics of the Middle East have long been a matter of prime concern to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , and I wish to congratulate Mr Colajanni on his excellent report .
However , the concern in the House extends far beyond the Foreign Affairs Committee , and during the last year the Committee on Budgets has been heavily involved in the future regulations for financing the Middle East peace process and eventually , when Commissioner Marin himself became involved in this process , we saw the results of excellent cooperation between the Commissioner and the Committee on Budgets .
Equally , the Committee on Budgetary Control has long had a deep interest , a concern that arises from the fact that something in the order of 54 cents in the dollar of the Middle East peace process is financed by the European Union budget .
In a very difficult political situation it is nevertheless part of our responsibility in the Committee on Budgetary Control to ensure that the European taxpayer gets value for money , as well as the resources put there by the taxpayer having maximum political effect in the peace process .
To that end , inevitably the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control raises the critical points rather than the complimentary ones .
I should like here and now to say that we have been more than pleased with the cooperation we have had from Commissioner Marin , who has answered a very detailed series of questions , followed up by a very detailed set of supplementary questions on a number of the problems that arise in the Middle East from the implementation of the process and that we are very grateful for the cooperation we are seeing from the Commission for a small mission from the Committee on Budgetary Control that will visit the Middle East , particularly to see the value-for-money questions in the Occupied Territories .
It will obviously be at that time that we will make a final judgement on the value-for-money questions and that will be done in the context of the discharge procedure .

Meanwhile , we congratulate Mr Colajanni on his report , we raise the critical questions about the quality of expenditure and we congratulate Commissioner Marin personally on the way in which he has engaged himself with the Committee on Budgetary Control and with the delegation in trying to ensure that we report properly to Parliament in terms of discharge .
Mr President , Mr Tomlinson has already mentioned the points that we have been discussing in great detail in recent weeks , particularly in connection with his report on the Palestinian issue and the new rules which we have fortunately been able to put together in a joint package with the Council and the Commission .
With the exception of the points that we had asked the Commission to change once again , we are satisfied with its proposal , which has now eliminated the problem areas that we raised in the debate .
Nevertheless , I would like to take this opportunity to mention two points once again .
Firstly , this is a programme that involves partners whose expenditure in the course of the year is very difficult to estimate at the beginning of the year .
It is not like the usual Community programmes , where we can calculate exactly what resources are needed .
As a result , there is a backlog of funds , in other words funds were earmarked which were subsequently not used and these are now left over .
However , what we need - and I know how difficult this is , as we also attempted to improve this procedure in cooperation with the Commission - is a more reliable procedure , including in terms of the anticipated expenditure in a particular financial year .
I would therefore ask the Commission to try to provide us with greater certainty in planning and implementation in the course of the year .
If you look at when the funds were used , you can see that a considerable percentage were not used until the last few weeks of the year .
However , in accordance with the Notenboom Procedure , October is the latest we can carry over funds not used in the current year .
We therefore need greater assurance from you in future : immediately after the summer break we need you to give us a summary of how much money is still expected to be spent , as we both know that last year we again had to forfeit funds because they were not going to be used in the few remaining weeks before Christmas .
I know that this is a big problem , especially for partners whom we simply have to deal with differently than we do within the Community ; however , we will not be able to avoid this problem , and we do not want to weigh ourselves down with a huge burden for the future .
I would therefore urge that this should be taken into account in the report in future , and this is the purpose of the amendment by the Committee on Budgets .
We have also included it in our opinion on the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the presidency welcomes the fact that today the European Parliament is looking in depth at the Middle East and the role of the European Union in the Middle East peace process .
As you know , the European Union is a resolute supporter of the peace process in accordance with the Oslo and Madrid agreements .
In 1996 the European Union appointed the Spanish Ambassador , Mr Moratinos , as the EU 's special envoy for the Middle East peace process .
Since then Mr Moratinos has dedicated himself with great energy and initiative to the aim of bringing the peace negotiations to a successful conclusion .
Every presidency has devoted considerable attention to this region .
From 10 to 14 February the German Foreign Minister , Mr Fischer , visited all the states in the region and the territories administered by the Palestinian Authority , where he took part in the talks on achieving progress in the implementation of the Wye River Memorandum .
I mention this here because the European Parliament 's resolution could give the impression that the EU is not sufficiently represented in the peace process .
I would like to point out that so far the European Union has rightly decided to support the USA in its various committed attempts to achieve a peaceful solution in the Middle East , rather than to compete with it .
The USA has for a long time been a partner that is accepted by both sides , and we recognise and respect its role and its importance in the region .
We must remember that this is a difficult process , and that while progress has been made setbacks have also been encountered .
The Palestinians ' right to self-determination conflicts with the Israelis ' right to live within secure and recognised borders .
In view of the complex history of the conflict , tenacity and patience are of particular importance .
At this point I would mention that the European Union has already made a vital contribution to the progress of the Middle East peace process .
The EU has been most generous in its financial support for the Palestinian areas since 1993 .
Not only has it made an important financial contribution , but by doing so it has also allowed the political agreements to be implemented .
The EU is aware that a number of problems have arisen here .
The negative economic development in these areas is of course disappointing and sobering , especially in view of the extraordinary efforts we have made .
It is genuinely alarming that the population 's standard of living is lower today than in 1993 .
I believe that the problems are certainly largely due to the deadlock in the peace process and the resulting shortcomings in the implementation of the economic agreements .
But the Israelis and Palestinians themselves also bear responsibility , and each must ensure that international aid is applied more effectively than before in their own regions .
We must not forget , however , that there are also very successful EU projects that have significantly improved living conditions .
Examples include the building programme for schools , water treatment plants in Bethlehem , Nablus and Hebron , and waste disposal in Gaza .
It is certainly no consolation to imagine the disastrous route that economic development in the Palestinian territories would have taken if aid from the EU and other donors had not been so generous .
One thing is certain : without this aid the territories administered by the Palestinian Authority would not have been viable and as a result the entire peace process would have been in jeopardy .
We should bear this in mind in future , since our disappointment at the economic development of the Palestinian territories must not undermine the EU 's fundamental financial commitment .
Financial aid is political aid .
Without our support the peace process and , accordingly , the people in this area would not have stood a chance .
I therefore welcome the EU 's offer of substantial aid for the period 1999-2003 at the donors ' conference in Washington and most recently under the German Presidency in Frankfurt .
On that occasion , on 4 and 5 February in Frankfurt , details were given of how EU funding is to be more efficiently applied .
Reference was made not only to obstacles caused by Israeli bureaucracy but also to the difficulties within the Palestinian administration that were rightly addressed in your parliamentary report .
By taking over the joint presidency of the conference , the EU also illustrated its commitment effectively .
However , the EU 's support for the Middle East peace process also has a further dimension : the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
With the third follow-up conference of EU foreign ministers and their twelve Mediterranean partners under the Barcelona process in Stuttgart next month , the EU will be making a further specific contribution to regional integration and economic development in the Middle East .
We are hoping that this will provide further support for the peace process and open additional lines of communication and dialogue .
I would like to look at two further points contained in the European Parliament 's motion for a resolution .
The first is the reference to the need to support Jordan .
The presidency is very much of this view , as economic and political stability in Jordan is a crucial factor in peace-keeping in the Middle East .
Our Foreign Minister , Mr Fischer , also spoke to the new King Abdullah during his trip to the Middle East and expressed the EU 's wish that Jordanian policy should continue as before .
King Abdullah assured him of this .
It is very much in Europe 's interest that security and stability in this important state should be maintained , and the EU should therefore help Jordan as far as possible .
The General Affairs Council of 22 February asked the Commission to examine how the EU can help , taking national contributions into account .
The second point concerns the lack of water resources in the Middle East .
We all know that this is one of the most serious problems in the region and that all states affected will sooner or later be forced to cooperate .
Ambassador Moratinos has already held various talks with Israel , Jordan and the Palestinian Authority on this subject , and he has also set up a task force on water issues .
During his trip to the Middle East , Foreign Minister Fischer emphasised Europe 's interest in finding a solution to the water problem .
Various Member States are involved here .
I can assure you that the European Union will continue to play an appropriate role in the Middle East peace process .
We will pursue our policy with commitment and patience , with great dedication and acuity , and in agreement with the United States .
I am sure that in the not-too-distant future the parties will achieve the peace in the Middle East that all sides would like to see .
Mr President , today we are discussing two documents which , both with Palestine and with Libya , are going to be of great importance for the future development of the European Union 's Mediterranean policy .
I would like to thank Mr Sakellariou and Mr Colajanni for their reports , especially since both Members are particularly interested in these issues .
I am only going to give you a very brief political analysis because what the President-in-Office said corresponds exactly to the Commission 's position .
I should therefore like to keep my analysis short , as I have little to add to what the President-in-Office said .

As regards what Mr Colajanni said , I agree with him that the Stuttgart Conference is very important and comes at a very delicate time politically .

As Mr Verheugen pointed out , the Commission and the special envoy , Mr Moratinos , accompanied the Presidency and we had the opportunity to witness the atmosphere there and the problems involved in trying to find an appropriate solution in a difficult political situation .
On the one hand , there is the deadline of 4 May that is laid down in the Oslo agreements ; on the other hand , there are the Israeli elections , which are naturally going to play a key role in the peace process and in the implementation of the Wye Plantation agreements .
There are two positive points that I would like to mention .
We have worked tirelessly in recent months with the German Presidency - whom I would like to thank publicly - in order to conclude the association agreement with Egypt .
In principle , I believe that we will be able to complete these difficult negotiations before the Stuttgart Conference , thereby allowing this important country to finally have its own agreement .
I would like to make a point about the procedure in the light of what Parliament has recommended .
It is true that the ratification of the agreements is progressing very slowly at national level .
I would like to take a moment to talk about Mr Samland 's proposals both for the programming and also for the programming of the joint agreements .
As you reach the end of your time in the European Parliament , Mr Samland - as I surely am too , since some people are trying to ensure that I leave before my time - I would like to tell you that the system of joint agreements is being changed .
If we do not amend that system at the next intergovernmental conference , Mr Colajanni , the average time needed to ratify the agreements at national level will continue to be between two and a half and three years .
That is not the Commission 's fault .
The problem is that we have a cyclical programming system that needs to be reviewed , and we will have to find solutions for the future through calm and peaceful discussions with the European Parliament and with the Council .
I agree with you that there are some things that need to be changed as soon as possible and one of those , Mr Colajanni , is the system of ratifying joint agreements .
However , I have contacted some of the Member States by letter to try to speed up the process .
You raised a key point : how to resolve the disruption affecting the peace process and the Barcelona Conference .
We have talked about this on many occasions .
In my opinion , the solution will involve organising a meeting similar to that held in Palermo , and we are working with the presidency and have had many technical meetings on this issue . The Malta Conference could not succeed because it took place at the height of the conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians .
But in Palermo , great efforts were made and it became evident that the political forum of the Barcelona committee had to be maintained at all costs . It is the only point of political reference we have in the Euro-Mediterranean sphere , given that the multilateral process and the regional process are not working at this point in time .
I am very hopeful and believe that we will be able to make significant progress in Stuttgart .
As regards the peace process in the Middle East , we fully agree with what the President said and with Mr Colajanni 's philosophy .
We must make every effort to try to obtain an adequate solution for 4 May and a commitment on the part of the Israeli Government to quickly move the peace process forward .
In this respect , I have little to add to what was said by Mr Colajanni and by the President-in-Office , Mr Verheugen .

As far as assistance to the Palestinians is concerned , I would first of all like to point out , in relation to what both Mr Samland and Mr Tomlinson said , that the Commission has taken the fundamental step of following up the Tomlinson report by fixing the timetable for the next few years at the conference of donors in Washington and Frankfurt .
I welcome the fact that distinguished members of the Committee on Budgetary Control are soon to visit the Territories .
But the problem lies in the difficulty of drawing up a financial programme in a situation where there are security problems , terrorist attacks , a lack of dialogue between the Israelis and the Palestinians , closures of the Territories , and obstacles to the distribution of goods . These are all problems that we are very well aware of and they make it difficult to prepare the financial programming .
That is where the special regulation in the Tomlinson report , approved by Parliament , comes into play .
As a result , I cannot promise the chairman of the Committee on Budgets that there will be 100 % funding for the financial programme .
That is impossible .
I cannot predict whether or not the Wye Plantation agreements will be implemented .
I do not think that Mr Samland can ask that of the Commission , of the Member States , or of this Parliament .
If the Wye Plantation agreements are implemented as they should be , we will be able to present the financial programme to the Council and to Parliament .
If the Wye Plantation agreements do not work , then that will be very difficult .
And this is something that I want to stress .
Nevertheless , we are going along with the reasoning put forward by Parliament .
Mr Verheugen made a very important point .
In February , at the meeting in Frankfurt , the Presidency and the Commission highlighted the two most significant problems of the last five years .
To ensure that the Palestinians enjoy economic development , two requirements must be met : there must be greater transparency in the Palestinian budget , and Israel must put an end to its restrictive policies .
If the Palestinian economy is not transparent , there is the risk of corruption , whereas an open and transparent Palestinian economy would make it more difficult for problems to arise .
However , in order to achieve this , Israel must accept the fact that a bilateral agreement has already been signed between the Palestinian Authority and the European Union .
Indeed , the Commission has emphasised this point on many occasions . It is a fundamental element of our cooperation and we must let the Israeli authorities know that it is a mistake to implement such restrictive economic policies .
Israel has every right to demand security and greater cooperation in the fight against terrorism . However , it is also evident , as highlighted in the Colajanni report and the Commission communication , that economic development in Palestine is also a key element in ensuring Israel 's own security .
Israel will become much more secure as the Palestinian economy grows . If there is no development , there will be more poverty , a greater degree of marginalisation , further difficulties for the Palestinians , and a greater likelihood of extremist tendencies developing .
This is why we want to complete the financial programming for the next few years and , in conclusion , I would ask Parliament to understand one point in this respect .
The Commission is going to propose to Parliament and the Council that it should no longer be responsible for the Palestinian Authority 's current expenditure .
I want you to understand this .
Over the last five years , in order to implement political decisions taken by the Council , for exceptional reasons , and to keep the Palestinian Authority active for political reasons , the Commission has had to finance current expenditure operations that were not included in the economic assistance programme .
That was a purely political decision and it must be seen as such .
We therefore do not want the Commission to deal with any more current expenditure .
But what will happen if the borders are closed in the next few years ?
Are we going to let the Palestinian Authority fall ?
No , we will not .
But what the Commission will propose is that in each instance a joint decision be taken by the European Parliament and the Council .
We believe that this is a reasonable solution .
However , Mr Tomlinson , when you present the report on the discharge , I would ask you not to forget that , for political reasons , the Commission has allocated current expenditure that , in principle , was not included in the economic development programme .
There is nothing to hide here and I am speaking very openly .
We do not intend to repeat this in the future .
Nevertheless , what I do want to state very emphatically is that you cannot accuse the Commission and Commissioner Marín - and I say this without any complex - of having acted wrongfully : the only thing I have done is to implement the political decisions of the Council and Parliament .
The issue of Jordan is an example of a typical problem of political compromise .
The old MEDA programme , which is being updated , included a special structural adjustment programme for Jordan .
The Council has stated that the Commission was asked to draw up a special programme for Jordan and that is the case .
Once again , Mr Tomlinson , Mr Colajanni , we will have to choose between the political option on the one hand , and financial rigour on the other .
And as far as Jordan is concerned , if we have to act politically , then let us do so .
As regards Libya , Mr Sakellariou , we have a political problem that must be solved at a political level by means of a political decision .
You are perfectly aware of that and , therefore , we will first of all have to find a solution according to the formula put forward by the Secretary-General of the United Nations .
It is , of course , only right that the Libyan dispute should be resolved .
It would also be a positive step if Libya were to participate in the Euro-Mediterranean Conference .
But we all know that there is a precondition .
If we can find an answer to the precondition , we will have resolved a political problem .
It would naturally be better if Libya 's relations with the European Union were to return to normal .
But there is firstly a precondition to resolve .
Commissioner , you have spoken at some length , but I understand that you need to express your thoughts on your policy and on how this important problem has developed over the last few years . For this reason the Chair showed understanding , but it needed to show a great deal of understanding .
Mr President , just this once I really want to talk about the Rules of Procedure .
Rule 46 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure gives Parliament the right to make recommendations to the Council in connection with Article J.7 of the EU Treaty .
This recommendation , which will be adopted by Parliament tomorrow , was addressed to the Council presidency , but the Council presidency has not discussed what was in the recommendation .
I thank the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Marín , who did discuss the substance of the recommendation and the question of Libya .
However , the recommendation is addressed to the Council .
I would therefore like to ask , on behalf of Parliament , when the Council intends to reply to our recommendation , even if only to say ' no , thank you ' .
Mr Sakellariou , I have listened very carefully to what you have said .
As regards the procedural matter you have raised , I have to tell you that Mr Verheugen , the President-in-Office , had informed us that it would not be possible for him to stay and so he has not heard your recommendation to give a reply on .
However , the Chair will try to obtain clarification from the Council so that we will have an answer .


Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Mr Colajanni and Mr Sakellariou for their very committed reports which really show the direction that Europe should take .
However , I would also like to thank Mr Tomlinson and Mr Samland , as I firmly believe that the links between foreign policy , the budget and budgetary control must be strengthened in future so that perhaps some of the things that have happened recently could be avoided .
Being involved in foreign affairs , I know how important financial resources are in conducting foreign policy , but as a Member of Parliament I also know that we in this House and also the public must be sure that the resources are used properly and efficiently .
I also wish to comment on a point raised by Commissioner Marín .
It was really very interesting , Commissioner .
You said that we must decide between policy and financial stringency .
Perhaps together we can find a way of combining the two , of taking very useful action in the political sphere and yet being at least efficient in financial terms .
You are right on one point : Parliament itself was probably not prepared to make the link between policy and financial stringency .
We , at least in my group , are fully behind what you proposed here yesterday .
We will support you in uniting policy and financial stringency .
I have two comments on what Mr Sakellariou proposed .
I support what he said about Libya .
I have myself visited Libya and spoken to those in charge , and I believe that many people there are ready and willing to become part of the international community once again .
The conditions you mentioned , Commissioner , will of course still apply .
Perhaps I could make one further point about the Colajanni report as I and others prepare for a trip to Syria and Lebanon .
I believe that we must do everything we can to encourage Israel to withdraw from Lebanon , in its own interest and in the interest of the peace process , so that a similar process can then be begun with Syria in relation to the Golan Heights .
Finally , I would call upon the Commission and the Council to approach 4 May 1999 , an important historical date for the Palestinians , in such a way that it does not provoke renewed conflict but instead marks a further step towards peace .
Mr President , I would like to make a point of order .
The President-in-Office has left when we are in the process of debating a recommendation to the Council . I think that that was very impolite behaviour before the House , particularly since it was not due to reasons beyond his control : he is currently attending an informal meeting in Room 100 .
It was very disrespectful of him to leave the sitting , especially given the issue we are now debating .
I would therefore ask you , Mr President , to protest to the President-in-Office about such unaccustomed behaviour during a parliamentary debate .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , as you will have heard , I noted the presence of the President-in-Office at the time when our rapporteurs were speaking .
I am very sorry but I do not want to make an issue out of this .
The President-in-Office was here up to and following the speech made by Mr Marín , but perhaps you were unaware of this .
It would have been better if he could have stayed longer , and I agree with you on this .
However , I will make a note of that aspect of your comments .
Mr President , if I may say so , I too find it odd that the Council President merely listens to the Commission and the rapporteurs and then completely ignores the debate .
One often has the feeling when discussing Mediterranean affairs that the European Union treats them with a certain disdain , as though Libya , the Middle East and the Balkans are really rather a nuisance .
And yet this is both our most sensitive and most fascinating border .
Here , different cultures have been in contact for centuries , more often clashing than meshing , but also trading and establishing the principle of communicating vessels in important areas of culture , philosophy and mathematics , to mention but a few .
It was not possible in the past , and is even less so today , to define the Mediterranean countries merely as those whose shores are washed by that sea .
The concatenation of problems - one need only think of the Middle East and the Gulf - is such that these borders can no longer be drawn in the manner of the Romans , who wrote on their maps just beyond the southern shore of the Mediterranean : ' hic sunt leones ' - ' here be lions ' .
The first fundamental mistake would therefore be for Europe to think that the Mediterranean area can be confined to countries which resemble it to a greater or lesser extent : the multifarious array of cultures and political systems cannot be narrowed down artificially .
Europe must foster cooperation with all the coastal states - obviously including Libya - and also , where problems do not stop at geographical borders , with their neighbours .
My first point , therefore , relates to the Mediterranean countries in their entirety .
My second is as important as it is insidious , and answers this question : is the problem of the Mediterranean a matter of joint economic development with Europe ?
It is , but , if we think it is only or mainly that , we shall be making the second fundamental mistake : it is also a matter of joint civil development .
How ?
By imposing a common denominator on the whole of Europe ?
That would be the third fundamental mistake .
Allow me at this point to quote a highly authoritative speaker from the Islamic world , President Khatami of Iran , whom it would be absurd to ignore .
According to him , before a people can accept change and evolution , it must first be conscious of its own existence and historical identity , so as to have a point of departure .
This is just what the West has sometimes misunderstood when following its colonial and post-colonial inclinations .
Of course , it is not always easy . We are dealing with very different countries , but isolation will not solve problems which should instead be entrusted to the wisdom of politicians : Libya should teach us a lesson .
True fundamentalism must never make us forget that behind it lie problems on which we can legitimately comment : Islam , for example , is not necessarily intolerant in itself ; intolerance is caused by social and economic problems when they are allowed to fester .
Mr President , the Middle East peace process is deadlocked and the parties are waiting for two things , the May elections in Israel and the declaration of an independent state of Palestine .
We must persuade the Palestinians to postpone that declaration .
Something has to be done here .
And I think we should commit ourselves to recognising that state if it is declared .
We should not forget that 4 May marks the end of the transitional phase of the Oslo Agreement , at which time the final outcome of the negotiations will become apparent .
It is clear that a postponement is important in order to stop extreme elements from gaining the upper hand in the Israeli elections .
The problems in Lebanon are big enough .
Europe must preach moderation and a willingness to compromise and must hope that the people and government of Israel can find the way to peace and dialogue .
This peace process is also extremely important to the Barcelona process , which is likewise deadlocked at present .
Aside from the peace process , the Union must invest in democracy and human rights .
Good governance is the basis for successful progress .
The Union can foster these processes by focusing its attention on civil society .
With luck , all the problems over the legal base for providing funds have been resolved .
The Union must also support the organising of a parallel meeting of NGOs during the Euro-Mediterranean summit in Stuttgart .
My group , the Liberals , endorses both reports because they take account of the fine detail and give the European Parliament a voice at a time of such significance in the region - for peace , security and a promising future .
I want to make a general observation about small groups . A minute and a half is given to group representatives .
This is totally inadequate for colleagues to express more than a few thoughts and they have to rely on the forbearance of the Chair .
For its part , the Chair is put in a difficult position and does not want to cut off speakers .
At some point this system must stop .
It would be better if fewer colleagues spoke for a longer time to enable them to express their views .
It is impossible to give just a minute or a minute and a half . It is not enough .
Mr President , all honour to the rapporteurs who in the last five years have placed passionate and carefully considered visions before us .
But great as this passion is to move the situation in the Middle East or Mediterranean area forward a little , we are still dependent on developments on the spot , such as elections in Israel and Algeria .
Moreover , the date of 4 May hangs over us like a sword of Damocles .
The rapporteur calls on the Palestinian Authority to desist from a declaration of independence .
If it happens , I fear it may have implications for the financial assistance we provide . That is already the subject of criticism , and we want better scrutiny of it .
It is clear too that we must ask the Israelis , after the elections , to make serious efforts to move the peace process forward .
In the run-up to the elections , positive noises have been heard , for example about a possible withdrawal from Lebanon .
The rapporteur speaks of unconditional withdrawal from Lebanon .
I cannot go along with that , since Israel can in no way be sure that Lebanon can control the fundamentalist military groups there .
Nor are things clear with regard to the deeply entrenched Syrian presence in Lebanon .
Withdrawal from Lebanon without any agreements with Syria is an invitation to violence .
So we must remain hopeful that a coherent solution will be found , so that part of the external threat to Israel is removed and realistic possibilities are created for further and more specific ties with the Palestinians .
Restoration of the peace process may help our policy on the Mediterranean , but it is not the only factor .
The Commissioner mentioned Egypt earlier .
After three years of talks , it is very important that we should now involve Egypt in the peace process .
It is a shame that the Council representative is no longer here .
I echo Commissioner Marín in urging the Council to bring in Egypt as an important country .
That will be a step forward .
Mr President , both the Colajanni report and the Sakellariou report take us forward in a very positive direction .
They were unanimously adopted by our committee and also have the support of our group .
I would like to make a comment on the Sakellariou report .
Mr Sakellariou quite rightly highlights four basic areas : finding a solution to the Middle East problem ; increasing the number of participants at the conference to include Libya and the countries of the former Yugoslavia ; content , and the debt issue .
However , I should like to ask whether , with the way things are developing at the moment , these are the only issues .
Perhaps there is a new , important issue - which indeed is not new , judging by the force with which it has emerged - in the Mediterranean area , which threatens to destabilise the whole of the Eastern Mediterranean .
Is it possible to move towards a Mediterranean zone of safety and cooperation without tackling the Kurdish question ?
The Kurdish question affects Mediterranean countries , it affects Turkey and Syria , and it affects countries which , as Mr Graziani said , are extensions of the Mediterranean region , such as Iraq and Iran .
The Kurdish question is closely interwoven with , and is destabilising , relations in Mediterranean countries , such as the relations between Greece and Turkey , Turkish-Cypriot relations , or the wider relations in the Eastern Mediterranean region .
We cannot afford to ignore the Kurdish question and it must be integrated into issues relating to Mediterranean cooperation .
Do we want policies to combat terrorism and violence , and to tackle issues which the European Parliament has repeatedly and wholeheartedly condemned ?
Do we want to take action at international level ?
Do we want to promote political solutions instead of violence ?
If this is indeed what we want , I think we must concern ourselves with how to integrate the Kurdish question into our deliberations on achieving peace and security in the Mediterranean region , to which the European Parliament hopes to contribute .
Mr President , on behalf of the Green Group , I should like to begin by expressing our support for the reports by Mr Colajanni and Mr Sakellariou . Both of them deal with issues - the Middle East peace process and the Euro-Mediterranean process following the Barcelona Declaration - which are currently deadlocked , as colleagues have pointed out .
We could certainly not disagree with what Mr Colajanni said about the outcome of the Wye Plantation agreement and the significant fact that the ' land for peace ' principle has now been accepted .
We must however acknowledge that the current deadlock is largely due to the ambiguous attitude of the Israeli Government and the obstacles it is raising , and I believe that this must be emphasised by Parliament .
The Lebanon and Syria questions must be solved too , without a doubt , if there is to be peace in the Middle East .
Here I would recall Parliament 's efforts to set up ' people to people ' initiatives ; I believe that a more effective response is required from the Commission .
As regards the deadlock in the aftermath of the Barcelona Declaration , we too should like to see all the countries concerned participating - not only Libya , but also the countries of the former Yugoslavia and Albania - and we should like Macedonia to have special observer status .
I would conclude by stressing that the present situation was caused largely by the European Union 's current shortcomings in tackling common foreign and security policy problems .
Unless this state of affairs is rectified , the prospects are bleak indeed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the two issues we are discussing this afternoon are in fact one and the same issue .
As is his custom , Mr Colajanni has produced an excellent report which is balanced , prudent and which searches for even the slightest sign of progress towards peace in order to defuse the many occasions for confrontation and obstacles which arise on a daily basis in Israeli-Palestinian relations .
Nevertheless , my group has serious reservations as regards the general position adopted .
It is very diplomatic and seems to take as read the Israeli Government 's volte-face on the resolutions on the peace process , to which it is nevertheless committed .
The rapporteur proposes a further effort by the Palestinians , a degree of procrastination in order to delay any unilateral declaration of independence by the Palestinian Authority .
But we do not believe that diplomatic efforts are justified when the spirit of peace has been violated and Mr Netanyahu is seriously in the wrong on this point , most probably to the detriment of the long-term interests of the Israeli people .
The European Union will gain little by not daring to speak its mind .
It would be making a mistake in continuing to believe that the United States must to some extent be left to act alone on this issue , with the idea that this forces it to be more open to Palestinian proposals and to put up greater resistance to its own pro-Israeli lobbies than if the Union were to clearly state its position and bring pressure to bear .
In fact , as Mr Sakellariou and Commissioner Marín pointed out , the position we must adopt on this subject is largely determined by the position we must adopt in order to relaunch the whole process of Mediterranean cooperation .
The position we take will have a determining influence on the consolidation of peace at the gates of Europe .
Apart from the clauses on human rights and democracy , every option must be envisaged in a flexible frame of mind in order to genuinely relaunch the Barcelona process .
The solution to the economic and demographic difficulties of the countries in question will clarify , facilitate and anchor the gradual appeasement which time alone can bring to the eternal dispute between fraternal enemies which is undermining the Middle East .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there has been a stalemate in the Middle East peace process since the Wye Plantation agreements .
We know where the responsibilities lie : with the Israelis for their intransigence , and , for reasons which are all too evident , with the sole superpower , the United States , for the support it is giving to the Israeli policy .
For electoral reasons , the powerful support the Israeli policy finds in Washington and elsewhere will never be subject to any serious criticism on the part of American politicians , and particularly those who run the federal administration .
Finally , the responsibility also lies with the servile alignment of European policy with that of the United States , even when US policy is contrary to Europe 's most obvious interests and even where we have the political and legal means to oppose it .
This is true , for example , with regard to Lebanon , whose political subjugation and continued occupation we continue to tolerate .
It is also the case in Iraq where the blockade and the bombings have cynically continued for years to the detriment of the civilian population , when there is clearly no security consideration to justify such a policy .
When are we finally going to use France and the United Kingdom 's voting rights on the UN Security Council - which could even win the support of China and Russia - in order to put a stop to this scandal ?
As regards our military interventions , if they are essential , why must they be carried out within the framework of NATO , which has no legal or political justification except to chain us to the decisions made in Washington ?
We claim to be able to solve the problem of Albanian immigration in Kosovo yet we are incapable of solving immigration problems in Strasbourg , Hamburg , Brussels or Genoa .
Our inconsistencies in this field will benefit neither our interests nor peace in the Mediterranean .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , two minutes is really a very short time to speak as chairman of the Delegation for relations with Israel on our Mediterranean policy and , in that context , on peace in the Middle East .
So I must be brief and , after thanking our two rapporteurs , I would like to make five points .
Firstly , Europe is currently obsessed with its enlargement towards the East and Agenda 2000 .
It should concern itself more with the south , and , as a result , its Mediterranean policy .
This is ultimately a question of survival , for Europe and thus for us .
Secondly , in this connection it is now time - behind the statements of principle and the agreements signed - to act , and act quickly .
There are too many long delays in ratifying agreements between Europe and southern countries followed by further overly long delays before concrete , quantifiable and , above all , visible actions are implemented in the field .
Thirdly , although we must continue to hold talks with everyone , in the case of Libya , Mr Sakellariou , we must first demand the extradition and trial of the terrorists who blew up aeroplanes and killed hundreds of innocent people .
The families of the victims demand this and are appealing to us in their suffering .
Fourthly , everyone agrees that Europe must be more active politically as regards the Middle East .
Indeed it must , but at the present time it must act without interfering in the forthcoming elections ; otherwise , we will be acting contrary to our objectives .
Finally , Europe must take initiatives to avoid a unilateral declaration of independence by the Palestinians on 4 May , while supporting the principal of a Palestinian state .
This is a double requirement which anyone with good sense today recognises as a condition for relaunching the peace process immediately after the elections .
Mr President , the Mediterranean policy of the European Union must be our most effective , high-minded and unanimous policy .
As all wise men have pointed out - it would be sufficient just to mention Braudel - the Mediterranean is the cradle of Europe from a historical , cultural and ethnological perspective . It is also of major significance in current geopolitical terms , because it connects the continent of Europe with the troubled region of the Middle East and also with the awakening giant that is Africa .
However , our Mediterranean policy is our most neglected , irresolute and ineffectual policy .
The events of 1989 , with the overthrow of the autocratic regimes of the Eastern bloc , served to highlight the need for an enlarged Europe to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
We have come to realise , rather belatedly , that enlargement must be balanced against the need to meet the challenges thrown up by the South .
Not until the end of 1995 , with the Barcelona Conference , did we attempt to open up prospects for cooperation , though with pre-defined commitments and an unlimited time scale .
As pointed out by Mr Sakellariou , the rapporteur , the fruits of this endeavour remain negligible .
In the ensuing three years , the Middle East peace process has not ended the drama in the region , nor has the human rights situation improved . Indeed , in many respects it has deteriorated .
Nor has the threat or the use of violence among partners ceased to be a political instrument . Also , as a look at the map is enough to convince anyone , the partner relationship is fragmented and ad hoc .
Many countries that border the Mediterranean remain outside the plan which , in order to be effective , must be cohesive and all-encompassing . Moreover , the lack of an honourable and realistic settlement of the immigrant problem is poisoning relations on all sides .
We must make a courageous and flexible effort . This effort needs to be coordinated , as we have bitter experience of aspirations that are disjointed .
The European Union must play a leading role in breaking the deadlock in the Middle East and this particular policy must fall in line with enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe . If none of this happens , our Mediterranean policy will remain a cosmetic declaration and an excuse which fails to solve any of the burgeoning problems in the very region where Europe and European civilisation were born .
Mr President , we support the two reports being discussed .
I will only refer to the Colajanni report which attempts , among other things , to redefine the role of the European Union in the Middle East peace process .
I find this report balanced but , given the ever-changing situation , its content is repeatedly being called into question .
Nevertheless , there are certain elements that do not change .
The Union 's foreign policy in this particularly troubled region of the globe must no longer be limited to simply being the principal donor of economic and financial aid in the form of the vast sums made available to the Palestinian population .
These sums , however , have still not produced the desired effect : the substantial fall in the average earnings of the Palestinians is proof of this .
Europe must therefore cease being an economic giant and a political dwarf .
It is now more essential than ever to have a true European common security policy .
Only then will we be listened to and have a genuine role to play on the international stage .
The economic and political situation has deteriorated sharply over recent months and the Lebanese thorn is proving increasingly painful .
Given its complexity , the situation in the Middle East requires negotiated solutions involving the various parties .
We must remember that Lebanon is under Syrian supervision and that the south is occupied by Israeli troops .
The peace process must continue and we must avoid at all costs the useless sacrifice of human lives .
I should like to mention paragraph 29 of the resolution concerning the occupation of southern Lebanon which is now very much in the news . I believe that a unilateral Israeli withdrawal must be possible , provided it is coupled with guarantees for the Hebrew state .
In my view , we should therefore eliminate the term ' unconditional ' .
Mr President , the report by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy on the Middle East tends to place the Israeli Government and the Palestinians on the same footing in terms of responsibility for the current deadlock in the peace process .
This does not reflect the reality of the situation .
It is the Israeli Government which has gone back on its previous commitments .
I do not accept the way in which the report tries to organise pressure on the Palestinians to postpone their declaration of independence on 4 May 1999 .
Should not the role of Parliament , and of the European Union , be to make every effort to ensure that the peace agreements are honoured , that is , all the peace agreements ?
These explicitly set the date of 4 May 1999 for the declaration of Palestinian sovereignty .
Another problem remains in connection with the Mediterranean policy : the situation in Western Sahara .
Here , too , the peace plan is deadlocked .
The UN Secretary-General , who is personally committed to resolving the conflict , set a new deadline of 31 March 1999 .
I would call on the Council to intervene speedily in order to ensure that the conditions established by the United Nations are respected by that date and that the Sahrawi people can express their right to self-determination and independence .
Mr President , the delayed entry into force of the five association agreements signed as part of the Barcelona process is deplorable and significant , as is the fact that - three years on from the Conference that took the name of the city where it was held - not all the Mediterranean countries have been invited to participate in the partnership process which was so loudly applauded in November 1995 .
It seemed to be the dawn of a new age , a welcome opportunity to establish new relations and revive cooperation between Europe and the Mediterranean countries , particularly in the political , economic , financial and cultural spheres .
The delay is deplorable for two reasons : firstly Europe 's lack of a common foreign policy , and secondly the stalled Middle East peace process .
Until such time as security can be guaranteed in Israel , peace will be nothing but wishful thinking .
It is vital to step up the EU 's relations with Jordan , given the major role played by the late King Hussein in overcoming the stalemate in negotiations .
A Europe which is incapable of giving itself a political identity cannot claim to have the weight required to play a determining role , both in guaranteeing peace and in fostering cooperation and development .
And yet the EU has to play an increasingly important part in these processes .
Otherwise its role will simply be to beat the human rights drum : a noble role , without a doubt , but utterly useless in terms of influencing proceedings , unless our words are followed by deeds .
Two factors seem to me to be germane to a policy of economic revival and reform : firstly , debt cancellation for countries undertaking to reinvest the amounts involved in development projects ; and , secondly , closer cooperation with SMEs andcraft undertakings .
It is not ' cathedrals in the desert ' that will generate growth , but the organisation of a network of small businesses geared to making high-quality , typical and distinctive products .
Expanding the production base in the Mediterranean countries will help to combat illegal and clandestine immigration , which represents a running sore both for the immigrants and for the European host countries .
Mr President , let me finally turn to the German Presidency , which is hosting the Euro-Mediterranean Committee in Bonn on 19 March and Stuttgart on 14 April , to say that we hope these meetings will finally lead to tangible progress .
Mr President , allow me first of all to say that the Council 's desire to concentrate all its efforts on foreign and security policy only highlights its disregard for Parliament . It does not listen to us and I would like to thank Commissioner Marín as he has provided us with some of the answers we had hoped to receive from the Council .
I would very briefly like to say that we are dealing here with an extremely old problem , perhaps one of the oldest problems affecting humanity . But we are faced with a very specific timetable beginning with the Stuttgart Conference on 4 April .
A month later , there is the possible declaration of independence by the Palestinians , and then there are the Israeli elections .
I think that we need to take a very practical line in this dual debate , covering , as it does , two issues that are very closely linked . Although we have tried to take them in isolation at times in order to make progress , it is clear that the cornerstone of the Mediterranean process rests to a large extent on finding a successful solution to the peace process in the Middle East because that is the only multilateral forum that exists in the Mediterranean .
In my view , the European Union should promote something that the Presidency mentioned . Without being too specific , it is basically the fact that , clearly , there is a right that we must recognise .
Exercising that right is another matter , and that is an area where we can help .
Indeed , we can also set an example .
We certainly have the ability to contribute , and I believe that we can actually do so : issues such as water and regional development spring to mind here . But , in my opinion , we also have the authority and the opportunity to establish that there is no fundamental inconsistency between a declaration of independence and allowing those who have their own identity and who might help find common ground in many areas to return to the negotiating table .
That is what we have done and I think that that is where our strength lies .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Colajanni on his excellent work and to thank Commissioner Marín for what he has said here today .
There is one very important point regarding the Colajanni report and that is paragraph 13 , which refers to the need for an initiative on the part of the Council to make the new presence of the European Union in the Middle East more visible .
I very much regret , and indeed it is a great shame , that the Council is not present at this debate , as we are thereby being deprived of the right to obtain answers on a number of points which , unfortunately , lead to false reasoning regarding the content of this new initiative .
The Council is making a mistake by leaving it entirely up to the United States to formulate proposals for a solution to the Middle East problem .
The Council is mistaken if it thinks that the presence of a single representative , who is unaided and lacks the support of any form of infrastructure , can solve the problem .
The Council is wrong if it thinks that the presence of the European Union should be confined to trips and contacts and that it should not include recommendations on the specific issues and problems which make up the Middle East question .
We call on the President-in-Office to tell us : firstly , what the position of the European Union is on the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the Golan Heights ; secondly , what the opinion of the European Union is regarding a solution to the problem of Southern Lebanon and , thirdly , what will happen to the agreement between the European Union and Syria .
Finally , Mr President , in order for us to arrive at that point , the institutional presence of the Council in the Middle East needs to be re-examined .
This can only be achieved if a decision is finally reached to set up a joint task force comprising the Council , the Commission and , possibly , the European Parliament , which can tackle each of these problems in turn .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to highlight once again the importance of the Mediterranean policy for the European Union .
We are currently undertaking enlargement negotiations with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
I would like to be sure that this dialogue with the Eastern European states will not prevent the European Union from concentrating on the problems in southern Europe and those affecting the Mediterranean countries .
In my opinion , this North-South dialogue must work in parallel with the policies being implemented by the European Union with a view to achieving a fair and necessary enlargement towards Central and Eastern Europe .
These issues were raised at the 1995 Barcelona Conference and the proposal was made to initiate dialogue between civil society in the north and south of the Mediterranean .
The Euro-Med Civil Forum held in Barcelona a few days after the Euro-Mediterranean Conference also examined these issues and established the foundations for discussion and collaboration between north and south .
Following that conference , a second conference was held in Naples , and similarly further Euro-Mediterranean Conferences were held in Malta and will this year be held in Stuttgart .
This dialogue must continue because otherwise Europe will not meet the conditions necessary to ensure that we have a peaceful and friendly future alongside our neighbours in the southern Mediterranean .
Mr President , I would like to begin with a question of terminology that has me rather worried .
The report talks about the Middle East .
But I thought that for us , as Europeans , the area in question was the Near East .
It is the Middle East for the United States and that is of some importance as it means that European politics are , in fact , looked on as subordinate to US politics .
That is why I think it is worth making the distinction . The Commission communication is a good one .
I would even go so far as to say that it is progressive since it presents figures and puts forward arguments relating to the political failings and how the situation of the Palestinians has deteriorated since the beginning of the peace process .
The conclusion to be drawn from this is very clear if we compare the European Union 's contribution with that of the United States and the rest of the world .
The EU must play a greater role as a joint leader rather than sitting on the sidelines . And in order to do so , the European Union must become an ethical point of reference for what is happening in the Near East .
We must therefore state clearly that if an international agreement provides the legal authority for the Palestinians to declare an independent state on 4 May , then the European Union must support such an international agreement with all the consequences it entails .
If we do not , we will constantly be defending the aggressor and exonerating it , while asking the victim to remain calm .
Clearly , we must do exactly the reverse .
Mr President , the Colajanni report once again sheds light on a glaring reality , a treachery which many refuse to see : the evident determination of Israel to ignore the agreements concluded and to ignore the UN resolutions , which they do not care about .
The European Union has a duty to stand up to this .
The obligation to intervene , invented to support causes that were far less just , must be applied to the Middle East with determination and steadfastness .
It is time to ensure that Israel can no longer harm the Palestinian people as it has been doing for more than 50 years .
Europe cannot allow an imperialist and racist Israel on its borders to remain with impunity .
The Palestinians ' aspiration of finally receiving the land promised to them a thousand times over is totally legitimate and the intention of the Palestinian Authority to declare on 4 May 1999 the independence of the territories that are still occupied , must be supported by the EU at a political , financial and , if necessary , military level so that a free Palestine can finally flourish .
Mr President , here we are , on the eve of the Stuttgart conference , voicing criticism of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
I shall not dwell on the difficulties in the peace process , because the rapporteurs have already done so , or on the need for a more incisive EU role , because most of my colleagues have already done so .
I would rather refer to the limitations of the instruments in the Barcelona process .
I think we all now realise that multilateral relations and decentralised cooperation - which were perhaps the most worthwhile of the Barcelona instruments - are faltering , whereas bilateral relations between the EU and the Member States are suffering from all the problems linked to ratification dates which have been recalled by Mr Marín .
I for my part would invite the Council to react to five very detailed proposals contained in the Sakellariou report : human rights , encouraging active participation by civil society , enabling new states to participate politically in this process , debt and immigration .
Perhaps , if these proposals are taken up by the Council in Stuttgart , this very difficult and complex process will be revitalised .
I believe that if the Commission receives much clearer political input , it will be better able to extricate itself from the managerial problems which we all realise are extremely awkward .
Mr President , the last contribution by Mrs Napoletano obliges me to alter my own , because otherwise I would add nothing new .
I wish to stress that her position is identical to mine . Obviously , if we are in agreement from one side of this House to the other , it means that this approach , and this one alone , is the right one .
So I shall use my minute and a half - which , as the speaker before last said , is somewhat ludicrous given the important points needing to be made - to express a few thoughts to Mr Marín , but not without first thanking Mr Sakellariou and Mr Colajanni for their remarkable work , which thoroughly covers every aspect needing to be covered .
To continue this theme of thoroughness , I would just comment on one of these aspects : civil society .
Mr Vallvé mentioned it a moment ago .
After Barcelona , ideas and proposals were put forward concerning civil society , and it does not seem to me that they received due consideration .
Mr Marín , I agree with you that it is difficult to handle situations of such sensitivity and importance .
It is also true , however , that where credible external bodies exist - and there are some in Europe and in the Mediterranean - then your hand should probably be strengthened from a managerial point of view .
And , finally , just one comment of substance : after Barcelona , Palermo , Malta and Naples , let us not be lured into making Mediterranean tourism policy the dynamo of growth .
That would be quite feasible , but let us confine ourselves to tackling more serious problems , namely those highlighted by Mrs Napoletano and myself .
Mr President , with this report and its one-sided view of the Middle East peace process the European Parliament is continuing a rather sad tradition .
While repeatedly denouncing supposed human rights violations in Israel , Parliament is treating human rights violations on the part of Arab dictatorships and the Palestinian administration with much greater caution .
We consider direct interference in the election to be unacceptable .
Israel is the only democracy in the region and the political strategy of the democratically-elected government should be respected .
After all , the peace process did not reach a state of deadlock because the wrong politicians are in power in Israel but because Arab terrorists refuse to end their campaign .
Critics of Israel have not yet learned very much when it comes to supporting Israel in the fight against terrorism , which costs the lives of hundreds of innocent people every year .
Finally , I would like to comment on a point made by one of the previous speakers , who described the Gaza Strip as a concentration camp .
This comparison with the Nationalist Socialist death camps is absolutely outrageous .
Mr President , I believe that before the next Euro-Mediterranean Conference , the Council should give consideration to Mauritania 's desire to participate fully in the Euro-Mediterranean process . Parliament has already done this itself at the Euro-Mediterranean Forum .
Mauritania is one of the five countries that together form the Arab Maghreb .
It is important to coordinate the Maghreb as a whole because of its social and economic development , and in Europe 's history there are terrible examples of what has happened when a geopolitical Arab region has been divided .
Mauritania is also involved in NATO 's Mediterranean dialogue .
This suggestion is far from being premature as Mauritania has been participating in the process since it first began .
As Commissioner Marín is aware , Mauritania has participated as an observer for ten years .
I think that that is too long to continue being an observer and that it is now time to provide Mauritania with the opportunity to take part .
The Euro-Mediterranean process is global in nature and includes countries such as Sweden , Finland , Portugal and Ireland .
Why , then , should we not include this ancient country from the Arab Maghreb ?
In my opinion , this would be an excellent time to remind the Council that Parliament supports Mauritania 's full participation in the Euro-Mediterranean process . This idea was approved and incorporated by Parliament in the Final Declaration of the Euro-Mediterranean Forum .
The Council is not present here as its representative preferred to attend an informal meeting .
As a result , I would ask you to forward this speech to the Council because if not , it will not be aware of this matter and the Stuttgart Conference is due to take place at the beginning of April .
I would therefore ask you to pass this on personally since the Council should have been represented here .
Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome the fact that these two reports are being discussed jointly here as the problems experienced in this region can only be solved by a joint effort on the part of all concerned .
However , when it comes to the Middle East peace process , we are repeatedly given the impression that Israel is considered to be largely responsible .
I also notice that these reports are tolerant towards shortcomings on the part of the Palestinians , but where similar shortcomings are detected on the other side they are accompanied by warnings or criticisms .
Some of the wording is also reminiscent of the resolutions on countries in Africa which waver between military dictatorships and one-party regimes and regularly have to be warned to observe the principles of democracy .
But Israel is more or less the only functioning democracy in the whole region and it is also a country that is particularly under threat .
When Members of this House always demand that the same concessions should be shown to the parties to the conflict , we wonder why the same tolerance is not shown towards Israel .
Why is Israel required to accept a separate Palestinian state instead of also expecting the Palestinians to appreciate that Israel is currently in a special situation and that allowance must be made for its sensitivity , especially after the repeated terrorist attacks ?
Now , more than ever , patience is required , as it always is when a country is about to hold important elections .
This patience will certainly also be required when the deadline of 4 May , agreed in Oslo , expires .
We cannot then allow one side to create a fait accompli .
In my view it would not hurt us to be more pro-Israel in our advice .
It deserves it .
Mr President , it is well known that the EU 's Mediterranean policy needs to be strengthened and overhauled .
In the Middle East peace process , the United States is jointly responsible for the implementation of the accords , whereas the European Union remains on the sidelines of discussions concerning the political future of that region .
I hope that the Stuttgart conference will be an opportunity to launch the reform of a policy based on the principle of attentiveness in distinction , which means playing an active role in the Mediterranean Arab world without forgetting the unalterable historical and cultural differences which divide us .
The best guarantee of stability , especially in international politics , is a healthy , sensible realism .
That is why I see the need for a common immigration policy : a restrictive policy applying rigidly the principle of Community preference .
I believe in the effectiveness of well-organised cooperation , but I am suspicious of moves to integrate Mediterranean states into our Union which , I would remind you , is a community of European countries .
Mr President , I shall focus on Mr Colajanni 's report . I would like to congratulate him on his excellent work and on having prepared such a well-structured and comprehensive report .
I would like to concentrate mainly on the European Union 's role in the Middle East peace process .
I must say once again that I am very concerned at the lack of progress that has been made recently in securing a final peace settlement that is acceptable to both sides .
In my opinion , the European Union must be very clear and must ensure that its position prevails . As the leading provider of economic assistance to the region , it can no longer allow itself to remain in the background when it comes to political questions as - and I would stress this point , Commissioner - the European Union is the biggest provider of per capita aid to Palestinians in the world .
As regards the EU 's cooperation with the Middle East at a political level , we must continue to make every effort to help build autonomous and independent institutions for the Palestinian people .
Our aim must be to promote and structure a civil society in Palestine , as was mentioned earlier . We must also ensure that the aid we provide is used to train civil servants who will be the backbone of a new civil administration .
As far as economic assistance is concerned , the Union must be able to transform its aid into tangible and lasting results on the ground with a view to improving the welfare of the Palestinians and generating an economic fabric in the region that affords Palestine a certain degree of independence from other countries . This is particularly important , for example , in terms of ensuring that they have the ability to export their own products .
I agree with the rapporteur that it is essential to monitor the way in which the Palestinian authorities make use of the aid donated by means of auditing procedures , and this should mean that all expenditure and all measures taken are totally transparent .
In order to achieve all this , we need not only the Union 's commitment , but also the participation of Israel in order to allow economic development in the region . In that way , both peoples will be able to coexist and respect each other , which is necessary for peace in the region .
Mr President , I just wanted to say that this has been an excellent debate .
I see that a large majority of the House is in favour of a certain position and its main points are very clear .
In accordance with the guidelines set out in the Sakellariou and Tomlinson reports , we will present the programming to the Council and to the European Parliament at the same time . It is convenient to have the Council 's decision and Parliament 's assent at the same time so that we can take an overall decision and resolve the many issues where improvement is still needed .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Trans-European energy networks
The next item is the report ( A4-0087 / 99 ) by Mr Adam , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision amending Decision No 1254 / 96 / EC laying down a series of guidelines for trans-European energy networks ( COM ( 98 ) 0542 - C4-0556 / 98-98 / 0284 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , as Members will be aware , the trans-European electricity and gas networks are an important part of our energy strategy and there is provision in the Community 's budget to carry out studies as to how these can be best improved .
Colleagues should also note that there has been a slight change in the approach .
Some of the money is now available for the actual construction of these networks .
The Commission has now come forward with a list of additional projects which are felt to be within the Community interest and therefore subject to the codecision procedure .
They are summarised on pages 8 and 9 of my report .
They are : the connection of isolated electricity networks , the development of internal electricity connections and various gas proposals .
Most of the proposals overall relate to gas , to gas interconnections and underground storage facilities .
One rather interesting thing about them is the way in which the islands and remote areas of the Community are increasingly considered for linkage to these networks .
Perhaps as an aside we might note that it gives an indication of the difficulties we have in exploiting renewable energies , which are often seen as the saviour of the remote areas : our main networks are continually pushing to the limits of Community territory .
Looking at the Commission proposals I am not aware of any particular problem with any of the projects .
Some of them have been up for discussion for quite some time .
Many of them take gas into areas of the Community which are not well supplied with it at the moment .
Of particular importance are the projects which develop gas supplies from Eastern Europe .
This is important in relation to our growing demand for fuel from that source .
We have tabled three amendments in committee .
They have been tabled in order to strengthen the links with offshore islands in the case of Greece and Spain .
We understand from the discussions in committee that these are not likely to cause any problem for the Commission or for the Council , so the procedures should not be held up because of this .
There is , however , an aspect of the overall problem which I would like to mention and which the committee feels is important .
Because this is a legislative text I cannot make reference in the resolution to anything other than the formalities that are laid down by Parliament .
But the committee feels that we need to have a better link with the broader areas of policy as far as networks are concerned .
It is all very well providing the networks , but they affect competition policy .
There is some unease for instance in the electricity sector , and in the gas sector as well , that although we provide networks which in theory can work in two directions , all too often they only operate in one direction .
There is concern also that the ownership of electricity stations seems to be more easily bought in some countries than in others .
The way in which the liberalised market operates is certainly more liberal in some countries than in others , and it seems to me and the committee that in approving projects of this type we ought to have more of an assurance that they are in line with the Community 's overall competition policy .
We also feel that we should be looking at how we can extend the electricity grids into Eastern Europe and as far as the former Soviet Union .
This is the way we ought to be going .
Not only do technical issues arise in this matter but there are also questions of competition and questions relating to environmental impact .
We hope that the Commission will look at the whole range of these areas , including oil pipelines - which are not technically part of the network agreement - and bring forward a communication on this subject in the near future .
We thought we would get gas from the Caspian area very readily .
We know there are demands from Asia for that .
The committee welcomes the progress that is being made .
We look forward to the expansion and integration of these networks with the countries of Eastern Europe .
Mr President , thank you for allowing me to take part in the Energy Committee 's debate .
There are two things to which I would like to draw attention .
The first is that there is an inherent conflict in opening the trans-European energy network to former Soviet states .
These states clearly want to be able to operate in a liberal market and earn money .
But when , as Parliament 's representative , I discuss this with my colleagues in the Lithuanian Parliament , the disagreement is unmistakable .
They want to earn money and they want access to a liberal market on different terms from those we wish to see .
This is a conflict .
Should an Ignalina nuclear power station price-dump on the European market ?
That is the question my colleagues put to our colleagues in the Lithuanian Parliament , the Seimas .
And the conflict will intensify later today when we discuss Mr Adam 's second report .
There is an issue of interpretation here when the Lithuanian side maintains that the Copenhagen criteria contain nothing about energy .
It therefore becomes a debate in which energy is left out of the real negotiations .
And yet we must maintain the demands for closure , even if our colleagues in the Lithuanian Parliament cannot accept them .
At the same time , however , we must be realistic , because the funds we are making available and the financing we can offer is peanuts compared to what such an operation will cost .
I agree with Mr Adam - whom I should like to thank , by the way , for taking part in the meetings with our Lithuanian colleagues - but I stress that we need solutions which take into account the economies of the applicant countries .
It will not work otherwise .
I would like to emphasise once again the problem of granting access to a liberal market for some nuclear power stations which should in fact have been closed down a long time ago .
It creates a conflict in the political situation , in the political negotiations connected with accession .
Mr President , I do not think that we can combine these reports .
That is why I have said that it is one thing to talk about trans-European energy networks for gas and electricity , and another thing to talk about the safety of nuclear power stations in Eastern Europe .
We should not combine the two things because , despite the fact that we are pressed for time , we will not manage to understand anything .
I would like to say to the Commissioner that , in my opinion , the ongoing activities of the Commission and the Member States in the field of energy are extremely important .
I particularly welcome the development of the gas and electricity networks as this is essential for the liberalisation of markets , to establish closer relations and to improve the standard of living in the countries involved .
I agree with all the points made by Mr Adam , which I will not repeat .
But I would like to point out that it is important to ensure that we have sufficient resources to extend the networks , and we will support all efforts to that effect .
The 1996 decision , which was reviewed in 1997 , included 74 projects .
The 1999 revision has included a further 17 projects .
I would like to highlight one of those in particular , which has already been approved by the Council and which was based on an amendment by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy concerning Spain . It involves strengthening internal connections , which , in turn , will also allow us to improve international exchanges .
So a great deal is being done , as I mentioned at the beginning , and perhaps some projects are moving too quickly .
However , all investment in electricity and gas networks will be important , perhaps particularly so in the electricity sector , Commissioner , because it is generally forgotten - or at least , this House tends to forget - that electricity cannot be stored and the service provided has to be immediate , in other words there must be immediate production to meet demand .
As a result , we have no option but to develop a system of widespread interconnections , to extend our networks and to also include , of course , the countries of Eastern Europe .
Some people say that we do not cooperate enough with the countries of Eastern Europe .
We should increase their possibilities of generating electricity .
We should help them and they should help us .
I would therefore like to thank you for all your efforts and hope that you continue with them .
You will have our constant support .
Mr President , in the short time I have available , I would like to mention one of the key projects of the trans-European energy network .
I am referring to the project connecting the French and Spanish electricity networks with a high-tension line .
The line is practically finished and all that remains is to select the connection point to cross the Pyrenees .
And that is where the problem arises .
The project involves passing this 400 000 volt electric cable through a natural park , a bird reserve and one of the few virgin valleys in the Pyrenees .
Naturally , all the political parties in Aragon , the parliament , the government , the trade unions and the chambers of commerce , have directly opposed such a ridiculous plan .
As a result , this trans-European network project has been paralysed for years .
I would ask us to apply some common sense , in this case as in others , in order to combine essential energy projects with respect for the environment , sustainable development and , above all , the unanimous wish of those who may be affected , particularly when less traumatic solutions actually exist .
Mr President , on the subject of using nuclear energy to produce electricity , in recent years we have had two camps : the enthusiastic supporters and the resolute opponents .
Since the German Government 's unambiguous rejection of nuclear power and the announcements by Belgium and Switzerland in recent weeks that they too will not use this technology , we are now faced with a completely new situation .
This technology no longer has a future .
In view of the fact that there is also enormous doubt concerning the economic viability of nuclear power stations , as established in the last few days by the Pemelin commission , Euratom loans for the construction of new reactors can no longer be justified .
For our own safety we must devote all our efforts to setting new parameters in energy supply .
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz recognised this clearly .
Her amendments are a step in the right direction .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Adam , for his excellent report .
The list of projects of common interest was updated in 1997 , when it became necessary to add projects to the list , chiefly to take account of the enlargement of the Community .
The majority of the amendments and additions that have been put forward by the Commission during the present phase are the result of the rapid development of the situation in Europe , mainly in the gas sector .
The projects that have been included in the Commission proposal have all been chosen on the basis of their contribution to the general objectives and on the basis of special criteria which determined the direction to be taken in the consultations we had with the industry . Moreover , they are fully in line with the intentions of the Member States , at least insofar as these have been expressed by the experts on energy matters with whom we had the opportunity of holding talks .
The Commission accepts all the amendments tabled by the European Parliament . In particular , we accept the two amendments for the inclusion of projects concerning the electricity grids in Greece and Spain .
We fully agree that the additions to this list of plans for projects of common interest are wholly appropriate .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to dwell in particular on the case of Greece .
We are providing opportunities for the funding of studies and projects to link the islands to each other and also to the Greek mainland .
I think you will recognise the opportunities that are opening up , not only in respect of the energy balance but also for the use of renewable energy sources and , mainly , of solar and wind energy , which we have in abundance in Greece .
I also want to highlight the concern expressed in the excellent report produced by Mr Adam regarding the security and the external dimension of the energy networks .
In the coming months the European Parliament will present a document on the security of the Community energy supply .
I also want to emphasise that the general issue of the external dimension , especially the issue of connections with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union , is a constant concern of the Commission .
Mr Sindal and Mr Adam had the opportunity to talk about this issue previously .
Our desire to keep the European Parliament fully informed on all these issues and on all the developments in the years to come remains steadfast .
Finally , the Commission hopes that the motion for a resolution we have before us will be adopted as soon as possible , so that it will be possible for these projects and especially the feasibility studies to get under way . The latter are necessary to show us to what extent the projects are sustainable and can be incorporated into the energy plans of the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me once again to thank Mr Adam for the excellent report he has put before us .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that clear and concise contribution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Nuclear sector-related activities for third countries
The next item is the report ( A4-0088 / 99 ) by Mr Adam , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the Commission communication on nuclear sector-related activities for the applicant countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the New Independent States ( COM ( 98 ) 0134 - C4-0314 / 98 ) .
Mr President , since 1990 nuclear power has been an important issue for the European Union 's relations with the Central and Eastern European countries and the newly independent states .
This importance is reinforced by the enlargement negotiations .
The European Parliament has recognised the sovereign right of states to determine their own energy policies , including the nuclear option .
The European Union has a significant presence in the nuclear activities of the Central and Eastern European countries and the newly independent states .
There has been undisputed progress in improving the operational safety of nuclear power stations , including the first generation reactors of the RBMK1000 and the VVER230 types .
These improvements in safety have been achieved particularly by the use of on-site assistance teams , supported by the PHARE and TACIS programmes .
These have resulted in a radical change in safety culture .
I would note that this change in safety culture and the increased operational safety cannot be measured in direct monetary terms .
The fact that these benefits cannot be readily measured , however , does not make them any less real .
It is becoming increasingly obvious that despite the massive investment of the European Union in the nuclear activities of the Eastern European countries , the European Union cannot dictate policy to other states .
This includes countries such as the newly independent states as well as those in the first and second wave applicant countries .
In the case of the Russian Federation , the constant referral to unsafe reactors and the pressure to close these reactors down is somewhat resented .
To the Russians there are no unsafe reactors ; there are only first and second generation reactors .
The pressure to close down is seen as an unwarranted interference in domestic affairs .
We should note that all the reactors in the European Union , in Central and Eastern Europe , in Russia and the newly independent states operate to the standards set by the International Atomic Energy Agency and the nuclear conventions which are currently in force .
It is clear that the use of nuclear energy in these Eastern European countries will continue .
Many of them have established policies which aim for maximum energy independence and security of supply .
Many of them do not wish to be dependent on Russia for supplies of oil and gas .
We must also remember that there are perceived economic advantages to continuing to use existing nuclear stations rather than building new alternatives .
To add to the complications , some of these countries provide their neighbours with electricity .
This is true of Lithuania and Bulgaria .
Bulgaria exports to Turkey something like US $ 600 million of electricity every year - badly needed currency .
To press for closure in those circumstances raises considerable resentment .
Although the European Union has been very active in the nuclear sector , up to now there has been a clear failure of the European Union and G-7 policy .
Not one unsafe or first generation reactor has been closed as a result of current policy .
It is clear that the nuclear states of Eastern Europe will continue to pursue the nuclear option .
Two main factors are responsible for the failure of this policy : firstly , the ambiguity of the agreements and , secondly , the lack of provision for alternative electricity capacity .
I should also add that there is a lack of consideration of the perceived national security and economic needs of many of these countries .
Future activity must involve real cooperation and negotiation with the recipients of aid .
The European Union cannot take a heavy-handed , dictatorial position .
We cannot impose our will upon those countries .
We cannot tell them what they must do .
We have tried this and , I have noted , it does not work .
It is my profound belief that we can only advance through cooperation and negotiation .
This negotiation must include an agreed energy strategy for each country in which provision for alternative electricity supply must be a fundamental component .
Another essential component will be the revision of regulatory standards by the Western European regulatory authorities with the involvement of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the European Commission .
The ultimate aim of this increased cooperation will be the development of an acquis communautaire for the use of nuclear energy .
Nuclear safety standards , applicable throughout the European Union , the Central and Eastern European countries and the newly independent states must be the goal .
We urge the Commission to coordinate its own services much more effectively than it has in the past .
I hope it will accept that cooperation and not confrontation must underpin our relations with the applicant countries and the newly independent states in relation to nuclear activities .
First of all , my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Adam , for his first-rate and above all constructive report .
I would also like to express my appreciation of the intensive debate and positive exchanges of views held in the European Parliament on the difficult subject of nuclear safety .
The report we are looking at today paints a realistic picture of the scope of the problems and of the difficult task facing anyone working to improve nuclear safety in Central and Eastern Europe .
Unfortunately , as the report makes clear , change and improvement are not things which can be achieved in the very short term .
And there are reasons for this .
First of all , and I heard Mr Adam say the same , the partner countries with which we examine these problems are sovereign states .
They set their own energy policy and their own nuclear policy as well . Some of them depend very heavily on nuclear energy for their electricity supplies and for export revenue too .
Mr Adam has also made those points this afternoon .
A third obstacle is of course the extremely high cost of modernising , not to mention decommissioning , nuclear plants or individual reactors .
The strategy which has been much discussed , as it was in the report of the European Court of Auditors and the Commission , goes back to the G7 decision of 1992 , which was really taken in the wake of the Chernobyl disaster .
A strategy for nuclear energy was devised at that time to serve as a basis for the Commission 's activities in this field too .
The short-term imperatives were to find practical solutions to the most pressing safety problems which we had identified jointly with the IAEA , for example appointing independent and competent safety authorities and improving reactor safety in both Eastern Europe and the New Independent States .
For the longer term , emphasis was placed on sustainable improvements to safety , on the one hand by encouraging the decommissioning of the less safe reactors , replacing them with alternative energy sources and improving energy efficiency , and on the other hand by helping to modernise those reactors which could be made safe by modernisation .
As you know , that was not the case with all nuclear reactors .
Some of them simply had to be closed down .
As regards the most pressing safety problems , I am convinced that despite the criticisms which might be made and which have been made , the European Union 's efforts have borne fruit and that the money - 800 million or so - was well spent .
A number of things have been achieved under the nuclear safety programmes .

To mention just a few : the independent regulatory authorities have been set up or strengthened and the legal framework needed to operate a nuclear safety policy is in place , both in Central Europe and the New Independent States , though the quality of the regulatory authorities varies from country to country .
Technical solutions have been sought to the most important and most serious design faults in nuclear facilities .
Exchange and transfer of know-how has led to progress in fostering a culture of nuclear safety in the region .
This has led to a more formal and regular dialogue between nuclear facility operators and the regulatory authorities , and also to an acceptance of the need to apply high safety standards to the building of new reactors .
I should also mention the substantial contribution which has been made towards improving operating practice in nuclear facilities and modernising them , in part by the supply of equipment and the promotion of greater awareness of the problem of waste management .
Lastly , we have helped , and are still helping , to resolve the problems presented by the Chernobyl facility ; in addition to the ' shelter implementation plan ' , the Commission has helped significantly to implement the policy devised by the G7 to achieve closure of Chernobyl by the year 2000 .
In a nutshell , the cost of our work to improve nuclear safety has been between EUR 750 and 850 million .
The mere cost of building the so-called sarcophagus around the Chernobyl reactor IV , the site of the explosion , is put at between EUR 600 and 800 million .
This shows the scale of the costs involved , and it has been calculated that the cost of all the modernising and decommissioning work required , just for the dangerous facilities in Central and Eastern Europe , is likely to be between four and five billion euros .
These are very large sums , so of course the 100 million a year which the Commission has spent on its activities is a relatively small amount .
Building on the G7 strategy , the Commission will continue its policy of helping the partner countries to modernise those reactors which can be modernised , but it will also continue working towards decommissioning those reactors which cannot be modernised because of fundamental technical or design faults inherent in that reactor type .
I should stress here that there is a difference in implementation of the policy between the applicant countries and the New Independent States of the former Soviet Union .
It is obvious that the prospect of Union membership gives us greater leverage over the nuclear policy of the applicant countries .
We need to realise that closing down rectors is only realistic if broader energy strategies are developed at the same time .
Mr Adam 's report makes that point as well .
In line with the report 's recommendation , the Commission will foster efforts to secure a strategy of this kind as part of the pre-accession strategy for the applicant countries , as well as under the partnership agreement with the countries of the former Soviet Union .
That is not new .
We have been working on this with these countries for quite some time now .
We are also holding talks with Lithuania , Bulgaria and shortly with Armenia .
These are three countries in which we do not only want to implement these comprehensive energy strategies ; they also have nuclear facilities which ought , on the basis of earlier agreements and notably the Nuclear Safety Account , to be closed down .
We know that these facilities generate much of the electricity in these countries , and we are well aware of the major economic interests which are at stake here if facilities close down , of the loss of important energy export opportunities and of the sacrifices which these countries will be required to make in this area .
This is why we are seeking , and have sought , to cooperate with the international financial organisations to draw up financing plans which can serve as a basis for international financial aid and the funding of alternative sources of energy .
And I should emphasis once again that I quite agree with Mr Adam that we must not seek to solve these problems with the countries concerned in a confrontational way .
Nevertheless , and we are attempting to get this message across to Lithuania and Bulgaria , we are dealing here with earlier decommissioning undertakings which these countries gave in the context of the Nuclear Safety Account , and we are keen to help them face up to the consequences of decommissioning and also to absorb those consequences .
The Commission has learned a great deal , not only from practical experience and internal audits , but also from the criticisms voiced in various reports of the European Parliament and the Court of Auditors .
The problems which the programme experienced in the initial phase are now behind us .
The Commission has drawn on its experience , and on your observations too , to make the necessary changes in the programme 's management .
A propos of that , I should like to offer the following examples .
Much of the delay in carrying out the programmes was due to the fact that the instruments available were not sufficiently well tailored to the specific requirements of this sector .
The new TACIS regulation should help to change this .
It covers the period 2000 to 2006 and has three clear priorities for nuclear safety : to continue fostering the transfer of a culture of safety in the field of nuclear energy ; to improve the management of spent fissile materials and nuclear waste , notably in the north-west of Russia ; and to contribute to international measures aimed at improving nuclear safety , which is a fairly broad description but naturally has everything to do with further efforts to close down a number of nuclear facilities which are deemed unsafe .
We hope that Parliament will deliver its opinion on the new regulation in due course , so that it can indeed come into force on 1 January of next year .
I am more than happy to assure Parliament that we shall report periodically on progress under the PHARE and TACIS programmes on nuclear safety .
Lastly , it is our firm intention to improve the internal management of the aid programmes .
The Commission is currently debating a proposal for a nuclear safety task force within the Commission , aimed at better coordination of the ten directorates-general which are concerned to some extent with these issues within the Commission .
In the light of the discussions during the last part-session , and in order to give a clearer general and more detailed overview of what the Commission has done to date in the field of nuclear safety , we recently sent Parliament 's Energy Committee and a number of other committees an ' aide-mémoire ' setting out in detail the work already done and further plans for the immediate future .
I hope that this will in any event have helped to lay a strong foundation for further debate with the European Parliament on this important subject .
. ( IT ) Mr President , nuclear safety affects millions of people in the European Union and in the Eastern European countries .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , which unanimously adopted my opinion on this report on 27 October 1998 , considers that nuclear safety is a crucial element of the pre-accession strategy .
The Commission stated in Agenda 2000 that nuclear safety was a key objective , given the prospect of EU membership for a number of countries in Central and Eastern Europe . It subdivided nuclear installations into three categories : obsolete reactors of Soviet design which must be closed down definitively ; ones which can be upgraded to acceptable levels of safety ; and , lastly , the few reactors of Western design , which can remain in service provided that high safety standards are maintained in the long term .
It emerges from the Court of Auditors ' special report that only ECU 300 million of the 850 m made available for the period 1990-1997 were spent by the CEECs on nuclear safety .
Crucial upgrading and restructuring work must therefore be carried out under PHARE and TACIS .
The safety standards of these power plants must be inspected by an independent authority recognised by the IAEA and the EU .
In view of the recommissioning of one of the Chernobyl nuclear reactors , the countries applying for EU membership and the countries formed by the collapse of the Soviet Union must provide Europe as a whole with safety guarantees , in full awareness of the economic and social implications of such statements .
I repeat that nuclear safety is a crucial element of the pre-accession strategy .
Unless guarantees are provided , accession could represent a risk to our collective safety .
It is therefore the hope of the Foreign Affairs Committee that all available financial resources will be used to mount programmes aimed at solving the question of nuclear safety in Europe once and for all .
I am also speaking directly on behalf of the Liberal Group and not just for the REX Committee , because otherwise I would not have three and a half minutes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , my compliments to Mr Adam on his report .
It is in a way his swan song , I would say .
It is not easy to get everyone to adopt the same line on matters of nuclear energy , but I think in this case he has succeeded very well .
The Union 's energy policy vis-à-vis the countries of Central and Eastern Europe is focused on the safe operation of the existing nuclear facilities .
Under the objectives of Agenda 2000 , Soviet-designed reactors which cannot be modernised at reasonable cost must be decommissioned , because these reactors are unsafe .
But in fact not one reactor in Eastern Europe has been closed down since 1992 .
Even the Chernobyl reactors I and II , although they have been inoperative for a number of years now , are still not regarded as having been decommissioned by the Ukrainian Government , despite all the resolutions passed by the European Parliament .
Sovereign states are entitled to determine the main lines of their energy policy , says the rapporteur .
But that does not mean that the Union has to stand quietly by and see our resolutions ignored .
If the Union puts money into Eastern Europe through aid programmes and loans , then we may be able to influence the strategy followed and give an advantage to certain forms of energy over others .
That is one of the few instruments the Union has for forcing unsafe nuclear facilities to close , and we should make use of such instruments .
The safety of existing facilities should also be used as an essential criterion for accession to the Union .
My second point concerns the Court of Auditors ' report on measures taken by the European Union in the field of nuclear safety in Eastern Europe .
The Commissioner has outlined these for us in detail .
The members of the REX Committee were shocked by the report 's conclusions . We have said as much previously .
We appreciate that it is not easy for the Commission to operate in the former Eastern bloc , given the degree of red tape there and the complexity of the nuclear industry .
But precisely because of that , the Commission should have shown greater care in implementing these programmes .
Greater use should be made of the specialist know-how available on the spot in Eastern Europe .
That brings me to my final point , and I have a question for Commissioner van den Broek .
A few weeks ago , in response to a question of mine , your colleagues told the REX Committee and the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy that they were busy on an inventory of the millennium problem , checking the millennium compliance of the computers in the facilities in Central and Eastern Europe .
So when , Commissioner , can we expect a report here in Parliament on the millennium compliance of the nuclear facilities in Central and Eastern Europe ?
I ask this because we are already almost a quarter of the way through 1999 , and 1 January 2000 is the crucial date .
I would be glad to hear your answer .
In reply to Mrs Plooij , we have made funds available to the IAEA , which is naturally far better qualified to conduct this inventory than we are .
You are actually asking the Commission to do something which we were unable to do in the past and will be unable to do in the future either .
We simply do not have the know-how or the people to prepare an inventory of this kind .
That is why we said we would support the IAEA in all the relevant work it did here , and that is exactly what we are doing .
I believe the IAEA is organising a forum on these issues , and I promise to report back to you on it .
We shall adjourn the debate at this point for Question Time .
It will be resumed this evening at 9 p.m.
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz has a point of order .
Mr President , would you please be so good as to ask the Commission to be present this evening for the debate on this very important topic ?
The Commission talked longer this afternoon than all the Members put together , and as a result it is not possible for us to continue the debate now .
I would ask you to urge the Commission to ensure that it is present this evening so that we can continue .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0144 / 99 ) .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 1 , 2 and 3 will be taken together .
Question No 1 by Richard Corbett ( H-0115 / 99 )
Subject : Cost to the taxpayer of the abolition of duty-free sales In reviewing the decision to phase out duty-free sales by July 1999 , will the Council consider the loss to national exchequers of revenue arising from duty-free sales and the corresponding benefit of ending duty-free sales ?
Is the Council aware that , for the UK alone , duty-free sales account for some GBP 1 billion per annum and that this represents a loss in terms of excise duty and VAT of at least an equal amount ?
Is the Council aware that this represents a shortfall of about GBP 40 per taxpayer ?
Question No 2 by Mark Watts ( H-0135 / 99 )
Subject : Duty-free salesThe Commission will present to the ECOFIN Council on 15 March 1999 its report on addressing the employment problems resulting from any abolition of intra-EU duty-free sales .
This fulfils part of the instructions from the Heads of State at the Vienna Summit .
If the Commission does not include the possibility of an extension to the transitional arrangements for duty-free sales in its report , will the Council Presidency ask the Commission to bring forward proposals for an extension , in order to meet the reference to a possible extension set out in the conclusions of the Vienna Summit ?
Question No 3 by John Cushnahan ( H-0179 / 99 )
Subject : Duty-freeOn 17 February the Commission presented its Communication as a response to the EU leaders ' request at the Vienna Summit .
In the document the Commission shows an aggregate job loss figure of 56 000 based on figures of direct job losses from 10 Member States and indirect job losses from a mere 7 states .
The document subsequently suggests that any potential job losses arising from duty-free abolition are not ' significant ' and are not of a ' macro-economic level ' .
Does the European Council share this view ?
I should like to welcome Mr Verheugen and ask him to answer these Members ' questions together .
Mr President , in accordance with the conclusions of the European Council in Vienna , in the course of this month the Council will be examining what problems may arise as a result of the abolition of duty-free sales in intra-Community travel by air and sea .
The Council will at the same time try to find appropriate ways to deal with this situation on the basis of Commission proposals .
Meanwhile , I can inform the honourable Members that the Council received a Commission communication on this issue on 19 February 1999 .
The Council would however like to emphasise that when examining this communication it will take into account all relevant aspects of the conclusions of the Vienna Council .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for that answer .
When the Council reviews the decision on duty-free it will no doubt be looking at the problem raised , rightly , by several governments about the need to have a workable successor regime in place .
Does he agree that the review should also look at the cost to public finances if the duty-free regime were to be continued ?
Duty-free is a tax break , and a costly tax break , largely for the benefit of the tobacco and alcohol industries .
Surely the President-in-Office can think of some better causes - if the finance ministers have extra money at their disposal - than a tax break for the tobacco industry and the alcohol industry .
Mr Corbett , I can confirm that the Council will consider all relevant aspects when assessing this issue , as I said .
This includes not only the effects of the abolition of duty-free on the labour market and the economy as a whole , but of course also the consequences of revoking or changing a decision taken in the European Union .
So I can reassure you that all aspects will be taken into account , including the question of whether it is correct and justifiable from a social point of view to abolish a privilege that has until now been available to very ordinary people and is the only privilege available to this section of the population . Here I am referring in particular to people who do not have high incomes and usually do not have access to privileges of any kind , be they tax-related or others .
That will also be included in the full examination to be undertaken by the Council this month .
I should also like to thank the President-in-Office for his very full answer and , indeed , thank the German presidency for trying to review the whole sorry duty-free saga .
Would the German presidency explain the details of the German compromise , which we believe is currently under discussion in Council working groups ?
It would help the House greatly if we could have details of the German compromise proposal tonight , before ECOFIN next week .
Secondly , would he comment on what the legal basis would be for the possibility of an extension to the transitional arrangements ?
Finally , would he give a view on how , in view of the very tight timescale until the end of June this year and the fact that we have European Parliament elections in the intervening period , the Council and the Commission will be consulting this Parliament on their proposals - which we hope will be forthcoming from ECOFIN or from Berlin - on a extension to the duty-free regime ?
Mr Watts , the issue you mentioned has now been discussed twice by the Heads of State and Government .
So you can see how important it is in political terms .
Considerable time was devoted to the issue both in Vienna and at the Petersberg meeting in Bonn .
It is therefore certainly a central issue in European politics .
The Federal Chancellor did indeed put forward a German compromise proposal which involves examining whether a one-off three-year extension of the duty-free regime - that was the original proposal - would be possible .
We are currently investigating whether a legal basis exists for this .
I am not giving anything away if I say that an immediate reaction to this proposal was that we should perhaps also consider extending it for two and a half years or for three and a half years .
This has to do with holiday periods in Europe and is related to the timing of the decision .
We are currently looking into whether or not this is possible , and I cannot inform you of the outcome of this investigation as it has not yet been concluded .
Mr President , it is unbelievable that the Commission rejected our claim about job losses and yet in its communication to the Council when seven Member States supplied complete data on direct and indirect job losses it concluded that about 50 000 jobs would be sacrificed on abolition .
I would like to remind the presidency that at the Bonn Summit the EU Heads of State and of Government quite rightly rejected the Commission 's assertion that job losses could be protected by the application of Community funding and state subsidies and that a 30-month extension would be necessary to identify the problems associated with the post-duty-free regime and to put in place a workable solution to protect employees in that sector .
I would like to ask the Council to comment on the fact that a growing number of Member States have expressed serious concern regarding the success of the regime , and that the Commission 's recent statement that there is unanimous agreement that the current legislation ' provides a clear , simple and easily enforceable solution ' is totally misleading .
The Council , or rather in this case the presidency , is of course aware of the status of discussions in the Council bodies , and it is also aware of the views of the individual Member States .
I have to agree with you that we have a broad spectrum of different opinions , both on what course of action should be taken and on the consequences of the various possible decisions .
So there are some Member States who fear enormous negative consequences if we abolish duty-free , and there are others who say that these consequences will not arise .
There are others who say that there will certainly be consequences , but we must ensure that we come up with a way of softening the blow .
There is a broad spectrum here .
I believe it makes sense to gather all the facts first and analyse them , and to attempt to reach agreement , which is always very important .
We must see whether the facts and figures form a common basis and , if so , we must use this common basis to find a solution .
You know what the legal situation is : there is a decision in force , and this would have to be revoked or replaced by another if we now wanted to take a different course of action .
This can only be done by unanimous assent .
The requirement of unanimity is to be taken particularly seriously in this context as it is a factor that will be relevant in assessing what is to be done .
This is also why the Federal Chancellor , in his capacity as Council President , made the compromise proposal I just described , as he recognised or believed it likely that unanimity probably cannot be achieved for an amended decision .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply to the questions so far .
I am grateful to him for reminding us that any prolongation of duty-free would require unanimity and I sense that unanimity is not likely to be forthcoming .
May I also remind him that the job losses referred to are widely exaggerated .
The figure of 56 000 was referred to in Mr Cushnahan 's question .
That appears nowhere in the Commission 's study and it contrasts with the figure of 120 000 job losses put about by the duty-free lobby .
So , would the President-in-Office please give us an undertaking that he and the Federal Finance Minister and the Federal Chancellor will not be persuaded by the powerful lobbying of what Mr Corbett has referred to as the ' cigarette and alcohol ' lobby ?
Mr Cassidy , if your question was whether I believe that I can persuade the German Finance Minister to do something , then my answer has to be that I do not know .
Laughter
Mr President , it is quite obvious that there is a strong , powerful lobby on the side of those who are against abolishing duty-free , while there is no-one on the other side because it is made up of small groups and small businesses .
I wonder whether account will be taken of the consequences that will arise if duty-free is allowed to continue .
Will that not destroy many more jobs in small businesses that are not in the right place and do not have the opportunities available to all the other large firms ?
Mr von Habsburg , I cannot disagree with what you said .
It is one of the aspects of a controversy that we could now almost describe as ideologically charged .
You noted this yourself very clearly in your question .
There are profoundly different views here , including on the structural impact .
I do not deny that by any means .
I do not believe I can tell you anything other than that it appears to be necessary , before a final decision is taken on whether to extend the transitional arrangements , to ensure that the economic and social consequences of these decisions are clearly identified , in detail and very precisely , so that the decision can be taken responsibly .
This must be examined for both options , and in my opinion the examination must include , as you suggested , the actual consequences of the continuation of duty-free on the SME-based retail sector , for example , in certain Member States and in the areas in question .
There is no doubt that this is necessary .
The question is very difficult to answer , Mr von Habsburg , because some people claim that the sales in question are impulse buys or purchases that are only made because they are available .
They will not be substituted by purchases elsewhere .
I do not know if it is correct that pensioners will only buy butter and coffee on ships if they are slightly cheaper .
But these are all just theories , and we have market research and all sorts of things here , all of which must be examined .
I hope that the results will soon be available so that the issue can be resolved before it begins to seriously disrupt European politics .
Mr President , I would like to reassure Mr Cassidy that there will be many thousands of job losses , not least , regrettably , in my own constituency of North Essex and South Suffolk because of the airport at Stansted and the seaport at Harwich .
My question to the President is this : is he aware of how unbelievably complicated the scheme is going to be if the decision goes ahead to abolish duty-free sales from 1 July ?
It will , in fact , mean that different prices for the same product will be charged depending on which airspace or which territorial waters the flight or the vessel is travelling through .
What does he propose ?
I cannot believe he means this regime to be in place in the manner intended .
Surely there must be a temporary delay until such time as proper rules have been brought in ; otherwise it will make complete nonsense of the application of the decision .
Mr President , Mrs McIntosh , I freely admit that any future rules will probably be complicated .
However , I do not envisage the complication you have just described , particularly not in air travel .
We board a plane in A and disembark in B , and if A and B are both within the European Community the problem does not arise , as in this case there can be no duty-free sales .
If B is outside the European Community this opportunity does exist ; it is relatively simple .
If a ship travels from one EU country to another and in doing so crosses the waters of a third country , it may be somewhat more complicated , and I am not currently in a position to say how we should deal with this problem .
However , I do not see a problem for air travel .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 4 and 5 will be taken together .
Question No 4 by Paul Rübig ( H-0116 / 99 )
Subject : Increase in parliamentary powers of control through the next amendment of the Treaties Discussions in recent weeks have shown that both the EU 's institutional order and the actual policies pursued call for a modern system of checks and balances .
The European Parliament has proved that it is willing and able , as the Community 's only directly legitimised institution , to perform the control tasks demanded by its citizens .
The requirement that the Commission resign as a body if a vote of no-confidence is passed and the European Parliament 's lack of authority to dismiss a Member of the Commission from office no longer seem in keeping with the times .
The need for individual political accountability requires an adjustment of the legislation concerned .
How does the Council 's representative view the prospects for eliminating these shortcomings at the next intergovernmental conference on the amendment of the Treaties ?
Question No 5 by Karl Habsburg-Lothringen ( H-0194 / 99 )
Subject : Responsibility of CommissionersBy what means is the Council planning to make provision for the individual responsibility of Commissioners ?
When in its view will it be possible for Commissioners to be confirmed individually by the European Parliament and , where necessary , also to be called to account individually ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer these questions by Mr Rübig and Mr Habsburg-Lothringen together .

The questions posed by both honourable Members contain proposals whose implementation would require an amendment of the Treaties .
Such possible amendments of the Treaties do not fall within the Council 's field of competence .
In accordance with Article N of the Treaty on European Union , or Article 48 of the EU Treaty after the Amsterdam Treaty comes into force , the government of any Member State or the Commission may submit proposals for the amendment of the Treaties to the Council .
After consulting the European Parliament and , where appropriate , the Commission , the role of the Council is confined to delivering an opinion in favour of calling a conference of representatives of the governments of the Member States , which is then convened by the President of the Council .
Treaty amendments agreed jointly by the representatives of the governments of the Member States only enter into force after being ratified by all the Member States in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements .
Mr President , at the next Council following the report by the Committee of Independent Experts - which has apparently been published in the Belgian press today - will the Council institute compulsory retirement proceedings for individual Commissioners in accordance with Article 160 , or will the European Parliament have to pass a vote of no-confidence in the Commission as a whole , including the majority of Commissioners who do excellent work ?
Mr President , Mr Rübig , I regret that I am not in a position to answer this hypothetical question .
The question is hypothetical because the Council presidency does not yet know the contents of the report , which is due to be published next week , and without knowing the content , structure and recommendations of this report it is absolutely impossible to comment today on whether and how the Council will deal with it and what conclusions it might draw .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I will try not to ask a hypothetical question . Instead , I wish to ask about your personal views .
You cited the paragraphs that need to be changed .
Now I would ask you whether you really see the need for the Treaties to be amended in this way in view of recent events .
Mr President , I do not believe I am authorised to answer this question .
I have been asked about my personal views , but these are of absolutely no relevance to the European Parliament .
It is only what I can tell you about the opinion of the Council , in my capacity as President-in-Office , that is of relevance .
I regret that I cannot tell you my personal views .
I can only give you answers that must be agreed with all the Member States , and for this reason my answer to this question must be no , I cannot give you my personal views .
Mr President , I hope the President-in-Office of the Council will indulge us in putting forward possibilities for the next IGC even if he is not yet in a position to react formally to them .
Surely one of the questions coming out of the recent events is whether the President of the Commission should have the right to dismiss individual members of the Commission .
In a national government , if a minister is guilty of serious misconduct or mismanagement but refuses to resign , then the leader of the government concerned can dismiss him or her .
In the European Commission , were that situation ever to arise , the President of the Commission does not have the possibility of asking that member to resign or leave the Commission .
Surely that would be the appropriate Treaty amendment to bring forward in the next IGC .
If the circumstances arose and then the President of the Commission did not use that power we could then censure the Commission as a whole .
Mr Corbett , I will be very specific .
The presidency does not so far intend , in its proposal for the European Council in Cologne in June , to go beyond what was left over from Amsterdam .
To date , the position of the presidency has been that we must now make a procedural proposal on how these remaining issues are to be dealt with , in other words on how and when the next intergovernmental conference will take place and with what agenda .
The agenda we have hitherto envisaged includes the composition of the Commission , qualified majority voting in the Council and the weighting of votes in the Council .
The presidency does not currently intend to make any other proposals to the Council in Cologne .
To Mr Rübig , I would first like to say that I do not believe Parliament fulfilled its responsibilities , because we should have sacked the whole Commission in January , but that is by the way .
To the President-in-Office , I would like to say that I do not think Mr Rübig was asking a hypothetical question .
The question can easily be answered , regardless of the outcome next month of the investigation into the Commission which is currently in progress .
We know the answer very well .
We cannot fire the whole Commission .
You must also be able to give that answer .
I seem to remember that in his speech Mr Fischer said the German Presidency was in favour of giving Parliament increased powers , which would in fact be equivalent to it becoming a real parliament and the Commission becoming a real government .
Have I understood correctly ?
Is that really what Mr Fischer said in his speech here in Parliament ?
Mrs Sandbæk , I can explain that very easily .
There are two separate issues which must be distinguished here . Firstly , there is a long-term process of change in the European institutions and in relations between them , with greater democratic legitimacy , improved democratic control and increased transparency .
This is the constitutional process - as I would like to call it - that is ongoing in Europe and with which we will be dealing for many years to come .
The decisions that have to be made at various stages must be seen as a separate issue because they are related to other decisions .
This is the case with the famous ' left-overs ' that I mentioned , which are directly linked to the process of enlargement .
There was a general consensus in the EU that these remaining issues would have to be dealt with before the accession of the first new Member State .
The question of when this will happen is of great political importance , since the speed with which we act on this , or our failure to do so , will send out a signal to the states wishing to join the Union .
If we now say that we will deal with these remaining issues at the same time as the far-reaching constitutional matters , which you addressed and I touched upon , then it means that they will not be resolved for some considerable time , which will be too late for the states wishing to join the Union .
This is why we want to restrict ourselves in Cologne to saying how and when and to what extent we want to make the decisions that need to be taken in relation to enlargement , but also to start broader discussions on the issues that you mentioned .
Of course the question of strengthening the role of Parliament in the European Union is crucial here .
I would also point out that the rights of Parliament will already be increased considerably with the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty , which is scheduled for 1 June .
But we see that as an ongoing process .
I am very concerned by Mr Rübig 's supplementary question .
Mr Rübig referred to today 's Belgian newspapers and asked the President-in-Office if the Council had any reaction to what appears in the Belgian newspapers today .
I am concerned because I have not read today 's Belgian newspapers and I do not know what they say .
I do not normally buy them here .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office if Belgian newspapers form part of Community law or if the President-in-Office intends to incorporate them into Community law at the next intergovernmental conference .
It is hard enough work for me to follow Community law through the Official Journal and if I also have to read the Belgian newspapers , I will have even more work to do .
Mr Medina Ortega , the presidency will not make decisions on the basis of publications in the Belgian press , nor on the basis of publications in any other newspapers . Instead , it will base its decisions on documents .
We do not consider a document to be something that is written by a newspaper but something that we receive officially from a European body , from Parliament or from the Commission .
Newspapers play an important role in Europe .
They are essential in a Europe of freedom and democracy , but they are not an EU body .
It is also better both for them and for us that they do not become one .
So I can assure you that your fears are unfounded .
Thank you for making that clear , Mr Verheugen .

Question No 6 by Michael Hindley ( H-0124 / 99 )
Subject : Visa-free access for Hong Kong passport holders In the context of the EP report on Hong Kong , the European Parliament adopted a resolution urging the Member States to grant visa-free access to Hong Kong passport holders .
In response , the Commission noted that , pending the introduction of a common visa list , the Commission had no direct responsibility over EU visa policy but that it strongly supported Hong Kong 's efforts to secure visa-free access for HKSAR passport holders .
Would the Council inform us what action has been taken in response to Parliament 's resolution ?
When will the question of visa-free access for HKSAR passport holders be considered by the Member States ?
Furthermore , what are the attitudes of Member States on the subject ?
Has any Member State indicated unwillingness to grant visa-free access to HKSAR passport holders ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer this question tabled by Mr Hindley , which has been taken over here this evening by Mr Newens .

Mr Newens , I would like to say firstly that the visa system for Hong Kong residents continues to be governed by Regulation ( EC ) No 2317 / 95 .
The regulation was declared invalid by the European Court of Justice , but its legal effects were expressly maintained .
As Hong Kong inhabitants are not included in the common list of nationalities requiring visas for entry to the European Union , under Article 2 of this regulation it is the Member States alone which decide the entry requirements .
On the basis of information supplied by the Member States , the Commission has drawn up a summary of current visa requirements for nationalities not included in the common list , which was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities on 3 April 1998 , page 4 et seq .
According to this , only Ireland and the United Kingdom currently do not require a visa from holders of passports of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region .
The other Member States have announced that they will apply the same visa requirement rules that apply to China to residents of Hong Kong .
The Council intends , with the involvement of the European Parliament , to adopt an amended regulation on the common visa list , so that Hong Kong residents would no longer be subject to a common visa requirement in the EU Member States .
The Member States would continue to decide themselves what entry rules to apply to Hong Kong residents .
I hope you will understand that I cannot comment on the national visa policies of the Member States , nor , in particular , on what their future policies are likely to be .
My colleague , Mr Hindley , apologises for his inability to be present .
From what we have heard , a decision on Hong Kong is being held up .
Is it realistic to hold this up , when there is no threat of a large-scale influx of illegal immigrants , merely because there are fears as far as other countries are concerned ?
In view of the fact that the Hong Kong authorities have made strenuous efforts to make their travel document difficult to forge and that there is the issue of reciprocity , from which European travellers to Hong Kong benefit , is there not a special case at this point to make progress on this issue , which would strengthen relations between the European Union and Hong Kong and , for that matter , between Europe and China ?
Mr Newens , we could spend a long time discussing whether the decision that has been taken is realistic or not , and whether the concerns or considerations that led to this decision are correct or not .
The fact is that it has been decided in this way .
The current rule will continue to apply , so visa-free access or visa requirements for Hong Kong residents entering the European Union will be decided at national level by the Member States .
It is the exclusive right of the Member States to decide what criteria they apply in reaching this decision , and they should most certainly use all the information available to them , including the information you mentioned regarding the problem of forgery and security .
President-in-Office , I want to support the initiative of my colleague , Mr Hindley , and the remarks of my colleague , Mr Newens .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on Hong Kong , I am fully behind what they are asking in the House today .
Bearing in mind the President-in-Office 's comments about the exclusive right of Member States , would he not also accept that the policy of the European Union is support for the concept of one country , two systems ?
Respecting the right of individual Member States , would the Council not coordinate a policy which grants visa-free access , which , in my view , is the total implementation of the concept of one country , two systems ?
Yes , I have to answer that question in the affirmative .
On the whole , it is true that we should aspire to a common entry policy and , more generally , a common immigration policy within the European Union .
We have that for the Schengen Area , and I hope that it will be extended .
However , this does not change the situation that now exists in relation to Hong Kong .
The legal situation within the European Union is such that the issue of whether Hong Kong residents require a visa for entry to an EU Member State is a national one .
It is not something that can be decided at European level because the Member States are not currently willing to transfer the decision to European level .
We can only guess at the reasons for this , as I am sure you are aware .
Question No 7 by Arthur Newens ( H-0126 / 99 )
Subject : The EU banana regime Would the Council make a statement about the latest developments in the dispute with the United States and other parties over the EU 's banana regime ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Newens 's question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 4 March the Permanent Representatives Committee noted with approval the condemnation by Sir Leon Brittan , the Commissioner responsible for trade policy , of the unilateral measures taken by the United States on 3 March .
The Council supports the Commission in taking all possible measures within the framework of the WTO to protect EU interests , and is to discuss the developments further .
The Council has regularly discussed current developments in the banana dispute .
Between Council meetings there has been constant close cooperation with the Commission in the 113 Committee and in particular with the ambassadors in Brussels .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply which is in support of the position of the Commission .
However , does the Council accept that it will be regarded as an acid test whether the European Union is prepared to stand by poor producers in developing countries , in particular the Caribbean where they have no effective alternative means of livelihood , or give in to United States pressure on behalf of the large multinational companies who already control most of the market and have used their wealth to lobby major American parties ?
Its attitude on this issue could be a precedent for other cases .
Can the President-in-Office therefore assure us that there will be no climb down whatsoever on this very vital issue ?
Mr Newens , I would like to inform you that the Council has always held the view , and still does today , that this problem can only be solved within the framework of the WTO .
The European Union has therefore asked a WTO panel to examine whether its banana regime complies with WTO rules , and the EU is prepared to accept and abide by the panel 's decision .
Only when this decision is announced can the WTO arbitrators decide on the US request for authorisation to impose sanctions , for example .
Mr President , if the WTO panel does not decide in our favour , what will the consequences be for the firms that have had to pay the tariff sanctions ?
Will you ensure that claims for compensation made by these firms against the US Government are pursued ?
Mr Rübig , I am not yet aware of any definite position on this issue .
As far as I know , no decision has yet been taken .
I will have to give you a written reply to this question .
Question No 8 by Nikitas Kaklamanis ( H-0131 / 99 )
Subject : ' Euro-tax ' , social dimension of the EU and environmental protection There are certain misgivings within the EU about the level of Member States ' financial contributions to the Union budget .
Has the Council considered the possibility of imposing a ' Euro-tax ' as a levy on the movement of speculative capital and on a number of luxury goods consumed by high-income groups in the Union ?
Might such a ' Euro-tax ' be an option for consideration when the EU 's system of own resources is revised , with the resultant revenue being used as a source of funding for the social dimension of the EU and for environmental protection ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Kaklamanis 's question .
As you know , Mr Kaklamanis , the Council can only consider adopting new legislation on the basis of a proposal from the Commission .
No Commission proposal has yet been submitted to the Council on the issue you mentioned .
Mr President-in-Office , your reply related to the formal aspect of the matter , which I am well aware of , but my question was more on a political level .
You belong to a body to which 14 other governments belong , 13 of whom declare themselves to be Socialist governments .
They declare that they are Socialists , but in fact they are neo-Liberals .
A few days ago I read the election manifesto of the Party of European Socialists which talks of a social Europe .
Are you aware that this year budget spending on a social Europe has fallen ?
Can you tell me what the political strategy of the Council is to find money for the social face of Europe and for the protection of the environment ?
Can you tell me whether you intend to debate with the Commission the imposition of tax on speculative capital , so that , with this money , we can help to produce a social Europe and protect the environment ?
Please do not answer me on the formal procedure , which I am already aware of .
Mr Kaklamanis , I have to agree with you .
Because of the current political landscape in Europe - which I need not describe further as you have already done so - it has fortunately become possible to develop fresh momentum in the areas of social justice , employment policy and the environmental market economy .
A huge effort is being made in all these areas , and in all these areas the German Presidency is extremely active .
One example is the European Employment Pact that is to be adopted at the summit in Cologne .
Another is the development of a European charter of fundamental rights , in which special attention will be paid to social rights .
I could add many more to this list .
My answer to your question is therefore emphatically yes : in European politics today we are seeing a clear trend towards focusing on social and environmental matters .
As the author is not present , Question No 9 lapses .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 10 , 11 and 12 will be taken together .
Question No 10 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0141 / 99 )
Subject : Abduction of Öcalan After his futile attempts to find political asylum in any Member State of the European Union or to be tried by an international court ( which was a desirable objective according to statements by the Italian and German Foreign Ministers reported in Agence Europe No. 73530 ) , the PKK leader , A. Öcalan , fled to Kenya from where he was abducted and taken to Turkey .
Does the Council consider that Mr Öcalan 's human rights have so far been respected , regardless of its views on his representativeness or his political opinions ?
Does his abduction without his consent ( statement by the Kenyan Foreign Minister of 16 February 1999 ) not constitute a violation of international law - and even an act of state terrorism - and what view does the Council take of such an act being perpetrated by a country which has applied for membership of the EU ?

In the light of these events , can it be guaranteed that Mr Öcalan will remain alive and receive a trial worthy of a country governed by the rule of law ?
Question No 11 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0163 / 99 )
Subject : The Öcalan case and the Kurdish problemIn the light of the latest developments in the Öcalan case and on the basis of its resolutions and decisions on applications for the granting of asylum ( Council Resolution 20 / 6 / 1995 , Agreement 97 / C254 / 01 ) , will the Council say how it judges the obstructive policies pursued by Member States of the European Union and their essential refusal to grant political asylum to the Kurdish leader Abdullah Öcalan ?
Was it not incumbent upon the Council to adopt a clear position on this matter before Öcalan fell into the hands of Turkish ' justice ' ?
What pressure does the Council intend to exert on Turkey to ensure that the Kurdish leader receives a fair and public trial and that his life is spared ?
What initiatives does it intend to take to convoke an international conference aimed at finding a solution to the Kurdish problem ?
Question No 12 by Ioannis Theonas ( H-0184 / 99 )
Subject : Conditions of detention and threat to the physical and mental integrity and life of Abdullah ÖcalanSerious misgivings have been expressed about the conditions in which the Kurdish leader , Abdullah Öcalan , is being held in custody ; it is also feared that his physical , mental and intellectual integrity , as well as his life , are under threat . It is alleged - and all the indications , such as the footage constantly broadcast in the Turkish media , confirm - that the authorities are keeping the Kurdish leader under the influence of psychoactive drugs in order to render him sluggish and dull his senses as a means of ' facilitating ' the proceedings surrounding his case .
Recently , moreover , the Turkish authorities themselves announced that Mr Öcalan had serious heart problems , possibly as a result of the conditions under which he is held .
The Kurdish leader is being held in solitary confinement in the harshest of prisons , the conditions in which have been repeatedly condemned by all the international human rights organisations , following his ' arrest ' and detention which took place in an atmosphere of hysteria .
The fact also that he is being subjected to legal proceedings while under the influence of psychoactive drugs which prevent him from acting and speaking freely , rendering him unrecognisable , is a blatant mockery of justice . Will the Council , therefore , say how it will react to this flagrant violation of the rights and dignity of the prisoner and what measures it will take to enable Abdullah Öcalan to be examined by independent medical experts in order to guarantee his physical and mental integrity throughout his detention and trial , safeguarding the right of the prisoner to his dignity and his life ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Questions Nos 10 , 11 and 12 together .
Mr President , I would like , if I may , to answer the questions separately but in summary form .
I will firstly answer the various questions raised by Mr Papayannakis .
The Council would refer to the statement issued by the European Union on 22 February 1999 , in which the European Union notes the assurances of the Turkish Government that Abdullah Öcalan will receive a fair trial .
The European Union expects this to include fair and proper treatment and a public and legal trial before an independent court , access to a legal adviser of his choice and the admission of international observers to the trial .
It is not currently possible for the Council to judge whether Öcalan 's abduction from Kenya constitutes a violation of international law , as you stated in your question , or , as you also said , perhaps an act of state terrorism .
The Council does not have access to any clear and definite information concerning the way in which Abdullah Öcalan was brought to Turkey .
It is therefore not possible to assess this .
As to whether it can be guaranteed that Mr Öcalan will remain alive and receive a trial worthy of a country governed by the rule of law , I would refer you to the first part of my answer - the EU 's demands in terms of the nature of the trial - and I would also point out that the EU has once again expressed its total rejection of the death penalty in the statement I mentioned earlier .
Moving on now to the question raised by Mr Alavanos , the first part of your question refers to the asylum problem .
I must point out that the implementation of asylum procedures falls within the competence of the individual Member States and the Council cannot comment on them .
In reply to your second question I would refer to the EU statement of 22 February 1999 which notes the Turkish Government 's assurances that Abdullah Öcalan will receive a fair trial .
I must reiterate what I said in my answer to the first question concerning the demands being made of Turkey on this point , and I would also repeat what I said about the death penalty . I would add that the European Union expects Turkey to solve these problems by political means and with full respect for human rights and the rule of law in a democratic society .
In this context , the European Union welcomes all genuine efforts to combat terrorism and to approach political solutions in such a way as to allow the reconciliation of the people concerned and a solution to the conflict .
In reply to the question raised by Mr Theonas I would say that the Council has not received any information that Abdullah Öcalan 's rights are being violated in the course of the investigation and legal proceedings .
According to a press release by the Council of Europe on 4 March 1999 , a delegation from the anti-torture committee was allowed to visit the prisoner in private .
The Council has not been informed of the outcome of this visit .
In its statement of 22 February 1999 , the European Union said that it expects the Turkish Government 's assurances about a fair trial to include fair and proper treatment .
I would like to apologise for being late , but in this House we sometimes have to attend two meetings at the same time .
Let me begin by thanking the President-in-Office for the information he has provided . However , one issue has yet to be dealt with .
I would point out first of all that we are also opposed to terrorism .
One of the most serious problems affecting our country , Spain , is terrorism , although the situation there fortunately seems to be improving . So we too are opposed to terrorism .
However , a group of Members went to Turkey last week to visit Mr Öcalan 's lawyers , whose lives are in danger . They learnt there that Mr Öcalan is not as well as he should be physically and that his personal safety is clearly not guaranteed .
Mr President-in-Office , how does the Council plan to develop the general conditions needed for a political solution to the Kurdish problem , a problem that is not going to end with Mr Öcalan ?
Thank you , Mrs González .
I must tell you that , some years ago , a well-known Cuban singer had a hit with a song that could almost be applied in your case : it was about how to have two meetings at once without going mad .
So , be wise and only have one meeting at a time .
Mr Verheugen , I would ask you to respond to the supplementary question by Mrs González .
Mrs González Álvarez , I would like to divide my answer into two parts , discussing firstly the Öcalan case and secondly the broader question .
With regard to the Öcalan case , you may rest assured that the Council will keep a constant eye on this case and will comment or take action as developments require .
The Council will also take careful note of all information concerning the progress of the trial and the treatment of Öcalan , and will consider whether this information requires it to take action .
So I can assure you that this problem will be given regular and continued attention .
With regard to the broader issue , I have to point out that , as you know , Turkey has always rejected what it calls the internationalisation of the Kurdish problem .
Turkey also regards comments made on this subject as inadmissible interference in its internal affairs and has to date not been prepared to talk to the European Union or anyone else about the Kurdish issue .
You probably know better than I do that the official Turkish position is that the Kurdish issue does not exist .
I must therefore say that I see very , very few ways of exerting a positive influence on Turkey .
However , in terms of the position of the German Presidency - which has given greater prominence to Turkey 's status as an EU applicant country than did previous German governments - I would like to make it very clear that the same requirements for membership of the European Union apply to Turkey as to all the others . This means that Turkey is not at an advantage because of its particularly important strategic position , and it is not at a disadvantage because of the fact that it is an Islamic country .
Turkey must meet precisely the same conditions as the others , which means that it must be a fully-developed democracy .
We must be certain that human rights are respected and we must be certain that everyone in the country enjoys the same rights .
I do not wish to use the term ' minorities ' in relation to the Kurds , as in my opinion this is completely inappropriate in this context .
The issue here is full equality for all people living in a particular country .
This is something we can and must impress on Turkey in relation to its progress towards Europe .
If relations develop in such a way that it is possible to discuss a solution to the Kurdish problem in direct talks with Turkey , I have no doubt that we will be prepared to do so , but unfortunately such talks have simply not been possible so far .
Mr President , my allotted time is really very short .
I would nevertheless like to ask the President-in-Office how she can be sure of the assurances and guarantees given by Turkey .
I was present at the trial of Leila Zana and the 16 other convicted members of parliament .
Leila Zana was sentenced to 16 years in prison .
In front of the international observers , including our group , as well as the international media that was present , Leila Zana , a small and frail woman but a great democrat and a great politician , was beaten - there is no other word for it - by the rifle butts of the soldiers who were there for the trial .
And this took place before our very eyes .
So I do not believe these verbal guarantees for one moment .
Equally , I do not believe that we will help achieve a peaceful solution to the Kurdish problem by continuing to sell arms to Turkey .
I should like to know what you base these assurances on . I would also like to know if it would be possible to introduce economic sanctions , especially having seen how pointless it was to believe that approving the customs union would help the country return to democracy .
There are many other things I would like to ask you , but unfortunately I have run out of time .
Mrs Pailler , unfortunately I have to say that in such cases we cannot be sure that promises will actually be kept .
There are no guarantees .
I could give you dozens of examples of this from recent history , not only in Europe but in other parts of the world .
That is simply the problem we have when we are dealing with countries in which there are certain constitutional shortcomings , and we all consider this to be the case in Turkey .
So there are no guarantees .
However , what we can do of course is to judge the implications if , for example , Öcalan were not given unrestricted access to lawyers of his choice , or if international trial observers were not given full and unrestricted access .
Then we could form an opinion .
But I must add that even if that is done there is no absolute guarantee that a trial will really be conducted fairly and properly in all respects .
Unfortunately I have to say that there is no guarantee of this even in states where the rule of law is fully developed .
Thank you , Mr President .
Unfortunately I am unable to thank the President-in-Office as well . I wonder whether he has seen the blood-curdling images of cruel torture , the repression suffered by the leader of an entire nation and the excessive pride with which these images were broadcast throughout the entire length and breadth of this planet by Turkish television and by all the media .
He says that the Council has no information .
Is this of no concern to the Council ?
Does the Council believe that the state security court in Turkey will conduct a fair trial ?
The President-in-Office has told us that there is no Kurdish problem , that there is no Kurdish nation , that there is no Kurdish minority , and this , simply because Turkey does not accept that there is !
Has Mr Milosevic been persuaded that the problem in Kosovo is an international problem , that NATO is threatening to drop bombs and that NATO forces are preparing to enter Kosovo ?
Will the Council give us answers to these questions , convincing ones at least ?
It is precisely because the Council is of course aware of the emotions that you have just described , in particular the video recordings and television footage , that is has made the statements and demands that I have repeated here today .
I was in Istanbul on Thursday and Friday and met Mr Öcalan 's lawyers .
They informed me that they had no precise documentation relating to the charges . They also said that had only been granted one brief visit to Mr Öcalan and that he was expressionless and totally under the influence of drugs .
They have not been allowed to visit Mr Öcalan again and this all leads us to fear for his life , as has already been pointed out today .
Our trip there was a spontaneous one as Members of the European Parliament and it was very difficult for us .
I would like to ask the Council if it intends to send European Union lawyers to Turkey to attend the trial and to help ensure that the trial is in fact fair , as you quite rightly said .
As I mentioned earlier , the Council put forward this demand and also supports similar demands from the European public that international trial observers be admitted to the trial .
These are generally legal experts .
The question is whether the European Union as an institution should take part in observing the trial if it is given the opportunity ; this question has not yet been discussed and must be decided in due course .
Mr President , I should like to ask the Council representative , as he did not answer Mr Theonas , what he has to say to those who believe that a policy of double standards is being applied , depending on whether it is the Kurds or the Kosovars .
In both cases , it is matter of stopping the repression and granting fundamental rights .
What do you say to those who believe that the European Union is applying double standards in these two cases ?
As far as I know , the Council has to date made no comment on this ; so far , it has never linked the Kosovo issue with that of the Kurds .
I do not intend to do so either .
Question No 13 by Astrid Thors ( H-0142 / 99 )
Subject : Coordination between the EU and the Council of Europe as regards policies for mutual assistance in criminal matters The Member States are negotiating an EU Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters .
The Council of Europe is negotiating a Second Additional Protocol to the 1959 European Convention on Mutual Assistance .
The two drafts largely deal with the same issues but lack any kind of coordination .
Have the EU Member States done anything to ensure that the same judicial solutions would be reached within the two fora ?
If not , what is the reason for pursuing different policies within the EU and the Council of Europe ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mrs Thors 's question .
The coordination of negotiations on an EU Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters and the Council of Europe 's draft for a Second Additional Protocol to the 1959 European Convention on Mutual Assistance has been discussed in detail at EU level .
The working party on mutual assistance in criminal matters , which is drawing up the new EU convention , last examined the question of coordination at its meeting on 17 and 18 February 1999 .
The need for coordination between the European Union and the Council of Europe has been discussed on several occasions at the regular meetings between the troika , the K.4 Committee and representatives of the Council of Europe .
Particular emphasis was placed on ensuring that their respective objectives in the area of mutual assistance are consistent and that overlaps between the legal instruments are avoided as far as possible .
One of the concrete results of this coordination process was that the Council Secretariat drew up a technical comparison of the EU draft and the Council of Europe 's text .
This document has proved to be a useful aid in the current discussions , and is currently being revised .
Certain overlaps between the draft EU convention and the Council of Europe 's draft protocol are unavoidable given that the objective of both new instruments is to improve rules for mutual assistance in criminal matters .
The EU convention will impose stricter mutual assistance obligations on the 15 Member States than the Council of Europe protocol , which can be applied to over 40 countries with very different legal systems .
This is true in particular of the rules concerning tapping into communications links .
It is gratifying to hear that there has now been some coordination between the EU and the Council of Europe .
At the beginning of February , I happened to hear one of the Council 's representatives , amongst others , say that there had been no coordination .
Consequently , I think the time has come for us to consider the principles that are to be applied in the new agreements on mutual assistance in criminal matters .
It looks as though supervision of the Internet and e-mail is one of the areas where there has been no coordination in either of the agreements .
It would appear that under one of the agreements , the Commission would like to compel the authorities to immediately hand out information about all e-mail correspondence .
Can that be right and is it consistent with European principles , given that no one has yet defined the infringements that will be looked out for or established a corresponding legal requirement ?
However , it is good to hear that there has been some coordination on the basis of this initiative .
Mr President , unfortunately I cannot do so .
The question initially asked by Mrs Thors did not refer to this special problem , so the Council Secretariat could not provide me with any documentation on this matter .
I would very much like to answer your question but simply cannot do so ; I must therefore ask you to accept a written answer .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 14 and 15 will be taken together .
Question No 14 by Esko Seppänen ( H-0143 / 99 )
Subject : Pensions of members of the ECB Executive Board According to reports in the Finnish media , Mrs Sirkka Hämäläinen , Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank , receives in addition to her salary at the ECB a special pension amounting to some FM 10 000 from the Bank of Finland , which is a member of the European system of Central Banks .
Was the Council aware of this before the salary levels of the ECB Executive Board were set , and does it know whether the other members of the ECB Executive Board also receive income apart from their salaries ?
Question No 15 by Heidi Hautala ( H-0157 / 99 )
Subject : Rules applicable to ECB officials and Executive Board members on incompatibility and financial relationsThere has been a storm of protest in Finland about the fact that Sirkka Hämäläinen , a member of the ECB Executive Board , is not only paid a salary , but is also drawing an early retirement pension of some FM 60 000 from the Bank of Finland .
Can the Council therefore say whether the ECB has drawn up rules applicable to senior officials and Executive Board members in particular on incompatibility and financial relations , bearing in mind that , where such circumstances exist , the independence of the persons concerned may be jeopardised ?
Has the ECB heeded the call from the Ombudsman and drawn up rules governing the release of documents into the public domain in the exercise of its tasks or the right of citizens to gain access to documents produced by and in the possession of the ECB ?
If the answer to the above questions is ' yes ' , is information about the income , assets , and secondary occupations of senior officials and Executive Board members made available to the public under all conditions ?
If that is not the case , will the Council use its influence to ensure that a requirement to do so is laid down ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer these questions by Mr Seppänen and Mrs Hautala together .
Article 11.1 of the Protocol on the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB provides that no member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank shall engage in any occupation , whether gainful or not , unless exemption is exceptionally granted by the Governing Council .
The Protocol thus prevents the members of the Executive Board , in the interests of independence , from receiving remuneration for any activity other than as a member of the Executive Board .
However , this rule does not prevent the appointment of an experienced person who may perhaps have a pension from a previous job .
It is not up to the Council to lay down the terms and conditions of employment of the members of the Executive Board , which under Article 11.3 of the Protocol are the subject of contracts with the ECB and are fixed by the Governing Council on a proposal from a committee of six members , three of whom are appointed by the Council .
Mr President , the Council has not answered my question at all .
I asked if the Council knew , before the salaries of the members of the board of the European Central Bank were determined , whether they also received a pension in addition to that from the European Central Bank , and whether , besides Sirkka Hämäläinen , who is a member of the board , any other board member receives additional pay .
The Council must answer these questions , as these matters are its responsibility .
The European Central Bank and the national central banks which report to it are part of the EU scheme .
The same rules for personnel apply to them as to any other EU institution .
Under Article 232 of the Treaty , the Council must ensure that the rules of the Treaty and those relating to staff are implemented , and the Council must be responsible for ensuring that the rules that apply to the European Central Bank carry the same weight as those applying to other EU institutions .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council to answer my question .
Mr Seppänen , I did answer the question , although you were not happy with what I said . I would draw your attention again to the relevant part of my answer .
I said that the provision that a member of the ECB Executive Board may not receive any other remuneration does not prevent the appointment of an experienced person who perhaps has a pension from a previous job .
To clarify this I would say that , according to the Council 's understanding of the legal position here , there is a difference between remuneration and a pension that someone receives for work done previously .
Mr President , like my colleague , Mr Seppänen , I am surprised that the representative of the Council is not answering certain questions .
I think it is important that the European Central Bank should operate transparently .
It may be relatively autonomous and independent when it comes to monetary policy , but it must have some rules on transparency and , inter alia , automatic ineligibility for certain posts and financial impartiality on the part of its senior officials , such as the members of the board .
Mr President-in-Office , you have not answered these questions .
Instead , you said there is no conflict in a situation where a person of experience receives a salary from the European Central Bank and a pension from some former position .
Is it not the case that , in the context of the European Central Bank system , this former agency , the Bank of Finland , and the European Central Bank are in fact part of the same organisation ?
The representative of the Commission did not want to take a stand on this issue either .
Who will ?
Mrs Hautala , I must also say to you that I answered the question precisely , indeed very precisely .
It is not possible to answer it any more precisely .
I will say it once again . There is a difference between an additional remuneration that a member of the ECB Executive Board might receive and a pension that a member of the ECB Executive Board receives from a previous job .
Legally , they are completely different .
In the Council 's opinion , the rules are completely clear .
There is nothing to stop a member of the ECB Executive Board , who is paid by the ECB , from receiving a pension from a job he or she did previously .
I should like to know why an exception has been made for the European Central Bank , since according to my understanding of the matter , it is not possible to receive at one and the same time a pension from another appointment and a full salary from either the Commission or the Council .
Consequently , I should like to know why an exception has been made in the case of the European Central Bank .
I must say quite honestly that I did not understand the question .
What am I supposed to say ?
The honourable Member says that she does not understand something .
She has not asked me a question .
I can only repeat once again how the Council views the legal situation .
It is clear .
The question of whether it is possible to receive a salary as a member of the ECB Executive Board and to receive at the same time a pension from a previous job has been answered three times with a definite ' yes ' .
That is the Council 's understanding of the legal situation .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
You are asking to speak , Mrs Hautala , but I cannot give you the floor .
You know very well that Members can only speak once during Question Time .
Question No 16 by Maj Theorin ( H-0146 / 99 )
Subject : Global solidarity 1.3 bn of the world 's population are living in acute poverty , and the number is increasing .
In 1997 the OECD countries ' aid to developing countries fell to 0.22 % of GNP .
The indications are that it has continued to fall in 1998 .
The flow of private capital from the industrialised to the under-developed countries also declined sharply in 1997 and 1998 .
The United Nations ' target is for the wealthy countries to set aside 0.7 % of their GNP for aid .
What does the Council intend to do within the OECD to ensure that this UN target is met ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mrs Theorin 's question .
Mr President , Mrs Theorin is quite right to point out that development aid from Member States represented in the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD has fallen as a percentage of GNP .
A comparison shows , however , that the figures for EU Member States , averaging 0.33 % of GNP , are much higher than the average figures for the DAC donor countries as a whole , where the corresponding figure is 0.22 % of GNP , whereas the contribution of such an important donor country as the USA is less than 0.09 % of GNP .
Some states are seeing a reverse of the negative trend .
With regard to the flow of private capital to the developing countries , the European Union is very much aware of the importance of private investment and developments in the private sector in general .
Directing private investment to developing countries can best be achieved by strengthening the private sector and creating conditions - particularly economic , legal , administrative and regulatory conditions - that promote investment .
This was also the view stated by the European Union recently at the ACP-EU Ministerial Negotiating Conference on 8 and 9 February 1999 in Dakar , and it was a view which our ACP partners entirely shared .
The Council is also devoting greater attention to the problem of poverty which the honourable Member mentioned .
It should be noted here that one of the fundamental points on which agreement was reached in Dakar was that the reduction and possible eventual elimination of poverty must be among the main objectives of the new partnership , along with sustainable development and the gradual integration of the ACP countries into the world economy .
With regard to Mrs Theorin 's question concerning concrete measures to be taken at OECD level , I must point out that the Council , unlike the individual Member States and the European Commission , is not represented in the DAC and cannot therefore propose any concrete measures .
Thank you for answering my question .
I was somewhat surprised to be told that some countries have been hiding behind the fact that the USA has given very little assistance to third world countries - that has been a well-known fact for some time .
Nevertheless , there are also some EU countries whose aid budget comes to considerably more than 0.33 % .
However , the goal of 0.7 % , established by the UN , serves as a useful target for all countries to aim at , regardless of whether they are in the Council or the OECD .
Since I first heard that poverty and its repercussions were being given the recognition they deserve - although it is not enough simply to recognise the problem - I have been wondering what measures the Council is proposing to take in order to deal adequately with the problems posed by poverty .
What exactly are we willing to do to help third world countries ?
Private capital flows naturally play an important role , as do trade agreements .
I would remind the Council that the Trade Agreement with South Africa comes within that category , and I hope it will be signed on 22 March , thereby making it possible to provide assistance .
Mrs Theorin , I fully agree with you that helping to combat world poverty must be a central aim of European Union policy .
Poverty is truly one of the most terrible scourges we are faced with today .
As we in Europe are in a better position than most people in the world , it is also in our own interest to ensure that large parts of the world do not decline into ever worsening poverty .
This ever widening social divide is bound to lead eventually to political and social conflict that may even end in violence .
Here our analysis is entirely in line with yours .
It is also something we need to get across to people in our own countries , that development cooperation costs money but is in the end an important investment in our own security , an investment that is at least as important as what we invest in our military security .
I fully agree with your basic views on this .
Mrs Theorin , you know what possibilities are available and what instruments we employ .
The development cooperation provided by the European Union itself is geared towards these objectives , and the same applies to the development cooperation of most Member States .
It applies to your country , my country and many others .
We are on the right track .
But I fully agree with you that a great deal more can be done and in particular that we must shed the notion that development cooperation consists of sending money somewhere in the belief that that will do .
It is indeed necessary to go for an integrated approach , and part of this involves integrating the developing countries ' economies into the world economy , directing the flow of capital and investment to these countries using the measures available , and helping to build structures that are necessary and attractive for investment .
All of this is included in our policy .
There is never anything that cannot be improved upon .
I am therefore grateful for any support we can find in terms of improving our policy 's aims and the opportunities available .
Question No 17 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0148 / 99 )
Subject : Participation of Libya in the forthcoming Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Stuttgart Will the European Union make it possible for Libya to participate in the forthcoming Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Stuttgart ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's question .
This issue has already been discussed today , and the answer is that the Council has noted the Final Declarations of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Forum of 27 and 28 October 1998 in Brussels , which included the recommendation that the participants of the Third Euro-Mediterranean Conference should take whatever measures are necessary to allow Libya to participate fully in the Barcelona process .
On this issue the Council confirms the position it has adopted since the beginning of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , namely that the door is being kept open for Libya and that Libya may participate in the partnership as soon as it complies with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security Council .
The Council is following developments very closely .
It has noted the recent positive developments and encourages the continuation of others ' efforts in this area .
I gather from the reply by the President-in-Office that we have now reached the stage where we can actually welcome Libya since , as he knows , there is already an agreement between the parties involved , as was announced by the Secretary-General of the United Nations a few days ago .
Therefore , if he is telling me that the door will be open as soon as there is an agreement and he knows , as I do , that there already is an agreement , surely we can take it as read that Libya will finally participate in the coming Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Stuttgart as a full member . This was requested by the Euro-Mediterranean Forum held in the European Parliament in November and I believe that it is a wise move .
If that is , in fact , the case , can I assume , too , that Mauritania will also be able to participate ?
The Final Declaration here in the European Parliament also supported the idea of inviting Mauritania to become a full member .
Mr President , this afternoon Commissioner Marín said what needs to be said on the subject of Mauritania .
Mauritania does not currently pose a problem for us in this context .
As far as Libya is concerned , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I would be thankful if I could reach the same conclusion as you ; I would be pleased if I could say that all the conditions we laid down had been met , so that Libya could take part in the Barcelona process .
However , I do not share your optimism .
The requirement is that the Security Council resolution must be implemented in full , and this will not be the case until the suspected assassins have been extradited .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
Ladies and gentlemen , exactly one and a half hours after the start of questions to the Council , that concludes Question Time .
Questions Nos 18 to 40 will receive written answers .
The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.

Nuclear sector-related activities for third countries ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on nuclear sector-related activities for third countries .
Madam President , the fewer of us there are , the more we need to keep to our speaking time , and I will do my best !
Firstly , I would like to thank Mr Adam very sincerely for his report .
The more I read through it , the more it strikes me just how excellent it is . I urge Parliament to treat this subject very seriously and to read the Adam report in detail .
The message is clear : we need cooperation , not refusal .
Older reactors , especially first generation reactors , need to be decommissioned as quickly as possible , while modern plants need to be upgraded , and we particularly need to cooperate with the CEECs and the New Independent States to develop an all-embracing energy policy .
The more the eastern electricity network is connected to the western network , the more important this issue is becoming , as these countries will use their nuclear power stations to sell power to the West as a means of earning income .
So it is by no means irrelevant to ask how this power is produced .
What is more , the applicant countries - this is what I wanted to say during the debate just now - must also observe other environmental regulations .
Not only nuclear power stations but also large combustion plant , cars and every single factory will have to adhere to the EU 's environmental legislation .
We cannot make any exceptions for nuclear power stations .
Nevertheless , there is one point that I would like to make , and I shall address this primarily to the Commission .
It is not just a question of telling each other here in this forum how important all this is - we also need to draw attention to deficiencies .
I was recently told about this by a German nuclear power station , Neckar-Westheim , which has been working with Zaporazhye for 10 years on improvements to valves .
As you will be aware - and if not , I am telling you now - an accident took place there on 20 April 1995 along the lines of the Harrisburg incident .
Similar incidents have also taken place at two other nuclear power stations in Russia .
They should have reacted pretty quickly - it was only a problem with valves , a simple technical matter .
Yet it has taken four years , and up to now nothing has happened , although an application has been made .
Now there has to be an invitation to tender .
If your house was on fire , can you imagine getting quotes to see which fire brigade was the cheapest ? Your house would have burnt down by the time they got there !
We need to apply different procedures in this case , and Gordon Adam is quite right in drawing attention to paragraph 20 , which states very clearly what we should be doing .
That is why I am asking for swifter action before the whole thing packs up !
Madam President , we in the Liberal Group tabled an urgent resolution a few weeks ago , also signed by Mrs Plooij and Mr Frischenschlager , on the K2 and R4 nuclear power stations in Ukraine .
We have withdrawn this resolution now that the Adam report is on the agenda , but we would nevertheless like to say something about this issue .
I entirely agree with the rapporteur that optimum use must be made of the capacity of the safe power stations that are now ready or under construction , at least where this is the least expensive option .
I have read various reports that the K2 and R4 power stations in Ukraine are to be decommissioned using EBRD and Euratom money , but we feel very uneasy about this .
We originally asked for the Court of Auditors to produce a report on this use of Euratom funding , but Mrs Aelvoet has tabled two amendments that go even further , and we in our group intend to support her .
We think that Euratom and the EBRD should not be providing money to decommission these two power stations .
Furthermore , the ESPOO Convention requires Ukraine to keep its neighbours informed about its nuclear power stations , which it has not done .
Ukraine is not a signatory to the ESPOO Convention , but as Western European institutions we are perfectly entitled to insist that it should meet the ESPOO requirements , in order to guarantee that Ukraine 's neighbours have some say in the future of its nuclear power stations .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of building Europe , and also with enlargement in mind , we need to have an energy policy in keeping both with market trends and the real needs of consumers .
There is an ever-increasing role for the EU here .
This is the context of Gordon Adam 's two reports , and he has prepared them with all the rigour and insight that we have come to expect from him .
The point at issue is to optimise electricity distribution throughout the whole of Europe , taking into consideration the ineluctable development of the market for gas , of which there are still substantial reserves .
The objective is not only to interconnect the electricity networks of central Europe and the EU , but also to facilitate natural gas imports from third countries .
The task before us now is to diversify sources of energy supply by continuing to use fossil fuels , whilst endeavouring to minimise CO2 emissions .
Given the rapid growth in energy demand , we need to develop a realistic percentage of renewables and at the same time exploit Europe 's nuclear know-how .
Gordon Adam 's second report is about improving nuclear safety in eastern Europe .
In this context , fuel reprocessing is just as important as operational safety .
Improved safety at traditional nuclear power stations is an objective of the PHARE and TACIS programmes , which new regulations have improved for the period 2000-2006 .
We are not talking about a replacement for government strategy in third countries - this is about using dialogue and cooperation to achieve essential improvements in the safety and energy efficiency of their reactors .
It is particularly important to achieve better management of waste from civil power stations , as well as eliminating 50 tonnes of military plutonium in Russia .
The European Union cannot stand by and allow Russian military plutonium to accumulate as a result of implementing nuclear non-proliferation treaties .
An integrated energy policy bringing together national governments and the European Union is essential .
It should steer industry towards rational use of energy and greater use of renewables , including improvements in the nuclear energy sector as a whole , with a new generation of reactors and management of the fuel cycle , in particular the end of the cycle , in other words nuclear waste .
We need an ambitious yet pragmatic and responsible programme under which the European Union can use its powers to achieve both short-term and long-term benefits .
In the short term , we need to make rapid progress with the EPR , the European pressurised water reactor , which is both safer and more profitable , as it will reduce the cost per kWh by over 10 % .
Whilst by using MOX fuel nuclear waste can be eliminated in part , we still need to be making preparations for the long term now , and - at the same time - to initiate a study to evaluate the technology involved in hybrid reactors , such as the reactor recently proposed by Carlo Rubia .
However , work is also needed on high temperature reactors , which are notable both for their energy efficiency and for their capacity to eliminate 90 % of military plutonium .
Work needs to be done under the EU framework programme , in Member States and in third countries , to develop the necessary technology .
Improvements in nuclear safety and the elimination of waste , coupled with diversification of energy supplies , will enable us to meet the increase in demand throughout Europe and to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases .
This makes European energy policy a model for others to follow .
Madam President , when you look at the Commission communication on nuclear sector related activities for CEEC and NIS states and at the Court of Auditors ' report , you could be forgiven for thinking that they were about two totally different subjects .
Given that the Commission claims that its communication gives an overview of funding provided and successes to date , together with new guidelines on programme implementation , the document we are considering , with just 13 pages of text and 17 pages of annexes , really is an outrage .
Nebulous statements such as - and I am quoting now - ' the European Union has undertaken a great number of activities in the nuclear sector since 1990 ' and ' special programmes were created with considerable budgetary appropriations ' are not what I would call an evaluation !
The passage in the communication about radioactive waste management is a real gem of vacuity .
Let me quote the following : ' The radioactive waste programme is giving many CEEC / NIS organisations and institutes a wide insight into western technology and safety culture , and this has helped to specify problems in this area and to better define concrete implementation projects ' .
I think these gentlemen must have been peering into a very deep hole indeed !
What projects , what problems ?
What form does the EU participation envisaged take ?
Bearing in mind that we do not have a permanent storage solution anywhere in the EU , but just shift waste around from one country to another and then dump it at some interim storage facility , that really is rich !
Participation by eastern European countries in EU research programmes is portrayed as being highly successful , but we are not given any evidence of this alleged success .
Or do we call it a success story when despite the agreements entered into under the Nuclear Safety Account for the closure of high-risk reactors , all of these reactors are still operating ?
The Commission and the Council have specifically stressed the importance of this agreement on closures , so I find it all the more amazing that the rapporteur has simply ignored this , instead of stepping up pressure on these states .
It is simply not acceptable for us to be using EU tax revenues to increase the danger , instead of minimising it !
The rapporteur 's assumption that building new nuclear reactors increases pressure to close down older ones is spurious .
On the contrary , as history has shown , old reactors which should have been scrapped will continue to operate and export power until they blow up in our faces . And what is more , the disposal problem has not been solved in these countries and the risks of proliferation are mounting .
We should not be using EU tax revenues to create new markets for EDF .
It is generally accepted that it is cheaper to build combined-cycle gas turbines and to encourage energy efficiency measures .
There is no evidence that the money spent so far has in any way had the desired effect , and it is high time that the Commission recognised this and changed its policy .
So , although Mr van den Broek has already left again , I would like to ask when we can expect a new communication based on the real facts .
And I would like to have an answer this evening !
Madam President , we have been looking at the issue of nuclear safety in the CEECs and the New Independent States for well over 10 years now , and a solution is still not in sight .
Not a single one of the reactors which are today euphemistically called first generation reactors has been closed to date , although there has been a substantial flow of EU funds to the CEEC and NIS countries and various agreements have been concluded . The aim of all this has been something which I believe everyone in this House wants : to close down these dangerous rust-heaps known as reactors as soon as possible , or , even better , yesterday !

I would like to thank Dr Adam for what I am sure was the very difficult task of preparing his report . In it , he says it is necessary to agree energy plans and strategies with the applicant countries , with the other Central and Eastern European countries and with the NIS , with the objective of closing down nuclear reactors ready for the scrap-heap , ceasing work on unsafe reactors already under construction , and at the same time meeting the energy requirements of these countries , which are at present to a very large extent covered by nuclear energy .
In drawing up such a strategy we will of course need to respect the sovereign right of these countries to decide at national level whether or not they wish to continue using nuclear energy . We will also need to involve regional and local authorities in this process as far as possible , and I believe that an energy plan of this kind will pave the way for renewables , making this an important opportunity for these countries .
Although there are to be various transitional arrangements for the applicant countries in the environmental field , there should be no transitional arrangements where nuclear safety is concerned !
Madam President , environmental protection measures will only have a significant impact on competitiveness where a company is directly competing with companies in regions where such measures are not in force .
If we apply the same principle to the nuclear power sector , this means that it is absolutely essential for nuclear safety standards in the applicant countries to be brought into line with those in the EU .
However , if in addition to closing down nuclear power stations , funds are to be made available for upgrading nuclear power stations still operating , these funds should come from the operators themselves , in keeping with the liberalisation of the electricity market and the polluter pays principle . The source of these funds should therefore be the proceeds of electricity sales and not subsidies or EU funds .
Otherwise , the market will be distorted to the advantage of nuclear power in applicant countries , which we mostly certainly do not want .
So it is only logical to demand that EU funds from the PHARE and TACIS programmes intended to improve nuclear safety in eastern Europe should not be used to finance upgrading , but rather that they should be used solely for supporting nuclear regulatory authorities in eastern Europe , for nuclear safeguards and to create a state-of-the-art regulatory regime .
I would ask the House to vote for my amendment on this subject , which has already been approved in committee .
Madam President , as all the other speakers here have pointed out , the safety of nuclear power stations is the most important issue when the EU is dealing with the nuclear power sector in the applicant countries and the New Independent States , and it is unacceptable to grant these countries transitional arrangements .
Safety requirements mean that some power stations will have to close . The reaction to this is often that new nuclear power stations will be built instead .
It is this response that is unacceptable .
We cannot export views that we ourselves no longer hold to other countries . And the truth is that the peoples of Europe do not want any new nuclear power stations .
Therefore , the most important thing in the Commission 's communication is in fact that it emphasises the need to draw up energy plans for the whole energy sector , and not just the electricity sector , with particular emphasis on energy saving , developing alternative sources of energy and using energy efficiently .
All too often , we see that the answer to a growing demand for energy is simply more power stations .
What is needed is something else , and not least in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Madam President , because of the procedure for the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the partnerships that have been formed with the New Independent States , the European Union has to take initiatives regarding nuclear safety .
In these regions , there are 50 plants with obsolete Soviet nuclear reactors which must be decommissioned , simply because they are extremely dangerous .
It is well known that the first generation RBMK and VVER 440 / 230 Soviet reactors are dangerous , since they are unable to withstand accidents .
Reactors such as these still exist and still operate in Bulgaria , Lithuania , Slovakia , Armenia and Russia , while those in the former German Democratic Republic have been closed down for good .
In particular , the Commission is called upon : firstly , to abide by the agreements to decommission first generation reactors , such as the Kozloduy reactor in Bulgaria , the Ignalina reactor in Lithuania and those in Slovakia ; secondly , not to give financial assistance for first generation reactors ; and , thirdly , not to grant Euratom loans to modernise later generation reactors , unless a guarantee can be given that agreements to decommission first generation reactors are pushed through , because these are a threat to the people of Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr van den Broek had the opportunity today to speak on these matters .
I think that he fully covered the difficulties which have arisen and which are set out in the report by Mr Adam .
I should like in turn to assure you that the Commission will continue its attempts to achieve the maximum level of safety in respect of nuclear reactors .
As regards the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , we will of course incorporate the issue of nuclear safety within the framework of bilateral agreements , and above all within the framework of the attempt to prepare these countries for their adoption of the acquis communautaire and subsequently their accession to the European Union .
In other words , this will be an important aspect of the pre-accession strategy for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Finally , as regards the efforts of the Commission to decommission nuclear reactors in those cases and in those countries where safety problems have been identified , I wish to assure you that the Commission , regardless of the respective strategies of those countries , is continuing to stand firm on the agreements that have already been concluded with them .
For this reason , we are doing our utmost to coordinate the efforts made by EBRD and , of course , by Euratom , to provide the necessary loans for nuclear reactors .
Against this background , I wish to tell you that this morning , in Ukraine , a task force was put into operation with exactly this objective in mind , that is , to help the Ukraine Government to move swiftly towards reorganising its energy sector and to meet all the necessary conditions for these loans to be granted .
In the other countries , such as Bulgaria , and in other countries with which the Commission is collaborating , we are trying to use all the possibilities at our disposal to help these countries to achieve a complete reorganisation of the energy sector , so as to give them the opportunity to use other energy sources .
For this reason , we are attempting to move the banking sector towards helping to support such plans .
I should like once again to reassure the House that , in line with the principles supported by the European Parliament and restated in the report by Mr Adam , the Commission is continuing its efforts to ensure the safest possible operation of nuclear reactors .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Mr Eisma , we really are so short of time that I would prefer not to take any further questions ; otherwise we shall not get through our business for today , and we are already behind schedule .
Madam President , I very much regret that Commissioner van den Broek is not here for this part of the debate .
It is not true , as the Commissioner present says , that Mr van den Broek dealt with all our comments this morning ; that would have been impossible .
The debate is still continuing , and we would have liked to have had an answer from the Commissioner responsible .
Perhaps the report could be passed on to Mr van den Broek .
That concludes this item .
Multiannual energy programmes
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0085 / 99 by Mr Robles Piquer , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision adopting a multiannual programme for the promotion of renewable energy sources in the Community ( 1998-2002 ) ( ALTENER II ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0550 - C4-0071 / 98-97 / 0370 ( SYN ) ) ; -A4-0084 / 99 by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision adopting a multiannual programme for the promotion of energy efficiency ( 1998-2002 ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0550 - C4-0072 / 98-97 / 0371 ( SYN ) ) ; -A4-0086 / 99 by Mr Stockmann , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the communication from the Commission on energy efficiency in the European Community - towards a strategy for the rational use of energy ( COM ( 98 ) 0246 - C4-0316 / 98 ) .
Madam President , in 1916 , Thomas Edison , who knew a thing or two about electricity , wrote the following : ' We should use the forces of nature to obtain our energy .
Light from the sun , wind and the tides are forms of this energy .
But no , we burn forests and coal as if we were burning the door to our house to keep us warm .
We live like savage invaders of the earth and not as if these resources were ours forever . '
In my mind , these dreadful words , written over 80 years ago in the middle of the First World War , are clearly an appropriate starting point for the debate on the three reports the European Commission is using to help fill the gap left by a lack of a Community energy policy . The Member States do not want this policy , even though the Members of this House and the Commission are in favour of it .
I am referring initially to the report by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz and to the report by Mr Stockmann - the first on energy efficiency and the second on the rational use and saving of energy .
We will discuss these later .
My report , Madam President , is a report on the section of the new Framework Programme for Action in the Energy Sector that attempts to establish a multiannual programme for the promotion of renewable energy sources . If we look closely , we find that this is the key element of the whole programme .
In short , it is an attempt to strengthen , extend and improve the effects - I would say the positive effects - of the Altener programme , which has now become Altener II .
The programme covers activities that seek to naturally maintain the ecological balance , to respect the environment , and to ensure security of supply while reducing energy import dependence , as the percentage of such imports is growing rapidly in the European Union . Also , by exploiting these renewable energies , it seeks to reach a certain balance with the technological advances made and to create jobs .
There are forerunners to these reports and to this situation .
Firstly , there was Altener I , from 1993 to 1997 , then the provisional form and the final version of Altener II that should take us up to the year 2002 .
Let me also remind you of such important documents as the Green and White Papers from the Commission and , if I may make a slightly more personal reference in this case , the 1994 Madrid Conference . In a week 's time we will reach the end of the first five-year period since this meeting was held .
I should like to remind you that the relevant authorities from Spain and many other countries were present , and also that my friend and , Commissioner , your predecessor , Commissioner Matutes , was present at that meeting and was actively involved . Mr Mandelis , now a minister and one of your fellow countrymen , was also present and , at the time , held the Presidency as it was the turn of the Greeks .
Both these men helped us in a very efficient manner .
We are talking here about wind energy , thermal and photovoltaic solar energy , biomass , small-scale hydroelectric schemes under 10 megawatts , geothermal energy and , perhaps in the future , harnessing energy from tides .
Recently , interest in all these forms has clearly increased , not decreased .
A few days ago , a pun in a major French daily paper said that wind energy had the wind in its sails .
Fortunately , t is not only wind energy that is doing so well , although this is the form that is experiencing greatest growth .
I believe that on this matter you must choose between three attitudes .
Either you believe that our efforts concerning these forms of energy are useless , or you think that these energies could replace conventional forms in the near future , or , and in my opinion this is the sensible position , you believe that we should slowly increase the percentage of energy consumption from renewable sources under the terms that have been laid out in all these documents . Of course , we still cannot describe such documents as satisfactory or definitive but they are an important first step .
Many countries are already aware of the fact that this situation is changing .
It would be difficult to list them here due to a lack of time but I will mention one simple figure : at this moment in time I can tell you that , in 1998 , the amount of wind energy produced and consumed in the European Union increased by no less than a third in relation to 1997 .
I should like to finish by saying that we must continue along these lines and that , as rapporteur , I recommend that we all vote in favour of my report as well as in favour of the other two .
In the case of my report and that of Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , we should vote in favour of the amendments already accepted by the Committee on Energy , Research and Technological Development .
I do not think that we need to include the others .
In conclusion , I should like to congratulate my two colleagues whose reports we are about to consider .
Madam President , together with the Altener programme , the SAVE programme is our only weapon for achieving the 8 % reduction targets to which we committed ourselves in the Kyoto Protocol .
This makes it all the more amazing and incomprehensible that we only intend to spend ECU 68.45 million on SAVE II over five years and ECU 281.1 million on Altener , also over five years , whilst in the same year we are throwing ECU 170 million at nuclear fusion for just one year !
There is also something else that I find puzzling : how is it that when the Commission was evaluating SAVE I it came to the very firm conclusion that only legislative measures would help us to achieve our objectives , yet such measures are quite absent from SAVE II ?
I have also failed to find a clear list of what we actually want to achieve .
However , one thing is certain : in Germany , for example , equipment in permanent stand-by mode in homes and offices consumes the equivalent of the output of two 1 000 MW power stations . This is irrefutably stated in a study by our own Federal Environmental Agency .
Furthermore , no one denies that if we finally started using energy rationally this would be an innovation that would create jobs , give us a competitive edge and preserve the environment . And I am talking about baseload electricity , because you would be saving power morning , noon and night , as everyone knows and as everyone keeps saying .
We hear this day in , day out , like a hawker 's sales patter , but no one is actually doing anything about it !
I find myself becoming suspicious that big industry just does not want this to happen - they simply do not want it !
If we could reduce baseload power consumption , and it would be quite a simple matter to save 30-40 % straight away by using electricity rationally , and we could also generate a lot using renewables , that would enable us to decommission a good many nuclear power stations only used for baseload .
This demonstrates how woolly this policy is , and how much waffle there is : there is more talk than action .
This policy will not enable us to achieve the reduction targets we are committed to , nor will it equip us with the sort of technology for the next millennium that would allow us to really boost our exports and achieve a presence on the world market , which in turn would allow us to create jobs and preserve our environment . This meagre programme really is not enough to achieve all that .
If there is no money available , we should at least adopt legislative measures , quite apart from the fact that if we could finally agree on an EU-wide energy tax that would be a real success story .
There is no incentive to save with energy as cheap as it is now .
So I would like to ask the Commission when it finally intends to take some action - we have had endless discussions about this in the House , and we have repeatedly said that we need intelligent programmes for rational use .
We cannot just carry on using the same old Stone Age methods as if they were good enough for us .
We know something needs to happen , and we have the means to achieve it , and yet nothing is being done !
What can you hope to achieve in five years with ECU 68.1 million ?
And that is supposed to include the EFTA countries as well !
Surely we cannot really intend to classify incineration of municipal waste as renewable energy , as proposed in the Altener II report .
What does that suggest ?
Renewable energy means solar , biogas , hydro and wind energy , used rationally of course , the two things go hand-in-hand . The Altener and SAVE programmes are like brother and sister , but we need to have the political will to act and not hold back .
The Commission has our full support on this .
Why is it not making progress in this area instead of letting the Council dictate to it all the time ?
We all know that the Council does not want anything to happen .
I have already explained to you why no progress is being made - there are many other parties involved who have nothing to gain from savings in baseload !
That is why I am asking you today to make a little bit of progress in this field , Mr Papoutsis .
SAVE and Altener are token programmes with very good intentions , but we both know that you can achieve nothing with so little money , none of us can achieve anything !
We not only have our post-Kyoto commitments , we also have a duty to future generations .
So I hope that Parliament will accept my amendments to the legislative proposal , including the further 1.5 % annual saving that I have included , and not just the ridiculously low 1 % that the Commission has proposed !
I must apologise , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , I wielded my gavel after just three minutes , but I thought you were speaking as rapporteur and then I had the impression that it was no longer a rapporteur who was speaking , but someone who was presenting their own views , and that rather confused me .
What I have just said reflects exactly what the committee agreed , including the 1.5 % , it is all in the explanatory statement .
I have not invented anything new !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate my colleagues , and I think that we are all pulling in the same direction on this subject .
The issue of energy efficiency seems to have lost its importance in the public 's eyes in recent years , as confirmed by the International Energy Agency .
This subject is regarded as irrelevant , quite simply because despite population growth and increasing energy consumption , there are sufficient fossil energy sources for the foreseeable future .
And I believe that another reason is that the market has gone quiet - it is not giving any price signals .
Quite the opposite in fact , crude-oil prices are lower than before the oil crises .
So who has any interest in improving efficiency ?
Certainly not energy producers , consumers scarcely at all and industrial consumers only within limits .
It is we politicians who are most concerned , because we understand the link between energy consumption and CO2 emissions .
And that is why we have committed ourselves to reducing Europe 's CO2 emissions as compared with 1990 , as has already been highlighted at Kyoto and Buenos Aires under the Convention on Climate Change , the Framework Convention .
Another political motivating factor is that if we carry on in this way , the share of imports will rise from 50 % to 70 % by 2020 , and with it our dependency on third countries .
Yet there are enormous opportunities available to us .
Of course , opinions differ on the extent of the technical and economic potential for energy savings over the next five years , but whether we aim for 18-20 % or higher , the potential is still very great indeed .
If we take our political role seriously , it becomes apparent that we need annual efficiency gains of at least 2.5 % , instead of just 0.6 % at present .
If we want to be consistent , these gains are necessary , and they are possible as well .
The Commission is calling for 1.6 % , but there is scope for more .
We can only achieve this if we agree upon a comprehensive strategy at European , national and regional level , and that is indeed what the Commission is proposing .
This strategy must require Member States to commit themselves to binding national overall targets , it must include guideline targets by energy type and economic sector , and we ourselves want reports at three-yearly intervals , starting in 2001 .
That brings me to certain priority individual measures .
We need a directive on energy efficiency standards in public procurement .
We need guidelines for the renovation of existing buildings .
We should start with the European institutions themselves .
We need guidelines for the award of contracts for buildings maintenance and for new buildings .
And while we are on that subject - and this has already been mentioned - a consistent policy on renovating old buildings would also create new jobs .
Second , we need more targeted campaigns aimed at specific occupational groups and comprehensive labelling of all electrical consumer and capital goods .
A start has been made , but something more comprehensive is needed .
Third , we need to increase the use of combined heat and power , and we must be careful that this option does not lose out because of the liberalisation of the internal energy market .
An 18 % target is sensible and this also has the Commission 's support .
We need a financing programme for energy service companies or ESCOs .
They have great potential for the future and could assist energy conservation .
Fourth , there is great potential for transport systems , leaving agriculture aside for the time being .
Concepts such as logistics and intermodal transport serve to demonstrate just how much could be done in this field .
Some initial steps have been taken under the fifth framework programme on research , but more needs to be done .
Fifth , stand-by losses need to be reduced .
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz has touched upon this already .
We expect the Commission to bring forward a communication on stand-by losses as soon as possible .
My sixth point is that we of course need an EU-wide energy tax .
We need to tackle this old chestnut yet again , and I hope that the next Parliament will do something about this at some point . I hope there will be sufficient insight to achieve this .
I am all too well aware of what happened to the Cox report .
Even if no one is going to win any political medals by fighting for energy conservation , increasing energy efficiency is and will continue to be the cleanest and safest source of energy that we have , and we should be focusing on that .
Madam President , the Committee on the Environment has drawn up opinions on two areas within the multiannual framework programme for measures in the energy sector .
These are renewable energy and energy efficiency .
From an environmental viewpoint , they are two sides of the same coin . There is a need for both , because if the current trend continues , global demand for energy will double by the year 2020 .
We therefore need good plans and programmes if we are to meet our Kyoto targets .
On the whole , it can be said that the Commission 's proposal does not contain enough new thinking .
It focuses too much on conventional energy solutions rather than renewable energy ones ; on centralised systems rather than decentralised ones ; on traditional , economic tools rather than new thinking ; on purely technical measures rather than an holistic approach .
That is just not enough , so it is wonderful to see the reports before us , which up to a point pull in the same direction as I have described .
There are a number of areas which I would like to highlight .
Firstly , the administration of the programmes .
There is a problem with these programmes like so many other EU programmes , which is that they are far too confusing for applicants , so many people have difficulty getting involved in them .
The reason I am emphasising this is because the second point - involving ordinary consumers - is absolutely essential if we are to achieve the results we wish to see .
Only through consumers can we get adequate local initiatives .
On the subject of local initiatives , I would also like to mention the organisation of the tariff systems , which have to be adapted to the decentralised structure and cannot simply take priority over a large number of major areas and ideas .
It is essential that the programmes are controlled at national level , where people have the greatest knowledge of their own environment .
It goes without saying that different conditions prevail in different areas .
Solar energy should be exploited where the sun shines and windmills should be placed where the wind blows , and the Member States themselves know that best .
Madam President , the only thing you can say about these three reports is that they are acceptable , and we can vote for them - but that does not solve our problem .
We have already made a great many declarations of this kind in the House .
We always agree .
It is hard to think of another issue on which Parliament and the Commission see eye to eye to such an extent as on promoting renewables .
That is not the problem .
And yet I feel powerless when I look at the figures , which almost drive you to despair .
Let us take Mr Seppänen 's report , for example .
Mr Seppänen quite rightly says that if you exclude hydro-electricity , renewable energy 's share is only 1.3 % .
If you include hydro , it is 6 % .
We want to increase the renewables ' share to 12 % , but there is little scope for a major increase in hydro - you cannot rape nature , there are limits .
The other aspect of renewable energy is biotechnology .
Hydro and biotechnology combined account for 95 % of renewable energy .
Hydro is chiefly found in the northern countries and in the Alpine regions of Austria and France and so forth , and biomass is found in the same countries , but you cannot extend these sources of energy at will , unless you are willing to pay the price .
Extending the use of biomass , on the other hand , is bound up with agricultural policy .
The fact is that a key omission from the proposals on agricultural policy in Agenda 2000 is a chapter on renewable energy .
That really should have been included .
I know that the Commission did some work on this , but in the end it was not incorporated , because the finance ministers did not of course want to pay for it : it would cost money .
That is the crux of the matter .
Fine , we want renewables , but we have to introduce them despite current market trends , because as a rule they are more costly than the cheap energy we currently have .
That is why Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz is quite right : nothing will happen without legislative measures .
The market will not achieve this by itself , otherwise this would have happened long ago .
So we need prefinancing .
In the longer term renewables will pay for themselves , but at this stage we need to prefinance them , and I therefore think that our biggest problem is not the technology itself - of course we want better and better plants , that goes without saying - but prefinancing .
How can we mobilise private capital and public funds and persuade the banks to play a more active part in this field ?
To my mind , that is the central issue with renewable energy .
We once had a debate about feeding in electricity from renewables here .
You will recall that the proposal I made at that time was rejected by a majority of Parliament .
Well , perhaps that was not such a disaster , perhaps there are better suggestions , but we have not heard them yet .
I would also like to ask Commissioner Papoutsis when a proposal along these lines will be brought forward , because at that point we were promised such a proposal before the end of the year .
It is now March and we still have not seen a proposal .
I grant you that this is a complicated field , and I do not envy you your task .
I tried it myself and had no luck in this House .
I wish you more luck , but we must do something .
Do something better than I proposed .
You will have my full support , but we must do something .
We cannot wait for the market to solve this .
There is also a link with energy prices .
According to the Commission documents , energy efficiency has been increased by just 0.6 % per annum over this decade , because energy prices are so low .
In the 1970s and 1980s the rate of increase was 2 % , because energy prices were high .
That is an economic fact , so we need to get a hold on this problem .
We have suggested energy taxation , which I know is not very palatable , but we need an honest debate about these issues , mere declarations are no longer enough .
Madam President , the framework programme now under discussion combines all the elements of the EU energy policy and will hopefully help to coordinate the EU 's work and make it more effective .
It is important that different sectors within the Commission move in the same direction , to conserve energy and exploit renewables .
Even to achieve the aims of the White Paper , not to speak of the still more challenging aim put forward by the committee , there has to be growth in the biomass sector in particular .
At present there are considerable amounts of biomass in certain regions , especially in northern areas of the EU , in the form of logging waste , for example , which remain totally unexploited .
However , these areas lead the world in developing the kind of logistics know-how for gathering this material , and growth in the industry is forecast .
I would like to emphasise two points .
Firstly , it will be vital , in my opinion , for us to be able to use the Structural Funds for projects relating to renewable energy in the future too , as there is a dearth of resources for other EU actions .
Secondly , I would like to stress , as others have , how important the issue of taxation on energy is .
Madam President , saving energy is the cleanest energy source .
Some of those here today have also come to the same conclusion .
We should therefore have additional energy taxes at EU level .
To me that seems obvious , and I am waiting patiently for a proposal from the Commission and for the Council of Ministers to approve it .
Tough economic measures are required in order to promote renewable sources of energy , the efficient use of energy and , in particular , to ensure that the traditional , conventional , environmentally unfriendly , reactionary energy society becomes a thing of the past .
Many fine words have been uttered tonight on the desirability of promoting renewable sources of energy , but nothing ever actually happens .
Consequently , it is absolutely essential that we introduce tough economic measures to set us on the right track .
Both the Commission and the Council of Ministers , together with an unholy alliance here in Parliament , continue to support the nuclear power industry and refuse to recognise that the modern sources of energy are renewable ones - a rational use of energy - which mean more jobs , a cleaner environment and healthier long-term economic prospects .
So why are so many people opposed to such an outlook ?
My generation and my political group most decidedly are not !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say at the outset that I support Mr Robles Piquer 's report on the promotion of renewable energy sources , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz 's report on promoting energy efficiency , and Mr Stockmann 's report on the rational use of energy .
All three reports demonstrate that Parliament has the will to make progress with a diversified energy policy which would encourage environmental protection .
As I see it , that is the direction we should be heading in today .
We need to encourage the development of energy sources which , although they at present only offer partial solutions to the various major challenges currently facing the European Union , nevertheless offer very real solutions .
The first challenge is of course the environment .
New energy sources , and in particular wind energy , hydro and solar energy , are clean sources of energy .
In this respect we need to remember the commitments that we entered into at Kyoto in 1997 .
Furthermore , these new energy sources should also allow us to reduce our dependence on third countries for supplies of oil , gas and other energy sources .
Fifty per cent of our energy comes from outside the Union .
This percentage is due to rise to 70 % by 2020 , which is not without its risks .
What is more , although technological developments have certainly reduced the prices of these new energy sources , this reduction is still not enough , and we must therefore finance RTD programmes in this field .
The recently launched fifth framework programme on research should enable us to do this .
In conclusion , Madam President , I would like to remind Members , at a point when unemployment has been called the main enemy of the European Union , that these energy sources will generate many new jobs .
That is a point that it was also important to mention this evening .
Madam President , Mr Stockmann sounded rather resigned when he said that the issue of energy efficiency is not exactly centre-stage in political debate at present .
However , I believe that energy efficiency is very much uppermost in the minds of people who are concerned about saving money .
I have many contacts and discussions with industrial leaders who say that energy efficiency - and this applies particularly to the basic goods sector - makes it possible to use less energy , and to cascade energy , that is to use it two or three times . This does not just mean saving a great deal of money , but also making technological advances which ultimately mean that we develop new methods and that , as Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz said , we remain competitive on the world market and can create new jobs in new industries .
We have discussed the promotion of renewables in Parliament at length and in great detail , and I think that there is little new that I can add .
We need to invest in renewables if we want to achieve the Kyoto objectives to which the EU has committed itself .
I also expect , Commissioner , that during accession negotiations you will pursue a strategy of increased use of renewable energy sources , because the other countries have signed up to the European Union 's Kyoto objectives and the first six applicants , which will already be Member States at the relevant point in time , will have to comply with these objectives in exactly the same way .
In addition to these reports , on which I congratulate the respective rapporteurs , we will also have to make further efforts .
Mr Linkohr has already mentioned that we are waiting for a proposal from the Commission on how renewables can be promoted now that the directive on feeding in renewables , which Mr Linkohr himself proposed , has failed to find majority support in Parliament .
We need a proposal along these lines because it is necessary , when bringing renewables onto the market , to create a certain buffer , and to offer some support until they become commercially viable .
We need to start by discussing energy taxation again , because the present situation is that the costs associated with energy production - and above all electricity generation at power stations with high emission levels - are spread equally , and not borne by those whose actions give rise to these costs . This cannot be allowed to continue if we wish to observe the polluter pays principle .
I hope that in future the sun will play a greater role in determining where our energy comes from than it does today .
Madam President , I am pleased to see that there is a large measure of agreement on the importance of developing new forms of energy among all of us here in Parliament and at the Commission .
That is why demonstration projects are incredibly important .
The good results we obtain in demonstration projects are made available not only to our Member States in the EU , but also to the applicant countries and the third world , where the fastest growth in energy consumption is taking place .
It is therefore amazing that so little money has been allocated to creating good , solid demonstration projects which can really show others the best way to do things .
The most capable countries , the most capable institutions and the most capable industries are the ones who will show us the direction in which to go .
We all know that today we are emitting twice as much CO2 as plants can break down .
And we know that the use of fossil fuels will double by the year 2020 .
We are heading for a very difficult period , and we should be deeply concerned about how our climate will develop and what burden will be placed on our ecosystems .
I see increased research and the development of new technology as the only way forward .
In many places today , taxes aimed at modifying behaviour , or so-called ' green taxes ' , have simply become new taxes , thus creating a negative attitude towards them among the general public .
In the long run , only an increased awareness of the problems through information and education will lead to responsible use of our limited energy resources .
Madam President , on behalf of my group , I should like to say that perhaps there is no real need to be as pessimistic as some of our colleagues have been .
I have just returned from northern Austria , where 30 % of energy already comes from renewable sources and where there are more solar panels than the whole of Spain , despite the fact that there is less sun .
At the same time as this meeting on solar energy was taking place in Wels , which followed on from the Madrid and Milan meetings , a major conference of the European Wind Energy Association was being held in Nice , which hundreds of people attended .
Moreover , as German magazines are reporting , we know that there is now something called the ' German , Spanish and Danish model ' . This simply means that some governments are becoming aware of the issue and are beginning to grant significant amounts of aid to renewable energies .
For example , anyone who has read the latest Spanish Royal Decree from the end of December will know what I am talking about as there is now something called a ' feed in ' system , to use our usual jargon , that redistributes the various renewable energy sources according to different scales .
And there are many countries that take wind energy very seriously , such as Holland , Sweden , Finland and Greece , a country that is also covered in solar panels .
A few days ago , I was in my home country where a day seminar on wind energy was being held , for the second time , in Santiago de Compostela .
This form of energy is experiencing tremendous growth in Navarre , for example , a region that already meets 20 % of its needs in this way .
The Commission now wishes to begin an experiment with 100 local authorities that hope to be fully supplied and served by some form of renewable energy . I believe that this so-called ' campaign for take-off ' is proof of the fact that , in spite of everything , some governments are becoming aware of this issue and that binding legal provisions are beginning to emerge .
And of course , the joint action of the Commission and Parliament has played an important role in promoting these new forms of energy and I believe we should be proud of this .
Madam President , I would first of all like to congratulate the three rapporteurs , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , Mr Robles Piquer and Mr Stockmann , on their reports and on their excellent work .

All three reports are part of a broader Community initiative to achieve a cleaner and sustainable future energy supply .
The promotion of renewable energy sources and increased energy efficiency are the keystones of our policy to tackle environmental pollution and to reduce CO2 emissions .
As you know , the Altener and SAVE programmes will make up by far the largest part of the framework programme for energy , which has been adopted and is already in operation as regards the remaining programmes .
Following the adoption of the Altener and SAVE programmes within the next few months , the framework programme for energy will be able to operate as a unified whole and as an overall energy plan .
I should now like to talk about each of the reports in turn , starting with the report by Mr Robles Piquer on the Altener programme , which concerns renewable energy sources .
The Altener programme is a fundamental instrument for the implementation of the Community strategy and action plan for renewable energy sources , through which we aim to achieve our objectives .
Our aim is to double the share of renewable energy sources in the gross domestic consumption of energy in the European Union by 2010 .
In the context of the Altener programme , the development of standards for the equipment needed in connection with renewable sources will continue , as will the development of strategies and the strengthening of those methods which will promote the market penetration of renewable energy sources .
New production activities will strengthen the contribution of Altener to the ' Campaign for take-off ' , which was announced in the White Paper on renewable energy sources .
In addition , thanks to the Altener programme , projects will be undertaken on a broad scale which will include technologies for renewable energy sources which are now ready to be implemented .
Participation in this programme will also be open to the countries belonging to the European Economic Area , as well as the countries involved in negotiations to accede to the European Union .
Before I move on to the amendments , I should like to thank Mr Robles Piquer , not only for his report , but also for his continuing support for the Community strategy on renewable energy sources over the last few years .
As regards the amendments , the Commission is able to accept 14 amendments as they stand .
These are Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 13 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 23 and 24 .
In addition , the Commission is able to accept seven further amendments , but only after they have been specifically reworded to bring them into line with the White Paper .
These are Amendments Nos 2 , 6 , 11 , 14 , 16 , 21 and 22 .
Amendment No 3 refers to the putting in place of a Community plan of action which , however , has already been established .
We would prefer a reference to the implementation of the action plan which was formulated in the Commission proposal .
Amendment No 15 provides for a new programme objective 1a which is already covered by Objective 1 , and also relates to the actions that are to be taken under Objective 2e .
As regards Amendment No 26 , I believe that Parliament has in mind here the Commission 's attitude that the committee procedure should not be changed .
Amendment No 12 cannot be accepted because it refers to indirect costs and competitiveness , whilst the internalisation of the profits from renewable energy sources and the different ways and means of improving the competitiveness of renewable energy sources have already been elaborated at some length in the White Paper .
In addition , the Commission is unable to accept Amendments Nos 27 and 28 , because they go beyond the scope of this programme . Nor can we accept Amendment No 29 , since we feel that the organic part of urban waste is a renewable energy source .
Finally , we accept Amendment No 30 in principle , but we believe that this is already covered in the monitoring of progress of renewable energy sources which is provided for in Article 2 .
Madam President , I should now like to move on to the equally important report by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz on the SAVE programme , which refers to the rational use of energy .
I would like to thank the rapporteur warmly for the quality of her report .
We all agree that the contribution of the SAVE programme to the rational use of energy and to reducing CO2 emissions in the European Union is especially important .
The SAVE programme does not serve that objective alone ; it also aims to secure the Community 's energy supply .
The European Union will continue to import large amounts of primary energies .
The measures which aim to improve the way in which we use our energy sources would seem to have important implications for the lifetime of finite sources of mineral fuels , and will clearly reduce our dependency on imported energy .
The SAVE programme will continue to support energy labelling and also the development of standards of energy efficiency for appliances which consume energy .
We shall also continue to underpin the efforts of Member States to improve their energy efficiency , by exchanging information on the one hand , and by closely monitoring the performance of energy efficiency on the other .
A significant share of the budget will continue to be channelled towards setting up local and regional SAVE offices , and its effects will be multiplied in conjunction with investments from the Community Structural Funds .
The countries belonging to the European Economic Area as well as the countries involved in negotiations to accede to the European Union will continue to be able to participate in the programme , using their own financial resources .
At this point , I would like to express my agreement with the rapporteur , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , on the level of budgetary funding .
I agree with her entirely that , for renewable energy sources as a whole , and for the saving of energy and energy efficiency , we need more resources .
It is clear , however , that we are moving in an area of financial austerity and , unfortunately , the European Parliament and the Council have not allowed the appropriations for these particular objectives to be increased any further .
As regards the amendments , I would like to say that the Commission is able to accept five amendments exactly as they stand , and these are Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 7 , 10 and 16 . We are also able to accept Amendment No 8 , subject to it being reworded .
The Commission will put forward new legislative measures where these are fully justified at Community level and in cases where other means , such as self-regulating agreements with the industry , have not yet proved effective .
Moreover , initiatives by the Commission to take new legislative measures do not depend on the SAVE programme being adopted .
Amendments Nos 1 , 6 , 9 and part of No 11 , which provide for the number of legislative initiatives from the Commission to be increased , are not appropriate in this specific context and , as such , cannot be accepted .
Amendments Nos 13 , part of 15 , 9 and 20 , in which additional areas of study and pilot actions are proposed , substantially limit the scope of the programme and also the flexibility of the initiatives , and cannot therefore be accepted .
The part of Amendment No 15 which talks about improving energy efficiency by switching from one energy source to another cannot be accepted either , because it goes beyond the scope of the programme .
The Commission is unable to accept Amendment No 4 , because an evaluation of the SAVE programme by independent assessors has shown that the programme has contributed to a large extent to improving energy efficiency in the Community .
Amendment No 5 and part of No 11 also cannot be accepted because the objective of 1.5 % , although desirable and although we could agree to it in principle , is nevertheless over-optimistic in practice .
Amendment No 18 cannot be accepted because it creates confusion between the SAVE and Altener programmes , and nor can Amendment No 12 , because it too creates confusion between the SAVE programme and the fifth framework programme for research and technology .
We are also unable to accept Amendment No 21 , because we feel that the call for complementarity with the programmes that are being developed in the Member States makes our action more effective .
By the same token , we do not accept Amendment No 22 , because we consider it to be unnecessary .
We want the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , Cyprus and Malta to participate in the programme , but it is clear that funding their participation cannot be covered by the SAVE budget , because this would render the programme completely impossible to implement .
As regards the call made by Mr Linkohr for a directive on the use and promotion of renewable sources of energy within the framework of the internal market in electricity , I should like to assure you that we are continuing our efforts and our consultations both with the German Presidency and the European Parliament to achieve the best possible outcome which the Member States could accept immediately , and which could be adopted immediately by the Council .
I am bound to say that the Commission was prepared to put forward a directive . However , following discussions with the presidency , with certain Member States and also with the European Parliament , we realised that our proposal was a more ambitious one than the Member States were able to accept at this particular time .
For this reason , we are proceeding apace with our efforts to devote all the time we have available to putting forward a proposal which could be accepted by the next Council of Energy Ministers .
Finally , I would like to deal with the equally important and comprehensive report by Mr Stockmann on the Commission communication on energy efficiency .
The importance of taking measures in the area of energy efficiency is set out using powerful and persuasive arguments , and the various actions are clearly defined .
I would like to stress that the Commission agrees to a large extent with the principles and the bases of the report by Mr Stockmann , and also with the measures he proposes .
There is also a complete convergence of opinion as regards the importance the report attaches to measures to disseminate information in the most effective way possible , to improve and bring into line with existing guidelines the standards and guidelines for public procurement , and to promote combined heat and power .
This is also true in respect of the priority given to energy efficiency guidelines which relate to the renovation of existing buildings and the awarding of contracts for buildings maintenance .
The measure proposed to promote energy service companies will be examined with particular care by the Commission 's services , especially now that we have a new sphere of activity as we move towards the liberalisation of the market .
Against this background , your proposal could best be examined in the light of these new developments .
The Commission also agrees with Mr Stockmann regarding the regular evaluation of the Member States ' plans for energy savings .
We must encourage Member States to promote national energy plans in this direction .
I would also like to point out that the possibilities for improving energy efficiency which are put forward in the report by Mr Stockmann are to some extent greater , and the objectives somewhat more ambitious , than the corresponding objectives contained in the Commission 's communication .
These greater possibilities and ambitious objectives are , of course , very laudable , but the Commission feels that they will be difficult to achieve with the existing Community funds .
However , there is no doubt that they reflect the high priority given by the report to promoting action for energy efficiency .
Madam President , I would once again like to thank the three rapporteurs for their excellent reports , which were of considerable help to us when we held our discussions , and which have brought us one step closer to attaining our common objective , which is nothing more than a sustainable future energy supply .
Madam President , have I understood correctly ? Is the Commissioner refusing to accept Amendments Nos 6 and 11 ?
If that is so , we might just as well go home now .
If we just have your ECU 68 million over five years and no legislative measures - because you do not seem to want to take those on board - we will not get anywhere at all .
That is quite obvious !
So when are you finally going to present some legislative measures , because without them this charade will go on forever .
Madam President , indeed I do not accept those amendments , and for no other reason than that the legislative initiatives which must be taken by the Community and the legislative initiatives which must by taken by the Commission do not depend on the SAVE programme .
We must move forward in this direction in any event .
I do not accept them for that reason , and not because there is opposition to them in principle .
It is not necessary to include the legislative initiatives in the SAVE programme .
Thank you , Mr Papoutsis .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Bank charges
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0146 / 99 by Mr Hendrick and Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on bank charges ; -B4-0149 / 99 by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on bank charges in the euro area ; -B4-0150 / 99 by Mr de Lassus Saint Geniès , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on exchange rate costs in the euro area ; -B4-0151 / 99 by Mr Wolf , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on bank charges following the introduction of the euro ; -B4-0152 / 99 by Mr Gallagher , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on bank charges in the European Union following the introduction of the euro ; -B4-0153 / 99 by Mr Herman , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on bank charges following the introduction of the euro ; -B4-0154 / 99 by Mrs González Álvarez , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on bank charges .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , monetary union has been with us for over ten weeks , but consumers in the EU are still finding it difficult to see the day-to-day advantages of monetary union for them .
People travelling on business or as tourists who need to change their own national currency into another national currency - both of which after all simply represent the euro , which does not yet exist in the form of coins and banknotes - have discovered that the commissions charged on such transactions are still high , too high in fact . Their opinion is shared by the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs , following its hearing involving banks , buildings societies and consumer associations .
I would like to put the following question to the Commission : was it not a fundamental mistake to ignore the European Parliament 's proposals during initial consultations about what should be covered by the euro regulation ? I have in mind not only the legal status of the euro and provisions on standards and international recognition of the euro , but also the issues of converting bank accounts , conversion costs and dual pricing .
But above all , I have in mind the commission charged on exchange transactions .
It should be possible to apply yardsticks in all these areas so that savings on exchange rate hedge costs and other costs which previously applied to transactions in the European Union , and which no longer exist today , are passed on to our consumers , customers and travellers , as a kind of bonus .
What strikes me is that the fee structure in the various Member States is remarkably similar .
Yet in some Member States we now have commission rates of 6 % , and many people have reported different commission rates when exchanging from one national currency to another .
This applies to the French franc , for example . I have also heard , for instance , that it is more expensive to change German marks into Italian lire than into French francs .
I also have to say that both colleagues and members of the public have reported that there are banks and building societies which have ceased to offer exchange facilities , especially for certain currencies .
I have heard that there are even central banks which have stopped making no-fee exchange transactions .
The Commission needs to carry out a thorough investigation of all these issues to put a stop to these practices . And I mean an investigation by the Commission itself , not one under the aegis of the European banking associations .
It is simply unacceptable that the introduction of the euro has not created greater confidence in monetary union on the part of our consumers , but just the opposite , it is breeding a climate of mistrust .
It is high time that we had transparency .
We need to know how high costs and charges were before the introduction of the euro and how high they are now after its introduction .
We need an initiative from the Commission .
What is more , what effect is competition having in reducing costs and charges for exchange transactions ?
It is scandalous that Italian banks have been given advance warning of an investigation !
And can anyone claim that the Commission 's investigation of only eight banks in connection with a possible cartel agreement is adequate ?
That is why I think it is really important for the Commission to launch an initiative or take some other measures , perhaps even in the form of legislation , on maximum charges .
The Commission 's actions on cross-border transfers also really leave a great deal to be desired , given that there was a political undertaking to do more than just reduce the cost of cross-border transfers as from 15 August and to make such transfers more secure .
As Members of the European Parliament were are deeply concerned about all these issues , and the public expects the Commission to take some action instead of dilly-dallying .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the banks claim that changing coins and notes from the euro zone costs them more for transport , insurance , staff and so on .
I find this hard to believe .
Why ?
Because changing money within one and the same currency does not cost anything .
For example , I do not have to pay to change a BEF 10 000 note into ten BEF 1 000 notes .
Now , the exchange rates for the euro zone currencies have been fixed against each other and against the euro since the beginning of the year , which means that they form part of the euro and are thus part of one and the same currency .
So what is the difference ?
The House has been calling for there to be no charge for changing national currencies into euros because it is a compulsory exchange .
We have not insisted on the same thing for exchanges between the euro zone currencies because these are voluntary .
What we need , in any event , is complete transparency , which should in itself lead to lower costs both for exchanges and for cross-border payments .
This must happen by 31 March this year , otherwise our group believes that we must consider introducing binding legislation so that the credibility of the euro is not undermined and consumers can enjoy the full benefits of monetary union .
Madam President , even though not all the questioners are present for the discussion , the large number of oral questions on the subject of bank charges proves the importance and , if I may say so , the seriousness of this matter .
Allow me to begin by summarising the situation before dealing with some specific issues .
Since the Commission is being asked to take an initiative , I should like to explain the various initiatives already undertaken by it , all of them complementary with one another .
First of all , the Commission fully agrees that one of the main arguments used to convince the EU 's citizens of the benefits of the single currency was the fact that the introduction of the euro would bring down costs for tourists and for businesses trading across borders .
We remain absolutely convinced by the soundness of this argument .
Prior to the introduction of the euro , as the honourable Members know , the Commission adopted Recommendation 98 / 286 on banking charges for conversion to the euro .
It provides that banks should not charge fees either for the conversion of accounts from the national currency of a Member State participating in the euro zone , for example from the French franc to the euro in France , or for the conversion of payments from the national currency into the European currency and vice versa .
By the same token , banks may not levy different charges for services denominated in euros : in particular , they may not levy charges higher than those applying to identical services denominated in the national currency unit .
Finally , for services such as the conversion of banknotes , the recommendation establishes rules on the transparency of the fees charged .
On 8 December 1998 the Commission published an initial assessment , revealing that banks throughout the euro zone were intending to abide by the recommendation .
It is true that the recommendation does not specify what constitutes an acceptable level of charges , but the volume of charges currently being levied on the services in question is undeniably a cause for serious concern .
As you know , we must distinguish between two types of operation : the conversion of euro zone banknotes and cross-border payments .
Let us begin with conversion transactions .
Prior to the introduction of the euro , as Mr Hendrick and Mrs Randzio-Plath stressed in their question , conversion charges - covering the exchange-rate risk and the costs of handling foreign banknotes - were partly concealed in the spread ; clients therefore had the impression that they were paying less than was really the case .
Now that the conversion rates have been set officially , banks must indicate - separately from the conversion rate - every charge that is made .
The elimination of the exchange-rate risk , deemed to represent around 15 to 20 % of the charges levied , and greater competition resulting from transparency should lead to a reduction in conversion charges , which has already happened to some extent .
But this process must be accelerated .
The Commission has been monitoring recent developments in this field very carefully , and has taken a number of measures to ensure that the cost of converting banknotes in the euro zone really is competitive .
On 12 January 1999 , I wrote to the European banking associations requesting the necessary information to compare the level of fees before and after the introduction of the euro .
On 5 February , the Commission - that is , Mr de Silguy , Mrs Bonino and myself - issued a statement to the press inviting all the banks to publicise the changes they had made , before and after the introduction of the euro , to the total level of charges for banknote conversion in the euro zone and for cross-border payments in the form of cheques , credit transfers and paper .
We asked the euro-zone banks to forward this information to the Commission by 31 March , via their European associations .
Similarly , the press release of 5 February invited users of financial services to inform the Commission - by e-mail or fax - of cases where the banks have failed to respect the legal framework of the euro or the Commission 's recommendation on the transparency of bank charges .
My department has so far received some 200 messages .
These relate to the level of fees , or to the continued existence of fees , rather than a failure to respect the legal framework or the recommendation .
Mr Van Miert has since begun to investigate possible violations of the rules on competition , so as to ensure that there is competition between financial service providers in respect of exchange-rate fees and other bank charges .
This matter was specifically raised by Mr de Lassus Saint Geniès .
However I would also make it plain - to Mr Gallagher and Mrs González Álvarez in particular - that there is currently no intention of taking legislative measures in this area ; after all , direct intervention in the establishment of banknote conversion costs in the euro zone would be incompatible with market principles and with contractual freedom .
That is the situation for the time being .
If I may , Madam President , I should now like to answer some of the specific questions raised by the honourable Members , implying that the present levels of charges for cross-border services indicates that the recommendation is being ignored .
As I have explained , the recommendation states that such charges must be transparent , without specifying an acceptable level .
Concern over the level of charges would rather seem to indicate the opposite , namely that the banks are abiding by the recommendation on transparency , which has raised awareness about the level of charges that were previously completely or partly hidden .
The honourable Members wonder , furthermore , whether or not the disappearance of the exchange-rate risk has affected the level of the charges made for such services .
We have received some partial data in response to our enquiry of 12 January ; we publicised these on 29 January , but by 31 March we expect to have a complete picture of the situation on the basis of the requested information . We shall report back to Parliament accordingly .
Finally , as regards cross-border payments - a topic raised by Mr Gasòliba I Böhm - this is a matter of great importance , which will not disappear automatically with the introduction of euro banknotes in 2002 .
In a single-currency area , it will be increasingly difficult for the public to understand why cross-border payments in euros should be more expensive than national payments .
Therefore this problem must be addressed as a matter of urgency .
It is not only politically important , but also commercially important to the banks that this matter should be explored rapidly , not least through investment in cross-border links between national retail payment systems , as pointed out by Mr Herman .
The Commission is determined to act as a catalyst for all these developments ; and to Mr Wolf , who asked what other initiatives are planned , I can reply that this is one .
We are currently preparing a communication , to be published by May 1999 , concerning the policy on payment systems in the economic and monetary union .
Last of all , as far as cross-border credit transfers are concerned , I would recall that the directive which Parliament helped to adopt dates from January 1997 , and that in the Conciliation Committee a very late date had to be set for its entry into force : mid-August 1999 .
The main reason was that this was demanded by one Member State , whereas the majority of Member States formally undertook to transpose the directive no later than the start date of the euro .
However , this has not happened in most Member States , and at the ECOFIN Council on 8 February , I pointed out to the Finance Ministers that this directive needs to be implemented as soon as possible ; I am following this up in writing .
Therefore the Member States too bear considerable responsibility here .
I would add that , according to press reports over the past few days , the French Minister of Economics and Finance intends to embark on a dialogue with all the parties affected by euro-related bank charges .
This is an encouraging sign . Given the overall context which I have described and in which - as you see - the Commission is actively pursuing a cohesive set of measures , I can assure the honourable Members that we are especially grateful for Parliament 's support , not least in the form of initiatives such as the hearing which Mrs Randzio-Plath recently organised on this issue .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
I would just say something on the procedure . With oral questions to the Commission , the practice is always that the authors first introduce their questions , then the Commission answers , and then come the speakers for the political groups , who can once again state their position .
Madam President , I have listened carefully to Commissioner Monti 's explanations and we must say that they are unsatisfactory .
They are unsatisfactory for several reasons .
The first of these is the fact that this is not an unexpected situation we are facing .
This is not the first time the House has debated the matter .
We have already looked at this issue , and we have had plenty of advance warning .
More than one year before the final stage began , we had already discussed this issue - levying bank charges during the transitional stage of monetary union - many times in the House . On two occasions , Parliament reached a conclusion which it made clear to the Commission : in order to avoid unfair practices in this field , the Commission would have to use its power of initiative to prepare a regulatory instrument , a definitive regulation that would set specific limits and establish some discipline .
The Commission felt that this was not necessary , that a weaker instrument would suffice - a mere recommendation - and that we should trust in the effects of competition to control the situation .
However , the truth is that the situation is even more negative than the most pessimistic forecasts .
The general rule in terms of charges for exchanging euro area currencies is that the charge is at least 3 % and , in many cases , it is more than 3 % . Frankly , it is difficult to see how this figure can be taken as a real cost .
It is difficult to believe the claim made by some banks that the exchange rate risk component in former charges only accounted for 10 % of the charge .
Today , the Commissioner is telling us that it is between 15 % and 20 % .
This is unbelievable .
The majority of reasons banks use to continue charging handling costs , such as the cost of personnel , insurance , storage and so on , are reasons that would also be valid excuses for levying a charge for changing a 100 000 lira note into ten 10 000 lira notes .
Costs are also involved in these cases , they are also non-interest bearing assets and so on .
In the end , the result of such behaviour from banks will be that many people , many normal people , will come to the conclusion that the euro is not a single currency that has replaced the currencies of the 11 Member States participating in monetary union but that it is just one extra currency . It is another currency on top of their own currencies that still exist in practically the same conditions as before the euro was introduced .
The single currency is a reality for the stock exchange and for the financial markets but not for normal people , not for tourists who need to change their money to spend it in another country . Nor is it a reality for the emigrant who is sending money to his home country and who sees that the cost of transferring money has remained the same or , in some cases , has even risen .
It is as if the euro , the single currency , does not exist .
What is at stake here , Commissioner , is something extremely important : the credibility of the single currency , the credibility of the most important operation the Union has undertaken in a very long time .
This is what we are gambling with and , for this reason , we feel we should once again draw your attention to the possibility of revising the Commission 's initial approach .
Madam President , like my colleague , I am dissatisfied .
Obviously I appreciate the Commissioner 's commitment , but I would point out that I asked the Council an urgent question on this topic in January , which has still not been answered .
For over four years the Commission , Parliament and the Member States ' finance ministers have been telling the public and businesses that there would be a change of scene in the Community as from the landmark date of 1 January 1999 , in that the cost of moving currency - the number-one tool of unification - would disappear .
But none of this has happened !
It is more expensive to change a euro-zone currency now than it was in 1998 .
I could go on about this at length , but now is not the time .
I have in my pocket a small example of what I am saying : like every conscientious MEP - and I am , moreover , vice-chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - I have one euro account in my own country , Italy , and another here at my workplace .
I paid a cheque drawn in euros into another euro bank account , and was asked to pay not only the normal cost of the banking transaction but also the cost of converting a foreign cheque .
So I called for the branch manager and asked him whether he knew , in that specific case , what the lira was .
To his answer that the lira is our national currency , I replied that , on 1 January , the lira - or franc , deutschmark or peseta - in fact became the national unit of the single currency .
Unless the banks start working towards a common currency rather than a national one , it will be hard for us to convince the public , business leaders and small traders to work in a market which - as you rightly say , Commissioner - must become not just a single market but an internal market .
Madam President , Commissioner , it has been interesting to take part in today 's debate .
I also wrote a letter to the Commission on this matter prior to the issue of electronic payments coming up for discussion .
Much has been said on the subject of exchange-rate charges and transfer costs .
It was interesting to note the Commission 's repeated assurances that it would issue a communication in May , possibly devoted exclusively to payment systems .
Moreover , I think people are very surprised that we do not have an interoperable bank card or customer payment system .
I hope that on the one hand the Commission , by being vigilant with regard to competition , ensures that no one is excluded from the different payment or interoperable systems to be launched in the near future and , on the other , that it makes use of all the opportunities which are available .
I should also like to suggest that while we are deciding what needs to be done , we also look into the transaction costs incurred as a result of using a credit card in another country .
This is , of course , the only interoperable system which people can use when they are in another country .
It is very hard to understand why the cost of using a credit card outside one 's own country , but in another euro country , should be so high .
I hope the Commission will give some thought to the matter .
In this context , charges of 4 % and above have been mentioned .
Madam President , first of all I should like to say that one of the major arguments used to convince our EU citizens of the benefits of the single currency was the fact that the euro would reduce costs for travellers and for enterprises involved in cross-border trade .
It was widely anticipated that the elimination of exchange rate risks between the currencies of Member States within the euro zone would lead to a reduction in the costs involved in conversion transactions between these currencies .
Notwithstanding these arguments , charges for exchanging euro area currencies have remained relatively high , as have bank charges for cross-border transfers , despite the fact that all the currencies are now inextricably linked .
Parliament has consistently insisted that compulsory conversions between national currencies and the euro must be eliminated in every shape and form .
It is important that the EU institutions remain vigilant on this matter .
The Commission must continuously monitor , assess and publish the bank fees charged by the financial and banking sectors to ensure that no overcharging arises .
This data must take account of the structure of bank charges and must allow for direct comparisons between conversion costs before and after the introduction of the euro so that transparency can be maximised on this important issue .
The banking and financial sector in Europe should take it upon itself to draw up a code of conduct to ensure that the EU financial legislation governing these currencies is strictly enforced .
In conclusion , I welcome the fact that the European competition directorate is now investigating banks suspected of overcharging customers for transaction costs post- January 1999 .
Madam President , I am delighted that you have called upon me to speak on behalf of the non-attached Members , but as there is no such group , I have the luxury of speaking on my own behalf , as anything else would not be logical .
I have started off very dangerously , as with only one minute 's speaking time , you can only afford such a long introduction if you can refer to what someone else has already said . In this case I am pleased to say that I fully agree with all Mrs Randzio-Plath 's requests and would simply like to support them , in particular her call for the Commission to launch a real initiative and , as far as possible , to ensure transparency .
However , the vital point is not that the public are now paying excessively high charges , but the fact that this came as a surprise .
They had no idea what they were in for , and that is what is really wrong . The same members of the public who had to put up with major packages of cuts in order to meet the convergence criteria were persuaded to accept those criteria on the grounds that in future they would be able to travel within Euroland just as they had travelled within their own country in the past .
The fact is , that has not happened .
Charges still exist and in some cases they have even risen . The public do not perhaps feel that they have been cheated - I do not want to exaggerate - but at the very least they feel let down .
This has done nothing to enhance the European Union 's reputation in the eyes of the public in the various Member States .
Madam President , Commissioner , in Le Monde on Wednesday 10 March there was an article with the following headline : ' Euro still a virtual currency for consumers ' , with the sub-heading : ' Two months after its introduction , the European currency is still a marginal method of payment ' .
I could not have put it better myself .
So two months after all the fanfares surrounding its introduction amidst hype unprecedented before 1 January 1999 - and we as Members of Parliament were party to that - not only has the euro not caught on with consumers , it has also stirred up various doubts and fears amongst them .
To my mind , this is a serious blow for the credibility of the new currency and for its acceptance by ordinary mortals .
Of course it was predictable that national currencies would not be replaced by the euro very quickly in day-to-day transactions within the Member States .
However , in view of the stability of the euro and a reduction in the cost of transfers , we might at least have expected an increase in cross-border transfers .
Not a bit of it !
If anything , charges have increased .
The banks have been quite frank in explaining that as they have lost their profit on the exchange-rate spread , they need to recoup their expenses in other ways , and the Commissioner seems to have gone along with this to some extent .
Let me give you two examples from my own country .
Since 1 January 1999 , the Luxembourg post office has imposed a charge on every cross-border transfer - let there be no mistake , on every single cross-border transfer - amounting to a levy of LUF 80 , whereas previously it had been free .
By way of a second example , a member of the public wrote to me reporting that he had paid LUF 200 in bank charges on a transfer of LUF 268 to Germany .
None of this will do anything to develop the single market in financial services for the consumer .
In its communication on financial services , the Commission explained that there were enormous differences between one country and another in all areas affecting the ordinary consumer .
I think that in the case of bank charges for converting the euro , the least we could have done would be to go for transparency .
This would have involved explaining what these charges - which are now to be increased - consist of , why there is any need to increase them and what the sector 's overall strategy is .
Ultimately , Commissioner , the question is whether we are to leave things to market forces or whether regulation is envisaged .
You have made it very plain that in your view there is no need for intervention , and that market forces should push down charges .
Nevertheless , let me leave you with the following thought : at a time when everything works through the banking system and the average citizen is increasingly dependent on that system , we need to guarantee universal service in banking as well - the right to banking at an acceptable price .

Madam President , consumers feel taken in and politicians foolish now that the introduction of the euro has failed to produce much lower exchange rates and has even , in the case of exchanges of smaller amounts , resulted in higher charges .
The same applies for cross-border transfers .
We were a little less naive than the Commission about what the banks would do , so we called for legislation to regulate exchange costs , but this did not materialise .
Now the Commission is trying - too late , I fear - to restore its reputation by making dramatic attacks on the banks .
The banks are right when they claim in their defence that they still have costs to pay , but they should have explained all this earlier when they were still passing on those costs in the form of different buying and selling rates .
Now they are going to have to be a little more transparent about the costs involved , and if necessary we must introduce legislation to force them to do so .
Finally , it is unacceptable that the banks should not yet have developed a cheap and efficient system for cross-border consumer payments .
I find this completely baffling in a sector which claims that the customer comes first .
The development of such a system should be the top priority in my opinion , and it would also enable the banks to get at least some of their own back .
Madam President , I wish to thank all the speakers .
They provide me with the opportunity to identify one point on which I believe there is full agreement among us , namely , that the present situation is deeply unsatisfactory ; and one point where there are partial divergences , namely , how to remedy that situation .
The present situation is indeed quite unsatisfactory .
The figures deriving from the first partial returns from the banking associations indicate that charges for exchanging banknotes have decreased in many cases by anything from 15 % to over 40 % depending on the amount and the currency being exchanged .
They also indicate , however - and this is the most unsatisfactory part of it - that the decreases have been less when small amounts - for example , less than the equivalent of EUR100 - are exchanged , and in some cases the charges for exchanging small amounts may have increased .
This is totally unacceptable .
The divergence arises where apparently some of you seem to believe that simply setting the level of the charges by a directive or a regulation would be both necessary and sufficient .
Here the Commission happens to have a different view .
Certainly we are not so naive as to believe that the unregulated play of the market will do the trick .
Obviously not .
What are we doing , since our purpose is not simply to complain loudly but to try to change the situation on the ground ?
What we are trying to do is , one the one hand , to impose competition .
Hence the actions of the competition Commissioner to see whether agreements or cartels have been put in place .
The Commission has the power to eliminate them if that is the case .
We are also trying to impose transparency .
As we all know , transparency is a prerequisite for competition and we are using all possible weapons to impose transparency , such as asking banks and bank federations to convey their data ; and also in the most immediate way by opening up e-mail sites and faxes available to consumers and citizens .
We should also avoid creating confusion .
For example , when the issue of the remittances of migrant workers is brought into the picture , then obviously this has to do , not with conversion charges , but with the good or bad functioning of cross-border credit transfers .
There the relevant instrument is the one on which legislation has already been enacted - the directive for cross-border credit transfers of early 1997 .
As I indicated in my earlier intervention , there the problem is with a delay in transposition on the part of Member States - hence the actions vis-à-vis finance ministers .
It would be a great help , I would add , if Members of the European Parliament could also put pressure on their respective national authorities to speed up the implementation .
Finally , to indicate the complexity of the matter and the panoply of instruments through which the Commission - which is particularly active in this area - is addressing the problem , I should mention that we have proposed two draft directives on the issuance of electronic money .
It so happens that electronic money may be the first way in which citizens will be able to make cash payments in euros before 2002 .
There were strong interests asking us to limit the ability to issue electronic money to banks .
We said No , because we want to create competition there too , for the benefit of the consumer .
So in our draft directive we made provision for other institutions to create electronic money - provided , of course , that they are submitted to an appropriate prudential framework .
Therefore , we all share the point of view that this is an extremely serious matter , of great relevance , as you all stress , to the credibility of the euro and , incidentally , of the financial system .
I am afraid it is not a problem concerning which somewhat simplistic solutions such as merely legislating would have the desired results .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Leaf tobacco
The next item is the report ( A4-0067 / 99 ) by Mr Trakatellis , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2075 / 92 and fixing the premiums and guarantee thresholds for leaf tobacco by variety group and Member State for the 1999 , 2000 and 2001 harvests ( COM ( 98 ) 0633 - C4-0682 / 98-98 / 0306 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , the Commission proposal only partly addresses the restructuring of the common organisation of the market in tobacco .
There are four points in relation to which the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has made changes which we believe will be adopted .
The first point concerns the fact that , since 1995 , there has been absolutely no readjustment of premiums , which has resulted in producers suffering a substantial reduction in income .
Our committee has proposed a 5 % increase in premiums , which exactly covers inflation in the European Union since 1995 .
The second point concerns the transfer of certain varieties of tobacco from one category to a better one .
We believe that this is quite proper , except that these transfers must be possible and they must go ahead .
Let me give you a specific example from Italy , where out of approximately 15 000 tonnes , which is the guarantee threshold , it has been proposed to transfer between 3 000 and 3 500 tonnes from an inferior variety group to other groups . This can go ahead .
In Greece , on the other hand , out of approximately 15 000 tonnes , it has been proposed to transfer 14 800 tonnes , which is impossible within the time suggested .
This cannot go ahead for many reasons . I would like to say , first of all , that if a producer were able to change his variety , why would he not do so ?
For less tobacco production , he would receive the same money .
What our committee is proposing , therefore , after much study and debate , is that up to 25 % could be transferred , at least in the case of Greece .
The third point concerns the time needed for implementation .
We are already well into the 1999 period , and these transfers require study and a programme .
We propose that the framework should be implemented for 2000-2002 , as this is logical and feasible .
The fourth point concerns the introduction of a national variety which is grown in the region of Pieria and bears the name of a town in Pieria : Katerini .
It has been proposed that this variety should be moved to another region of the European Union , in other words outside those regions which are provided for in the COM regulations .
We believe that this will have negative results , rather than the desired outcomes .
These are the four points in relation to which our committee has made changes which I believe must be accepted by the Commission .
There are some amendments which refer to the harmful effect of smoking on health and which say that funding must not be given and that tobacco production must be reduced .
However , what they do not say is that if production is reduced , imports of tobacco from outside the European Union will increase for years to come .
I feel , therefore , that this is an unreasonable proposal .
We seem to be unwilling to face reality . Perhaps the campaign against smoking should be waged from the point of view of consumption and not from the point of view of production .
I am a doctor and I do not smoke , but I find it illogical that we want to reduce production when we currently import tobacco and will import more in the future as a result . This will have damaging economic effects on the European Union and it will also lead to social unrest , because many tobacco producers will be left without work , not only in Greece but in Italy , Spain , Portugal and Germany - everywhere , in fact .
What the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is proposing , therefore , is that these amendments should be rejected - and we have already rejected similar amendments in committee - because , as we have said , we believe that there must be economic and social support in the tobacco-producing sector .
This is the truth and the reality of the matter .
I propose that we fight to reduce smoking , in which case world production of tobacco will be reduced .
What we are in fact doing is punishing our own tobacco producers while rewarding tobacco producers in countries outside the Community and creating a major social problem in the European Union .
Madam President , the Commission proposal we are examining this evening focuses on issues relating to the fixing of premiums and guarantee thresholds for leaf tobacco .
By a decision of the Council of 22 June 1998 , the additional funding which is allocated for cultivated tobacco in Austria , Belgium , Germany and France will increase by between 50 % and 65 % in relation to the 1992 harvest .
In addition , in order to maintain financial neutrality , the overall level of guarantee thresholds will fall by 0.95 % between 1999 and 2001 .
Premiums are to be increased by 10 % , with a corresponding reduction in special subsidies allocated through producer organisations .
These proposals maintain financial neutrality , and therefore the Committee on Budgets raises no objection to them .
I would point out that the value of the premiums has fallen by 5 % in real terms in relation to 1995 .
Consequently , an increase in the order of a further 5 % would be a logical readjustment . For this reason , I support the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I support the comments made by Mr Trakatellis on the difficulties and the fundamental inability of Greek producers to carry out tobacco transfers .
Greek producers are small and medium-sized tobacco producers and it is impossible to replace the qualities they cultivate . Essentially , in the infertile soil where the tobacco is grown , it is impossible for them to switch to better varieties in such a short time .
That is why , Madam President , I believe that the Commission proposals regarding Greece do not fall within the spirit of the common organisation of the market in raw tobacco .
Madam President , I rise to speak for the chairman of my committee , Mr Collins , and the majority - indeed I believe every Member - of that committee who voted on the amendments we have tabled .
I fear I cannot speak with the mild good humour and the calm words of my chairman .
I get quite indignant when I hear my good friend , Mr Trakatellis say that of course we must wage a campaign against tobacco , but if we are going to kill 28 million people in Europe per year with tobacco , it may as well be with our own subsidised crops .
That surely should not be the answer .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection believes that with tobacco responsible for as many deaths as it is , the hypocrisy here is , on the one hand , for the European Commission to be spending large sums of money on subsidising research into cancer but throwing away a similar amount on the subsidy - and now the renewed subsidy - of this crop .
The fact of the matter is that we have been , for 28 years , supporting tobacco growing within the Community and the financial dependency that goes with it .
The Environment Committee has asked for a gradual reduction in these quotas and premiums for raw tobacco .
We intended that , in the countries where the dependency was the greatest , to take effect by 2008 - in ten years - and in the northern countries , where , as we have just heard , there is a proposal to increase the sums available from 50 % to 65 % in relation to the 1992 harvest , we wanted that abolished within five years .
We are not getting that .
We are moving in the wrong direction and we are creating a health problem .
To my good friend Mr Trakatellis , who is himself a doctor , I ask if he could honestly deny that is the case ?
Every time there is a case brought against the tobacco multinationals , every time damages are proved once again in one of these cases , we see the medical evidence laid bare .
We all understand that fact .
When I hear Trakatellis I am reminded of what the martyr Jan Huss said when he saw people piling up the faggots to burn him to death .
He said to an old peasant woman coming forward with her faggots : ' O sancta simplicitas ' .
Those who argue for a greater subsidy for tobacco are saying that today .
I say to them : sancta simplicitas .
This is not the way to go .
Madam President , discussing tobacco is always very awkward , not so much because of the hour at which we have to do it , as because of the difficulty we MEPs have in understanding one another .
This is where the main obstacles lie .
As the representative of the Environment Committee said , there is a fundamental paradox here .
It is true that smoking is unhealthy , but it is equally true that the problem will not be solved by reducing or eliminating tobacco growing in Europe .
Either we take a radical position and have the courage to call for smoking to be banned , or else we try to cut the rhetoric .
The arguments are always the same : on occasion , I have had to support tobacco growers and defend the sponsorship of major sporting events , including the Formula 1 Grand Prix , even though tobacco advertising has been banned at these , and certain Member States ' governments have challenged the legality of the measures we are adopting .
It was nevertheless decided to press ahead , without applying the principle of subsidiarity , bearing in mind that other sectors - such as textiles and clothing - had branding problems needing to be tackled gradually over time .
We are told at one and the same time that production should be switched and that milk quotas cannot be increased , that under the COM in wine vineyards cannot be replanted or extended , and so on in all the other farm sectors .
Let us call a spade a spade ; let us not make impractical proposals .
If we put forward workable ideas , with the necessary subsidies , then tobacco growers will be willing to go along with our initiatives - as long as they are feasible .
Let us cut the rhetoric of the Environment Committee 's amendments . Let us support the Commission 's proposal as amended by Mr Trakatellis , remaining consistent with the realistic approach we adopted previously , granting aid for quality improvements with a view to promoting tobacco that is less harmful than before , and investigating tangible - not rhetorical - ways of embarking on a process of crop substitution .
Madam President , the Commission proposal on the fixing of premiums and quotas for tobacco over the next three years centres around two main issues .
Firstly , it aims to abolish group V varieties almost totally and in a very short space of time and , secondly , it offers the possibility of transferring the Katerini variety and introducing it into Italy .
As regards the first issue , the Commission seems to be unaware of the particular conditions of production in the specific regions where these varieties are grown , since it is proposing the substitution of certain varieties , such as black tobacco , in soil where their cultivation is simply impossible .
Moreover , the very short space of time proposed by the Commission for this substitution will mean a deadlock for producers , whereby any idea of planning will be turned on its head .
As regards the second issue , the introduction of the Katerini variety into Italy will affect the operation of the market both in terms of prices and stocks , since it will have a negative impact on the balance of supply and demand , and in terms of the quality of this variety of tobacco , since the soil and climatic conditions of the new producer regions are totally different from the regions where it has been grown for the last 30 years .
Unfortunately , the Agriculture Commissioner has failed to bring me the study I had asked for , which was allegedly written by a Greek and which purported to show that these tobacco varieties could prosper and be productive in Italy .
I am still waiting for the name of the Greek who carried out this study , and this is the first time the Commission has taken account of a study and put forward a proposal based on one .
This has not happened before .
I am still waiting for Mr Fischler to give me the name and the relevant details .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for his own amendments and for those accepted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I believe that they greatly improve the Commission proposal .
These amendments aim to improve conditions for the production of tobacco , to set in motion a rational and feasible adjustment in terms of time towards improving the quality of tobacco and , finally , to maintain the level of income of many families on the continent of Europe who live in some of the poorest regions of the European Union , something which the author of the study never really took into consideration .
I would just like to say a word in conclusion .
As the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has been proposing amendments and talking about health matters for the last five years , it would be a good idea if it tabled an amendment to ban the use of butter , since butter damages the heart and increases the risk of heart disease . We should also ban the circulation of cars , because I doubt that there is a scientist who can say that smoking is more harmful than the pollution caused by cars and car manufacturers .
At some point the hypocrisy in this House has to stop .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Trakatellis report is a moderate one .
It is a moderate report because it makes certain suggestions that , in my view , will help to adapt the tobacco market to the need to improve quality , give tobacco producers the time they need to change varieties and , at the same time , act as a preventive measure by promoting change to a given variety such as Caterini in the case of Italy .
I agree with Mr Trakatellis 's proposals and also agree with the 5 % increase which is really just compensation for the successive devaluations that have taken place since 1995 .
5 % is no big deal .
However , I would like to emphasise two aspects .
First of all , the lack of concern shown by the European Parliament , in my view , about fighting fraud in the tobacco sector .
I have no doubt whatsoever that if fraud in the tobacco sector - one of the major forms of fraud to be found in Europe - were really taken seriously , without crocodile tears or hypocrisy , the money recovered would be more than enough to pay for the many illnesses that the Committee on the Environment says affect smokers - since we know full well and have been amply warned that tobacco is harmful .
As far as I am concerned , the only thing I ask of a smoker is that they do not disturb me and blow their smoke over me .
I should also like to point out that tobacco is one of the most heavily taxed products .
In my country , it is taxed at 82 % .
I think that whoever takes the risk of smoking and becoming ill will already have paid for his hospital bed .
It may be in poor taste to say this but it is the truth .
As far as I am concerned I think everyone should be free to do as they wish as long as they do not inconvenience others .
Madam President , I could not allow to go by default possibly my last opportunity in this Parliament to point out the nonsense of spending over ECU1 billion subsidising the growing of a product which kills and maims its consumers .
Only yesterday at the end of the debate on Mr Needle 's report on European public health policy Commissioner Bangemann pointed out the contradiction of spending vastly more public money on supporting a product which undermines health than on public health programmes .
We are actually discussing here a Commission proposal to increase payments to tobacco producers in four of the richest countries in the European Union , allegedly because they produce better quality tobacco .
France , Germany , Belgium and Austria are not countries so poor or with soil so poor that no other crops can grow there .
There is absolutely no case on social grounds , such as could possibly be made for Greece or Spain , for public money to be used in this way .
I was a lone voice in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the date of the vote , supporting the amendments of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and very similar ones of my own , calling for the phasing out of subsidies for all tobacco .
Sadly , others who shared my view could not be present on that occasion .
I strongly support my colleague Mr Whitehead .
The proposals before us move completely in the wrong direction .
If European farmers want to grow tobacco it should be without public subsidy and the subsidies that exist should be phased out over a number of years with extra support to Objective 1 and Objective 5b areas during the transition .
Increaisng subsidies over three years to rich countries is totally indefensible .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tobacco is a plant , and that has been evident in today 's debate , during which opinions have been divided and which has been marked by repeated references to certain fundamental themes . These references have chiefly come from Members not concerned with agriculture , who see the debate more in terms of social policy .
I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur very sincerely for all his efforts .
The importance of tobacco production in the agricultural sector of the European Union and of individual Member States varies widely .
I believe that for a number of reasons it would be unwise to abandon tobacco production in the EU without any compromises , as many people are demanding .
In many regions of Europe , tobacco growing is often the only viable form of agricultural production , and this applies particularly to a number of Objective 5 ( b ) areas , including those in ' rich ' countries such as Austria .
Many family farms working in difficult conditions are dependent on tobacco production , which represents their only source of income .
Switching to other agricultural products is often out of the question because of the climate .
I think we are all acutely aware of the social and economic pressure on the population of these regions .
My second point is that it is pretty unrealistic to expect that people would smoke less or even give up altogether if we completely stopped European tobacco production .
The result would just be that all our cigarettes and tobacco products would be imported from third countries .
I hope that you will not misunderstand me , as I attach great importance to a healthy lifestyle and I myself am a non-smoker .
Nevertheless I think that decisions about our own health should be left to the individual .
I think we should grant each person that much responsibility .
In this context , I would like to point out the need for an improvement in tobacco quality .
I would also like to stress that a voluntary halt to tobacco production in the EU should be possible , with financial support from the EU .
Madam President , I feel as though I am at the races : whenever we discuss tobacco it is the same old Derby between Latins , Mediterraneans and Anglo-Saxons , as if the latter did not smoke .
It really is disconcerting that yet again , one year after we last met here to discuss the COM , we are sticking to our guns and saying the same things .
I was tempted to repeat the speech I made last year , just to check whether anyone was listening !
Mind you , I shall not stray very far from it .
In any event , while the Derby continues , some points have been scored by those wishing to abolish the cultivation of this crop in Europe .
The prices and premiums have been unchanged since 1995 , meaning that they have already fallen by 5 % in real terms ; the COM is being put into effect slowly - indeed , for the time being it merely represents additional costs ; and the negative effects of the transition from the ecu to the euro are weighing most heavily of all on areas where tobacco is grown , in other words - let us not forget - in the most peripheral areas , those of Objective 1 .
What is more , neither the COM proposal nor that of the Commission takes the slightest account of new elements which we attempted to introduce last year : for example the social proposals - recalled by several speakers - aimed at eliminating tobacco growing as a means of combating cancer , as if people would stop smoking because they could no longer find any European cigarettes on the market .
Clearly the big American multinationals would have a field day !
Well , in many respects the wrong approach is once again in evidence this evening .
Smokers will not stop smoking , and let us not forget it , but woe betide us if we halt tobacco growing : unemployment in Europe would rise , more or less , by another 1 380 000 .
That would be extremely damaging , without a doubt .
All of this is proposed in some of the amendments put down by Mr Collins and others .
Mr Collins says ' stop growing tobacco and grow some other farm produce instead ' . My reply to him is that this cannot be done everywhere , and that to ask other Europeans to do so is certainly not acceptable .
And my own question is this : given that alcohol is more lethal than tobacco , why don 't you British stop producing whisky and start growing strawberries ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , both the Commission proposal and the report before us are based on the premise that health should be sacrificed on the altar of structural policy .
As a non-smoker and farmer myself , I think it is important to recognise the double standards involved in the present form of tobacco subsidy .
I find it hard to believe that no other crop would thrive where tobacco is grown .
We need subsidies in that if we stop growing various tobacco varieties here , they would have to be bought in from outside the Community .
It is also clear that we need a change , an improvement in structural policy in the weak regions , in this case in Greece and Italy .
I accept that production cannot be stopped overnight in these countries , but I feel that we have been talking about this for far too long .
From my own national viewpoint , the Commission 's proposals are acceptable .
Although the guarantee thresholds have been reduced , this reduction at the same time makes it possible to increase the premium for the northern countries .
But overall , I believe that these subsidies should be rejected in their present form .
Why ?
Because increasing subsidies does not persuade tobacco-growing countries to switch to other crops , but if anything encourages them to carry on as before , because ironically enough the cigarettes that are most damaging to health are those that receive the greatest subsidy .
The Commission 's proposals are quite simply market-oriented .
The quotas for varieties with guaranteed markets and high market prices are being gradually increased , whilst the quotas for varieties with weaker markets and low market prices are being correspondingly reduced .
For 28 years now tobacco production has been receiving massive support without any sign of a change of course .
The varieties produced in the Community are of low quality , and producers should show more ambition and switch their production to higher-quality varieties .
To conclude , let me ask what lessons we should be learning .
First , I believe that tobacco subsidies should be abolished by 2008 .
Second , during the transitional period , they should be reduced in a socially acceptable manner .
Third , as part of this reduction process , less harmful varieties should receive support and varieties which are particularly damaging to health should no longer be subsidised .
Fourth , we should provide financial support during the transition period while production is switched to other agricultural products .
These suggestions are not anti-smoker , they are aimed at enhancing quality and improving health , and I believe that they also offer a solution for farmers .
Madam President , I wish to begin by complimenting the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , on the quality and efficiency of their work on the proposal to complete the reform of the COM in leaf tobacco .
To tell the truth , we spent a long time discussing the committee 's report and the proposal on the COM reform .
The European Parliament , the Council and the Commission all agree on the need to continue supporting tobacco growers , whilst at the same time offering them the appropriate incentives to improve product quality .
In keeping with the thrust of the report , the Commission is proposing to leave unchanged the premium levels and quota amounts , while considering a sizeable reduction in the quota for group V.
Having said that , I should like briefly to review the main issues raised in the amendments .
As regards those aimed at excluding the 1999 harvest - Amendments Nos 1 and 3 - the Commission cannot accept them , because the reform of the COM is to enter into force and apply from the 1999 harvest onwards .
Furthermore , the impact of the proposal on producers is limited , in that the guarantee thresholds are maintained for all variety groups with the exception of group V ; for this group , the existing threshold is below 30 % for Greece and 22 % for Italy .
This deficit is being transferred to other groups on the grounds of poor quality and low market prices .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 2 and 6 , since the annual stability of the budget must be respected .
The amendments dealing with the adverse impact of monetary conversion - Nos 4 and 5 - are unacceptable because , in the Commission 's view , the same rules must apply to the common organisation of the market in tobacco as to the other COMs .
Concerning the amendments on the guarantee thresholds - Nos 7 , 8 and 9 - the Commission wishes to avoid disrupting the market in all group V varieties , for which market prices are poor and which face competition from cigarettes manufactured in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union .
Therefore , although we are prepared to examine the impact on the sector of the proposal to transfer amounts to other groups , we confirm our reservations concerning any reduction in group V.
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 10 and 13 , as the additional sum for northern tobacco-growing Member States reflects the situation of their growers and so should not be changed .
Amendments Nos 11 , 12 , 14 and 15 deal with the mandatory disengagement of the Community .
I can reaffirm what the Commission proposed and Parliament agreed last time Mr Fischler discussed this matter here : the tobacco grown in the European Union covers only about a third of Community consumption , and therefore imports - currently accounting for two thirds of domestic consumption - could easily cover it entirely .
On the other hand , support for tobacco growers is vital in that they are concentrated in the least developed regions of the European Union , without any obvious agricultural or economic alternatives , as has been pointed out .
Moreover , the tobacco reform already makes provision for voluntary withdrawal from the sector , but we should not force farmers to leave the land .
Therefore the Commission cannot accept these amendments .
Commissioner , you have lavished words of praise on the report , but I still do not understand which of the amendments voted for by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development you accept .
Why do you pay the report so many compliments if you do not accept a single amendment ?
I should like to know which amendments you accept .
Mr Trakatellis , the report has an intrinsic value which transcends the individual amendments , clearly , and our words of appreciation related to the undertaking as a whole .
However , as I said , Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 9 are acceptable to the Commission .
As for the amendments on the guarantee thresholds , the Commission wishes to avoid disrupting the market in all group V varieties , for which market prices are poor and which face competition from cigarettes manufactured in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union .
Therefore , although we are prepared to examine the impact on the sector of the proposal to transfer amounts to other groups , we confirm our reservations concerning any reduction in group V.
My apologies , Madam President , the interpretation may be to blame , but I did not understand Mr Monti 's reply or his politeness .
We want an answer .
Which of the amendments does Mr Monti accept ?
That was Mr Trakatellis 's question .
Is it the first one , the second one , the third one , the fourth one , or none of them ?
My impression is that he does not accept any of them , but he could at least tell us in a word , so that we do not leave the House without having understood .
Madam President , I am doing my best to convey the Commission 's position in a field which , as you know , does not fall within my competence but that of Mr Fischler .
Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 9 are accepted , with a transfer - or rather a change - in Annex II , transferring amounts from group III to group I and to group II in France .
The Commission reserves the right to examine the other transfers covered in Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 9 , namely those in Annex II aiming both to lessen the reduction in group V in Greece and to prevent the introduction of Katerini and similar varieties into Italy .
I hope I have been clearer now .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Staff Regulations of the European Communities
The next item is the report ( A4-0098 / 99 ) by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EEC , Euratom , ECSC ) No 259 / 68 laying down the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the Communities ( COM ( 98 ) 0312 - C4-0332 / 98-98 / 0176 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this really is a very important report .
In recent years Parliament has adopted various decisions , particularly in resolutions on budgetary matters , which have repeatedly stressed that this House would like to see a statute for parliamentary assistants to Members .
We all remember the report by the Court of Auditors which came before us a few months ago , and which was by no means uncritical - I am choosing my words carefully - of the remuneration of assistants . I accordingly believe that it is high time that the issues of assistants ' pay and their conditions of employment were sorted out one way or another .
However , and this is the important point , we need to approach this in a serious and rational manner . Although the proposal that we are now considering has been presented by the European Commission , it was not actually prepared by the Commission , but by European Parliament officials .
It was entrusted to the President of the Commission by the President of Parliament with a request to adopt it . I have to say that I find this proposal unacceptable in the form we have before us .
The proposal essentially provides for the conditions of employment of other servants to be included in a new Article 78 , the gist of which is that parliamentary assistants are categorised as other servants of the European Union , and furthermore that the details of the conditions of employment should be laid down in general administrative provisions to be enacted by Parliament itself .
That is the heart of the problem .
The legal basis of the Staff Regulations and the conditions of employment of other servants , that is to say the Merger Treaty , does not provide for an enabling regulation for Parliament .
For that reason I have always been critical of this Commission proposal , or rather the proposal prepared by Parliament 's administration , because it does not deal with the question of implementing regulations .
Nor am I the only one of this opinion : in its judgment of 7 May 1992 , the European Court of Justice made exactly the same point .
The Court of Justice then ruled , and I am quoting now , that : ' The general implementing provisions issued under the Staff Regulations may lay down criteria by which the administration should be guided in exercising its discretion or to clarify the meaning of unclear provisions of the Staff Regulations .
They may not , however , indirectly limit the scope of the Staff Regulations by restating in more precise terms an already clear provision of those regulations ' .
In plain English , that means that implementing regulations may not conflict with the spirit of the Staff Regulations .
If they do , they are invalid and should be disregarded .
They do not have the same legal force as the Staff Regulations themselves .
On this basis , the European Court of Auditors stated the following in a report to the Council of Ministers , prepared at the request of the Council , in the form of an opinion on this Commission proposal : ' In the present case , general implementing provisions which preclude the application of normal unambiguous provisions of the Staff Regulations , particularly with regard to length of service , for a particular category of auxiliary staff , may be regarded as unlawful and their application could be challenged in an action against a particular case decision ' .
In other words , the Court of Auditors totally agrees with your rapporteur and with the European Court of Justice that if we adopt the Commission proposal , the implementing regulations will be thrown back at us and in the end only the provisions of the Staff Regulations for officials and other servants will apply .
This will make it impossible to take account of the special conditions of employment of parliamentary assistants .
The result will then quite simply be - and I am estimating that there are 2 000 parliamentary assistants - 2 000 additional European Parliament officials .
I think that demonstrates a lack of responsibility and is contrary to the spirit of what we are trying to achieve here .
That is why I originally proposed to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights that the legal basis should be changed , and that a statute for assistants should instead be prepared , which would have formed an annex to the Statute for Members of the European Parliament and which would have taken as its legal basis the provisions of Article 190 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
For tactical reasons , the Legal Affairs Committee rejected this proposal so as keep the Council 's decision making on the Statute for Members of the European Parliament and on the statute for assistants separate from each other .
However , this will mean that provisions that are supposed to be the subject of contracts between assistants , Members and of course Parliament 's administration will then have to be incorporated in the statute itself , or to be precise in the Commission proposal itself .
This is what I proposed in a second report to the Legal Affairs Committee .
The only legally watertight alternative which might also be possible would be to dispense with a statute for assistants altogether and arrange instead for the Quaestors or the Bureau to decide in what circumstances a secretarial allowance could still be granted , and also to include issues such as social security obligations and an appropriate level of remuneration in these arrangements .
The Legal Affairs Committee was then faced with a very close vote . My proposal initially attracted support , but the Commission draft ultimately won the day , so that the report which I am presenting on behalf of the Legal Committee contains various contradictions and I as rapporteur cannot support what was agreed in committee .
For this reason I have today tabled a number of amendments on behalf of my group which reflect the draft report which I originally presented to the Legal Affairs Committee , and I urge the House to adopt these .
I fear that if we were to adopt the Commission proposal in the form presented to us , it would not be acceptable to the Council of Ministers , in view of the Council 's existing reservations in the light of the judgment of the European Court of Justice which I have quoted , and because of the second report of the Court of Auditors .
We would therefore be reaching a sort of token decision along these lines : Parliament wants a statute for assistants but is adopting an unrealistic text in the knowledge that the Council will ultimately reject it .
This would not help anyone , neither the assistants themselves nor the Members of Parliament .
For this simple reason I would urge the House to adopt the original draft report presented to the Legal Affairs Committee and not the Commission proposal .
If this fails and there is not a majority in favour of my proposal tomorrow , I will feel obliged , in the interests of achieving a worthwhile outcome , to request referral back to the Legal Affairs Committee , or , if there is absolutely no other way , to reject this version of the report , because I personally neither want nor feel able to take responsibility for something that I am convinced is wrong , and is to all intents and purposes a token gesture that cannot possibly solve the problems we face in this area .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have to say that the rapporteur 's sharp criticism of the Commission should not be taken to reflect the views of the committee .
I wanted to correct that impression immediately .
Our work on the statute for assistants to Members of the European Parliament has been difficult and has been made even more difficult by the strident background music which has accompanied it .
Nevertheless , we managed to find a way to give our assistants fair conditions of employment including social security arrangements , whilst preserving the autonomy of the European Parliament .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists smoothed the path with its proposals .
We should now adopt these proposals by a clear majority in the interests of our closest confidants .
The amendments tabled by my group include two additional elements . Firstly , taking the Commission proposal as a basis , we have made provision to regulate the employment relationship between Members and their assistants .
This should secure the Council approval which we need .
The Council cannot have any objections if we call for general conditions of employment including recruitment , dismissal , remuneration and social security to be the subject of a contract .
Nor can it have any objections to a requirement that professional confidentiality and a ban on unauthorised second jobs including lobbying should form part of the contractual conditions of employment .
The prohibition of discrimination against citizens of third countries makes sense in view of the forthcoming enlargement of the Union , and the Council will certainly not reject the statute on those grounds .
The autonomy of Parliament to make decisions on its own affairs will be guaranteed by the second part of our proposal .
I have in mind the general implementing provisions that Parliament will adopt itself , which will lay down the details of contracts of employment on the basis of a proposal from the relevant committee .
This will also enable us to accommodate many of the rapporteur 's proposals without the risk that the Council will object to a particular provision and will therefore drop the whole statute .
I would like to mention two points which I feel particularly strongly about .
The first one is short and simple .
Any statute that does not provide our assistants with the best social protection available , including sickness and pensions schemes , should go straight into the waste-paper bin .
It is not worth the paper it is written on .
The second point is also extremely important : our assistants ' remuneration .
They must be paid fairly and in line with their performance .
After all , we are not rewarding certificates and diplomas , but the quality of the work done .
So we do not want a fixed scale based on certificates , professional qualifications and officials ' grades . What we need is a high degree of flexibility in drawing up contracts as employers , and also flexibility as regards remuneration .
There is also another point that we have already covered in connection with the Statute for Members of the European Parliament .
The contractually agreed remuneration should be transferred from the European Parliament direct to assistants ' accounts .
This provides us with some degree of protection against the constant insinuations we have heard over the last few days that Members are a pack of thieves who exploit their assistants and use phantom posts to line their own pockets .
Thank you for your attention . I hope that on Thursday you will support my group and myself by voting to give our assistants social security and to preserve the European Parliament 's autonomy .
Madam President , I agree with all those who have said that the work carried out on this regulation has not been easy ; indeed , it has been extremely difficult .
Parliament has not come out of it very well , and I should like to say that we regard the outcome of the votes in committee as unsatisfactory .
For our part , we believe that the Commission 's proposal was a good starting-point , so we have tabled one or two minor amendments clarifying in which cases the rules proposed by the Commission will apply .
We maintain that it should be made clear which assistants will be covered , and we have introduced a time-limit .
A majority of the group is also willing to approve the system of remuneration proposed by the Commission .
In my view , it is very important that we should have a decision on this tomorrow .
We cannot allow it to be sent back to committee .
I find the rapporteur 's suggestion that that is what should happen if his position is not accepted most undemocratic .
I would urge a majority of the House to vote in favour of the proposal , so as to allow the introduction of a satisfactory system before all the new assistants arrive to take up their positions in the newly-elected Parliament .
This lends urgency to the situation , and I would thank the Commission for everything it has done .
Mr President , the legal uncertainty that exists between assistants and parliamentary auxiliary staff , and the inequalities that such uncertainty engenders , clearly highlight the need for a regulation to put an end to this situation .
The report by Mr Lehne works towards this and has some positive aspects that deserve recognition , particularly all those that refer to conditions of employment , resolving disputes , and tax liability .
But in other respects , it may be that the situation we have now is fairer than that envisaged in the regulation . This would indeed be the case if some of the amendments tabled were approved , in particular the extensive and excessively detailed Amendment No 38 that covers everything relating to the grading of assistants , the corresponding remuneration systems and the unequal social security schemes .
The excessive attention to detail in this amendment leaves very little room for transitional situations .
I believe that we should opt for a more flexible approach than the one proposed in Mr Lehne 's report , yet without ignoring assistants ' rights and whilst fulfilling the obligation to provide contracts of employment with the relevant legal certainty .
We acknowledge the rapporteur 's worthy efforts but on certain aspects we do not agree with him .
Madam President , Commissioner , the way we are dealing with this extremely important issue , which concerns the people with whom we have our closest working relationships , does Parliament no credit at all .
So maybe it is not such a bad thing that we are now conducting this debate so close to the witching hour .
Let me be brief : on the fundamental issues I totally support our rapporteur and I am therefore pleased that he is tabling his own amendments again , and I call on the House to vote for these amendments in the interests of our assistants .
I also agree with the two previous speakers that we urgently need to adopt any text that puts a stop to the legal uncertainty under which our assistants currently have to work .
We cannot let things get to the point where our assistants feel obliged to take the European Parliament to the European Ombudsman because we are to blame for the continuing legal uncertainty they face .
I hope it does not come to that , and from what I have heard there is a good chance that it will not .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wonder if it would not be more courteous if I were to face the interpreters ' booths , as it seems that there are more people in the booths than in the Chamber itself .

Be that as it may , it unfortunately seems that Mr Lehne 's initiative is necessary as regards both remuneration and social protection for our assistants .
However , one simple and fundamental principle underlying any social doctrine is that every person has the right to fair pay in return for their work .
It appears that that has not been the case and that Parliament , like the Commission , has been forced to come to terms with this .
Nevertheless , I feel that Mr Lehne 's draft goes into far too much detail on contractual relations and that , to coin a phrase , it ultimately tries to ' statutify ' the position of our assistants too much .
On the other hand , the Commission proposal has the advantage of a degree of flexibility and certainty , and it also has the advantage of having to some extent proved its worth in practice , mutatis mutandis , with the system for assistants to parliamentary groups , which is fairly similar to the Commission proposal .
In any case , it seems to me that the most important thing is that the choice of assistants - their qualifications , their skills and so on - should be a matter for individual Members of Parliament , who should be at liberty to select their own assistants and agree working arrangements with them .
Madam President , in our view it is time to close a very difficult chapter , although we are not unaware of the remaining difficulties .
Consequently , our line in tomorrow 's vote will be to stress the crucial nature of the text being adopted : I mean to say that it is essential to lay down certain general provisions , on which to base specific rules governing various matters of a contractual nature .
But these general provisions , based on what we regard as a positive Commission proposal , must clarify the situation once and for all .
Amendment No 31 in particular - which we recommend for adoption - is both necessary and important : assistants must enjoy equal treatment .
They must be paid directly by Parliament , whilst obviously maintaining - or rather strengthening - their links with the Member or Members for whom they work . In this way , transparency and propriety will be ensured .
Parliament must tackle this issue !
It should have done so long ago , and must now do so boldly .
The battle we are waging here is for transparency and propriety , not only for the sake of assistants but for Parliament itself and its working methods , to ensure dignity and guaranteed rights for all .
Madam President , allow me to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , and the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs for their in-depth examination of the situation of parliamentary assistants and for their proposed solutions to improve it .
The Commission drew up its proposal at the request of the President of Parliament and on the basis of a European Parliament Bureau decision .
The Commission drew on its right of initiative to determine a legal framework , albeit with respect for the prerogative of MEPs to establish autonomously the conditions and duration of recruitment and the level of remuneration of assistants .
Under the existing system , recruitment , pay and social insurance arrangements are agreed directly between an MEP 's assistant and the Member appointing him or her .
This has led to a wide variety of types of contract , which do not reflect the need for certain basic standards of equal treatment for all assistants .
As was suggested by Parliament 's Bureau , the most appropriate way of avoiding the present difficulties appears to be to confer on MEPs ' assistants the status of auxiliary staff , while their duties remain subject to specific rules dictated by the particular nature of their role .
Consequently , Members will remain free to select their own assistants , whilst allowing them to enjoy all the conditions of service applying to other staff , with the exception of the derogations provided for in the proposal for a regulation concerning their conditions of recruitment and remuneration and the duration of their contract .
The legal basis laid down in the Commission proposal allows Members to confer on their assistants the status of auxiliary staff .
Once this legal basis has been adopted , the second step will be to define the specific parliamentary rules of procedure conferring on assistants conditions of service which are more suitable and equitable than the present ones .
For these reasons , and also in order to ensure that the regulation is adopted as rapidly as possible , the Commission does not intend to modify its proposal .
Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 5 and 11 refer to the rules governing Members ' expenses and allowances .
Since these would change the provisions relating to officials and other servants , the Commission cannot accept them .
The other amendments proposed in Mr Lehne 's report aim to introduce into the regulation provisions which would have to be adopted by the Council , whereas the Commission would wish Parliament itself to adopt such provisions in its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 78a .
These amendments are therefore unacceptable to the Commission .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The sitting was closed at 0.10 a.m.
1999 Annual Economic Report
The next item is the report ( A4-0102 / 99 ) by Mr Fourçans , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , ' The EU economy at the arrival of the euro : promoting growth , employment and stability ' ( 1999 annual economic report ) ( COM ( 99 ) 0007 - C4-0043 / 99 ) .
Mr President , the aims of the report I am presenting today , on the basis of the Commission 's report , are twofold .
First , it aims to analyse the economic situation and then , more importantly , it aims to put forward some guidelines for economic policy which should serve as a basis for the famous broad outlines of economic policy .
First , I will look briefly at the economic situation .
It is no secret to anyone that growth is set to decrease in 1999 , however it will still remain above 2 % .
So , it will slow down , but - it must be stressed - there will not be a recession .
The international crisis has , and will have , an impact on our economies , but the extent of the impact will vary according to country .
As a consequence , the internal measures that need to be taken must be adapted to the specific situations in the respective countries .
This means that the interdependency of countries needs more analysis , especially now that we have a single currency , at least in the euro zone .
And in this regard , Commissioner , although we think your report is good , it did not go far enough and should have gone into more detail on the interdependency of countries .
That will be a task for you and I next year , Commissioner .
What conclusions can be drawn from this situation in terms of economic policy ?
Should we shift the emphasis away from budgetary consolidation , or even amend the stability pact ?
Should interest rates be dropped to stimulate demand , as those to the left of you , in this room at least , Mr President , tend to favour ?
Or should we pursue the strategy adopted over the past months and years , as those to your right seem to advocate , Mr President ?
We believe that the second strategy is the best , as indicated by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy in its vote on 24 February .
This does not mean - and we must be clear on this - that a good policy mix is not needed or that macro-economic policy is of no importance , because they clearly are .
But to revert to old Keynesian recipes that have already shown their limitations would , in our view , be a mistake .
We agree with you , Commissioner , that we must continue to reduce budget deficits , especially in the three larger countries - Germany , France and Italy - which alone , it must be stressed , account for 75 % of GDP in the euro zone .
This policy must be implemented without increasing taxes and other levies ; indeed , where possible , these should be reduced .
What is more , if public investment is to be increased , as we hope , at least in terms of human resources and research , it will be impossible to implement this policy without reorganising public spending .
Budgetary consolidation is also needed , firstly , to maintain low interest rates , which stimulate overall demand , and secondly , to maintain consumer and investor confidence , which also stimulate overall demand , and I would emphasise this for the ladies and gentlemen to the right of me in the House .
I would now like to look at monetary policy and the question of whether or not the ECB should lower interest rates .
As I said before , in 1999 , there will be a slowing down , but there will not be a recession , which is something that must be borne in mind when considering this issue .
Are we experiencing deflation as some claim ?
In my view , the statistics show that we are not .
The inflation rate appears to have stabilised at around 1 % and the price of raw materials and energy have dropped .
Who says that these decreases are going to last ?
That said , we must be extremely vigilant and , if it ever looked like we were going to fall back into deflation , then the ECB should lower interest rates .
But we have not reached that stage yet .
To conclude this section on the policy mix , I should like to stress that wage negotiations must remain reasonable and workers ' purchasing power should increase more or less in line with productivity gains .
And in this context , workers ' purchasing power would increase , which , ladies and gentlemen , would also help to stimulate overall demand .
It is therefore evident that a sound macro-economic policy is needed to guarantee growth and employment , but it is only through far-reaching structural reforms that unemployment will decrease in the long term .
I will not go into this issue as it will be dealt with in more depth in the forthcoming report on the broad guidelines of economic policy .
In short , the labour market must be reformed , which means reducing labour costs , especially for the most impoverished , and making the market more flexible .
The poorer sections of our society must also have the chance to integrate better . We also need to reform the goods and services markets as well as the financial markets .
Such reforms have to form part of coherent whole , in line with macro-economic policy , so that all measures benefit everyone .
So , ladies and gentlemen , this is the context of the report I am proposing . It suggests a sound macro-economic policy and a sound policy mix accompanied by thorough and coherent structural reforms , all based on long-term rather than short-term projections , or on the fine tuning that one might use were it possible to regulate the economy like an atomic clock to within a millionth of a second .
We are well aware that the economy does not operate in this way and if we forget that , we might be seriously disillusioned .
I hope , ladies and gentlemen , that we do not become disillusioned in that way .
Applause
Mr President , first of all let me congratulate Mr Fourçans on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on a highly commendable report .
We are pleased that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has adopted some important points from our opinion .
In the context of a single monetary policy under an independent central bank , economic policies in the Member States will have to be more closely coordinated than ever before .
However , the call expressed in Amendment No 19 for the abolition of the stability pact does not reflect the views of our committee .
What we are calling for is a balanced policy , which implies a stable currency and effective budgetary consolidation as well as the need to ensure adequate purchasing power .
Like the Economic Affairs Committee , we are in favour of a productivity-based pay policy .
If pay restraint leads to increases in profits and investments , a word of gratitude is scant reward for the staff who have exercised such restraint .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs believes that they should be able to share in profits and capital through voluntary schemes .
As an antidote to unemployment , we also recommend the promotion of business start-ups and the provision of venture capital , especially for small and medium-sized businesses , the development of new services and greater adaptability on the part of companies ; at the same time , steps must be taken throughout Europe to safeguard employee participation , to ensure that staff are informed and consulted about structural changes at an early stage , thereby guaranteeing them the opportunity to prepare themselves in good time .
What we ultimately need is an active , forward-looking employment policy , a modern form of vocational training for youngsters in Europe , improved opportunities for retraining , for lifelong learning and for research and development , investments in human capital by companies and Member States and through European programmes .
That will enhance both the social dimension and Europe 's competitiveness in the world market .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Fourçans on what I see as an improved attempt at presenting the Commission 's annual economic report .
I say ' an improved attempt ' because I see the report itself as being unimaginative - unimaginative in terms of how we can improve on projected growth figures ; unimaginative in terms of recognising that we are constantly having to revise the growth figures and we do not really know what to do in terms of trying to increase employment , growth and investment in Europe ; unimaginative because , whilst it accepts that we have relatively high unemployment in Europe , it does little other than to accept the fact that jobs are being created but are also being lost .
The level of unemployment in Europe at the moment is the same as when I was elected to this Parliament four-and-a-half years ago , and that speaks volumes .
We cannot blame the world situation for everything that is wrong with the European economy .
We accept that 20 % of the world is in recession ; we accept that 10 % is close to recession .
But the benefits of the European Union and of the single market should mean that we can still create jobs satisfactorily despite what is happening outside the European Union borders .
The report itself states that EMU is itself a protection .
EMU has not been a protection .
In my view the single market on its own has been a protection .
The fact that most of our trade is internal has been a protection .
The convergence criteria have helped , of course , and we have managed to maintain some investment as a result of consolidated budgetary and fiscal policies .
But the euro is not here , it is on trial and it is not necessarily a solution to Europe 's economic problems .
That is why I think this is a failing of the annual economic report because what we need to do is look at how we can generate policies to generate jobs .
The report itself states that the European economy is now used to functioning with an inadequate level of employment .
Try saying that to the thousands of people , certainly in my constituency , and the millions of people across the European Union who are unemployed . ' Inadequate ' is not a satisfactory term .
We have a bad international situation and again the report mentions the prospects of the Union having an adequate policy mix .
Adequate and inadequate , in my view , are not particularly appropriate terms to use .
My concern , in terms of policy and responsibilities , is that the Commission has failed to use the annual economic report as a stimulus for action and as an input into the broad economic guidelines .
Stability and growth pacts are important but public investment should not be included in those figures .
We need more private investment , more jobs , more productivity and more sustained growth .
The ECB has a role but it is not just the ECB , it is the Council , the Commission and Parliament working together .
We need a coordinated response .
The annual economic report does not call for one .
Mr President , it has often been said that the arrival of the euro is the most important event since the storming of the Winter Palace . This is true in many respects , and is all the more true in relation to what we are debating here today .
In this new world , the Member States ' national policies are shaped by three sets of guidelines : the broad macro-economic guidelines , the guidelines on employment , in accordance with the Luxembourg process , and the reports on structural policy that were approved at Cardiff I and Cardiff II .
But these three sets of guidelines are formed , predetermined and limited by the basic principles that gave rise to the process of European integration .
There is the principle of the single market according to which the existence of a single currency permanently rules out the option of adjusting economies by devaluing currencies . There is the principle of a single centralised monetary policy which is managed by an independent Central Bank .
And lastly , there is the principle of a restrictive budgetary policy , where austerity is ' consecrated ' , to use the biblical term , as a virtue . Therefore , these guidelines are extremely important for Europe as a whole and for each one of the Member States involved , particularly as national policy is being questioned in some of the larger countries .
Over the past few days we have heard statements from representatives of the German Government concluding that the crisis we are currently experiencing is a crisis of demand and a crisis of price stability . In their eyes , these are two important new ideas that rule out the possibility that structural reform might be the appropriate remedy , as had always been claimed in the past .
According to the German Government , this remedy harks back to old Keynesian recipes that we thought had been confined to memory following the 1973 crisis .
A drop in interest rates is being considered on the other side of the Rhine , as an attempt to influence the European Central Bank , and the stability pact itself is being called into question .
In our opinion , we must follow exactly the opposite policy and this will probably be the central debate in the European elections .
What the German Government is not telling us is that many of its internal problems are due to an increase in German salaries that exceeds productivity . They are also due to a certain contentment and somewhat of a return to the days of wine and roses in budgetary policy .
When stability has been achieved , the benefits are clear , at least in my country .
We must address the question of structural reform in order to solve the only problem that really interests us all : unemployment .
Mr President , I agree with the point that Mr Hendrick made , which is that we have been sitting here in Parliament for four years now , and unemployment is just as high as when we arrived .
The White Paper on growth and competitiveness has been on the agenda many times and we have always said that it must be implemented , yet no progress has been made .
In fact we have gone backwards .
I would like to highlight one of the aspects that other speakers have mentioned , which is the conservative attitude adopted by some countries .
If we think about the mobility of labour , for example , and the opportunities for firms to operate across borders , we have to say that more obstacles are being created than removed .
I recently found out that the German Government imposes extra taxes on workers from companies doing contract work there .
I think this is scandalous , and the Commission should put an end to these sorts of practices .
Apart from that , the Member States are perfectly accustomed to using social security and taxation to make it unattractive for people to work in other countries .
If we look at countries like America , where the employment situation is much better than here , we can see that the mobility of labour contributes a great deal to the level of prosperity .
Another subject I would like to raise is venture capital , which is something I have often talked about .
This week we approved a report on this issue without debate , but venture capital can give an enormous boost to small firms which are just starting up .
The insurance companies and pension funds have huge reserves , for example , but in my view these are not being used appropriately because we do not yet have the rules we need in this field .
I would urge that these issues should be given close attention in the context of the employment guidelines .
Mr President , the approach adopted by the rapporteur to the Commission 's 1999 annual economic report is comprehensive and also sensible .
The report covers a wide range of issues and makes some very important statements .
In particular , I want to welcome the recognition given to the Irish Government policy towards wage developments .
The Commission states , and I quote : ' Member countries might learn from the positive experience of a number of Member States , especially Ireland and the Netherlands , where continued moderate wage increases over more than a decade have contributed importantly to improved unemployment outcomes .
Both of these countries have also in common that the appropriate wage behaviour was underpinned by tripartite consensus-based wage agreements and was accompanied by a reduction in the tax burden on labour . '
My fear is that the Socialist-dominated governments of Europe are hell-bent on harmonising taxes , on raising tax levels and finding new ways of penalising industry and entrepreneurship .
We want lower taxes , not higher taxes , and we want an atmosphere conducive to economic investment and the creation of jobs .
There is still an enormous and hugely costly infrastructure imbalance in my country .
Nowhere in my constituency on the periphery of Europe is there a semblance of M1-type motorways linking any of the regions .
This stifles economic and business growth and opportunity .
Nor have we any direct motorway link with continental Europe .
We do not want to penalise these people for using the structural funds wisely and openly .
Our infrastructural work is far from finished .
Regionalisation is essential for my country ; anything less would set us back decades and run counter to Treaty objectives .
I welcome President Santer 's support for the cohesion fund .
The Agenda 2000 proposals fly in the face of Article 104c of the Treaty which the Commission 's annual report itself highlights .
Under this article Member States in the euro area must avoid excessive government deficits , and that I support .
Under the stability and growth pact budget deficits must be limited to a maximum of 3 % of GDP in normal circumstances , with the possibility of sanctions , including fines , for Member States breaching this limit .
I am pleased that cofinancing of the agricultural payments is a non-runner .
This would have led to renationalisation and the dismantling of CAP .
Slashing structural fund payments to Ireland , which we have used well , and should not be penalised for having used well , would immediately bring about huge pressure on the national budget and create deficits , leading to fines that would obviously exacerbate economic difficulties .
I urge a re-think and a special case to be made for my country .
Mr President , Commissioner , Parliament 's examination of the annual economic report presented by the Commission should be an ideal moment for discussing the main economic policies , for assessing those already pursued and for defining options for the future on the basis of that assessment .
It should also - when the circumstances so demand it - be a time for a serious reconsideration of the approach taken and , on this score , the Fourçans report offers some lucid diagnoses .
However , despite its technical merits , it is not a satisfactory report because it does nothing to throw light upon the approach or the guidelines that have been followed so far .
We shall not dwell upon the already well-known points of disagreement between us concerning neo-liberalism and excessive budgetary restraint , but we should like to highlight another aspect : the way in which the labour market works continually against the workers ' interests and treats them as though they were the cause of all our ills .
Slimming down enterprises - which means more unemployment - and wage restraint : the Fourçans report reflects the economic point of view here , neglecting the social aspects and thus merely making the situation worse .
For our part , as well as sitting in the Committee on Economic Affairs where the report was seen as highly controversial and only passed by a wafer-thin majority , we have tabled amendments that we would like to see approved , not because they change the report or do anything radically to alter its macro-economic approach but because they would at least alleviate some of its harmful effects .
In particular we must :
try and find ways of reducing working hours without any loss of pay , as a way of fighting unemployment , -devise a budgetary policy that stimulates growth and employment , while guaranteeing support for SMEs in particular , -bear in mind the importance of the Structural Funds and the trans-European networks as a way of promoting state investment in infrastructure and improving the skills of the labour force , -introduce a tax on speculative capital movements , making an effective contribution to stability through monetary stabilisation machinery or funds , -last but not least , break with the dogma of the stability pact ; it should be replaced by another approach or even a growth and employment pact .
Mr President , oh yes , they want to continue as before without realising that we have already reached the outer limits of pure supply-side economics .
What basically needs to be strengthened is the demand element - purchasing power and domestic demand .
This implies that regional policy must be taken as the starting-point , and strengthening the regions really means creating genuine stability .
We cannot create stability by means of an export-led economy ; we have been trying to do that , and it has not worked .
What basically happens during a cyclical downturn is that our potential is underestimated .
And we do have potential : growth potential and employment potential in a whole range of new technological developments - in environmental technology and in the increasingly efficient use of energy .
Such potential is simply not being used because it is unconventional , because it is new .
Secondly , there is a lack of courage to admit mistakes , to appreciate that international financial crises would be manageable , that action could be taken to prevent them and that they could be averted , if those involved in the formulation of external trade policy were to recognise that economic and social policy need to be coordinated .
That relates not only to the EU , but also to the policy of the IMF .
We can see it in the Albanian crisis , for example , and we have seen what happened in Bulgaria .
One of the root causes of such problems is that the IMF takes absolutely no account of important social criteria in countries undergoing transformation processes .
In this context , may I also say that we can certainly take decisive action to curb currency speculation , which is also a destabilising factor , by showing some long-overdue willingness to introduce the Tobin tax .
It is a stabilising tax , and the stability it created would not only benefit countries in other parts of the world but would also bring stability for us in turn .
For that reason , all I can say to you is that we must introduce another approach here , and at this time I can only appeal to you to incorporate our amendments into the report so that it will contain at least some new ideas and provide a new perspective , thereby clearly signalling to all observers that we really do want more jobs .
Madam President , Commissioner , the euro creates a de facto economic solidarity among eleven of our countries .
However , this does not mean it will eliminate as if by magic the considerable structural disparities that exist within the Union , making it particularly vulnerable to asymmetric shocks which could cause national self-interest and nationalist tendencies to flare up at any time .
This is particularly evident when there is an uncertain global environment and repeated financial crises in most regions of the world .
The individual responses of our governments have been to try to counteract local economic vulnerabilities while broadly coordinating over recent years only their general economic and budgetary objectives .
This is clearly not enough .
We now need to tackle , in a transparent manner , the comprehensive coordination of both social and fiscal objectives , since these two facets of the organisation of European society are the two major means of adjusting our activities .
They create sources of tension between our economies that can seriously exacerbate the impact of the asymmetric shocks that destroy our cohesion .
However , in the context of these common social and fiscal objectives , there can be no question of limiting governments ' ability to respond autonomously , just as large companies are nowadays well aware that giving their various units a considerable degree of autonomy makes them better able to respond to day-to-day developments .
It is important to work steadily towards the long-term general coordination of social and fiscal objectives in order to bring vitality to European democracy , although these objectives are extremely difficult to meet as it is . However in addition to this , should we also develop a public investment programme , as the rapporteur suggests ?
Since President Delors ' proposals , which were put forward some time ago , this has been essential , particularly to improve the major infrastructures for transporting goods , people and information , which , in the future , will considerably help to structure , develop and define the European area .
But the most pressing need is still to strengthen risk investment funds .
Subject to these remarks , we will support the main thrust of the Fourçans report . However , we have to criticise the Commission 's economic report for lacking vision .
Madam President , the annual economic report confirms that the introduction of the euro has come at a time when the economies of the Member States are far too divergent .
To deal with this problem , it is proposed that the EU should introduce a new culture for - or , in simpler terms - a harmonisation of , fiscal , monetary and wages policy and a reform of the labour market .
Public deficits are to be reduced without increasing taxes or other charges .
In fact , these are also to be reduced .
That means , for Denmark at least , that we would have to cut tax-financed welfare benefits .
This new so-called culture is very much in line with what the German Presidency says about the euro not being first and foremost an economic instrument , but rather a political instrument which transfers one of the most important areas of the nation state 's self-determination to the Union .
The recommendations to reduce the budget deficit and to increase public investment are directly contradictory .
The Economic Council of the Labour Movement in Denmark has pointed out that it is precisely the reduction in the deficit that has halved investment in Denmark .
It is also clearly the reason for the record high level of unemployment in the EU .
The June Movement cannot abolish the euro , but we are voting against the report .
Madam President , the rapporteur rightly highlighted several points which are regularly censured by the single European thinking .
For example , recitals C and F , on the asymmetric shocks that threaten the euro zone , highlight a genuine problem for the future .
In recital I , the rapporteur rightly denounces the persistently high unemployment rate , and in paragraphs 21 and 23 he criticises the public deficits and the heavy burdens of tax and other levies in Europe .
In paragraphs 28 and 41 , he stresses the need to reduce labour costs through the reduction of taxes if we want unemployment to fall .
Paragraphs 44 and 49 mention possible deflation and slowing of growth and point out that growth forecasts in Europe have been revised and lowered .
In paragraph 48 , he rightly calls for the study of varied economic policy scenarios to give a better understanding of how the economic situation is developing .
We actually agree with all these assessments but regret that the rapporteur was not prepared -evidently for political reasons - to admit that the majority of the errors criticised in the economic analysis in fact stem from one ideology , the socialist ideology which currently dominates Western Europe .
This ideology is responsible , in particular , for the high taxes and other levies we pay , for public deficits and for unemployment .
All of this is , to a large extent , linked to the climate of despondency which is crushing the spirit of enterprise in Europe , quite the opposite of what is happening , for example , among our great American competitors .
Therefore , the economic criticism in the Fourçans report must be accompanied by political criticism ; without it , we will not find any better way of combating the continuing unemployment .
Madam President , in the annual economic report , which should be seen in conjunction with the basic principles of the Union 's economic policy , we have been focusing time and again since 1994 on the question of whether we are actually doing everything possible at European level to combat unemployment and to stimulate investment and growth .
We have to conclude that in the past , old recipes have always formed the basis of EU policy and that there is a real need for us to break new ground .
We need to break new ground if we are ever to achieve full employment and the sort of growth that will sustain such a level of employment .
It is a fallacy to imagine that the causes of unemployment are purely structural , because one of our particular problems in the European Union is the way in which cyclically induced unemployment has very quickly hardened into structural unemployment .
That is why every effort must be made to kick-start the engine of growth , which is our only hope of reversing this unemployment spiral .
As an economic region , Europe has problems .
It must therefore launch a kind of action plan . The annual economic report represents an excellent basis for that .
It would also do nothing but good if the Commission were to come round at long last to the idea of inviting independent experts to express their views on the state of the EU economy , as is done as a matter of course in many Member States , to give us more food for thought and thus enable us to develop even better proposals , because we certainly must develop proposals .
The Commission is now rightly saying , as the European Parliament has said for the past two years , that the European Union will not be spared the effects of crises in other parts of the world like some tranquil island enjoying peace and stability in the midst of a storm-tossed sea .
On the contrary , we in the European Union must take action , and we can only take action if the various players are finally brought around the table with a view to creating favourable macro-economic conditions in the European Union and above all to coordinating their policies .
Policy coordination , after all , is part of the magic formula that has produced growth , investment and employment in the United States .
The important thing for us now is to find out why the growth process is stagnating again , even though our inflation is at historically low rates and we are practically starting to pen its obituary .
We must ask ourselves why further economic development within a favourable supply-side framework has done little to stimulate the private sector and why investments are not being made .
That is really the central problem for us .
That is where we undoubtedly need coordination between the various players .
Above all , I believe that , alongside our very responsible trade unions , we need a monetary policy which can begin at long last to serve the purpose assigned to it in Article 105 , as amended by the Maastricht Treaty .
Only then will it be possible to pursue additional new paths and to implement successfully new infrastructure projects in the European Union .
We need to engage the help of everyone who operates in this field , not just the finance ministers .
We need those who formulate monetary policies , we need management and labour , and we also need a bold approach at long last from the Commission and the Council if we are to achieve the modernisation of our infrastructure policy and the creation of a public-private partnership to provide investments that will effectively generate employment .
Madam President , the Commission 's annual economic report is a valuable document which covers the European Union 's economic activity in an international context .
What the Fourçans report does , very well and effectively , is to look at the economy dynamically and to adopt some political positions , which is useful and also beneficial .
I wish to make a remark about the comments on the introduction of the euro at the beginning of this year .
I was expecting a rather more in-depth analysis , but of course as the report was published on 20 January , it was not then possible for it to adopt a position .
Nevertheless , Madam President , I believe we need to give this subject a good deal more thought . I think that we cannot treat monetary stability as an end in itself , although no one should ignore its importance .
Monetary stability is part of a more general policy , and experience has shown that whenever we adopt an economic policy - and , even more so , a monetary policy - which has a single objective , ignoring consequences elsewhere in the economy , the results are not very good .
The dynamic element is essential , therefore , and we must abandon the very sterile fixation with mechanistic approaches to economic phenomena and explore how a policy mix can reflect dynamic factors .
If we do not do this , I very much fear that we shall be vulnerable to the political sirens who advocate solutions which , flying in the face of experience , persist in tackling classic structural economic problems by anticyclical methods .
I do not believe that a reduction of a quarter of one per cent in the interest rate will be enough to alter the course of the economy in Europe .
I do not think that attempting to solve economic issues which are purely internal to one particular economy by trying to establish a corresponding scenario at European level is particularly constructive .
That is why I think we need to see how the euro can be used as a proper instrument for economic growth .
We must not let it lose its value and , above all , we must not try to use it to solve other problems on a temporary basis , without reflecting on the long-term objective which , in the final analysis , is what we must all aim for . We all know that the problem of unemployment , which is the main problem in the European economy , cannot be solved by using ad hoc and purely short-term anticyclical measures : what we need is a very far-reaching structural approach .
Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to thank the Commission for its very lucid report and Mr Fourçans for his comments on it .
I think that now that we are operating in the euro framework for the very first time , it is natural that we should discuss this issue at length , albeit under rather unusual circumstances .
Mr Hendrick pointed out that in the last few years the biggest problem facing us in the European Union , unemployment , has not improved .
This is hardly surprising , particularly when you realise that we have spent the last 18 months under Socialist presidencies .
The ideas put forward by the current presidency , among others - Mr Lafontaine 's calls for more government investment , a more Keynesian approach , and less focus on what we have agreed about the stability pact and other issues - leave us Liberals completely cold .
It is a fact , as we can see from the Commission 's analysis and Mr Fourçans 's comments on it , that those countries which in the last few years have made the best of their economic growth , taken structural measures and reduced their budget deficits have been successful both on the employment front and in reducing national debt , and have put themselves in a position to be successful in the future .
So we feel - and this is a question I would like to put to the Commissioner - that the measures under the convergence programmes of the three largest countries at the moment are not enough .
They are too optimistic .
If we are to discuss global economic guidelines shortly , the national governments - and perhaps the Commission could tell us how it intends to encourage them to do so - need to ensure that they come up with structural plans to make employers , workers and governments face up to their responsibilities and decide on a plan together , rather than having it imposed on them by the government .
Madam President , there is a naive belief that the euro will deliver us from all our economic problems .
It is time to awaken from these illusions .
We know that the euro is falling , the rate is too high . The euro is falling against the dollar ; it is even down against the lowly Swedish krona , which is quite remarkable .
Financial investors are giving up the euro in favour of the dollar .
It is therefore necessary to stabilise the euro at a lower level .
Why is all this happening ?
To begin with , because the restrictions imposed on the Member States are preventing governments from pursuing an active economic policy and an assertive policy for growth and employment .
Secondly , because there is a power split where economic policy is concerned between a central bank which is entirely unaccountable and not subject to any democratic scrutiny on the one hand and the governments on the other .
This split is making it difficult to pursue a systematic and cohesive policy .
Thirdly , because the demands for harmonisation of the economic policies of different countries are mistaken .
As the economies and structures of the countries are different , they must be able to vary their policy if they are to achieve the same common objectives .
If on the other hand they are forced to pursue the same policy despite their differences , divergence will increase and in practice the result will be instability .
Convergence in policy is leading to inconsistency in the economy .
Variation in economic policy , on the other hand , can lead eventually to real convergence between economies .
Experience has shown that all systems with fixed exchange rates , or large systems with the same currency , sooner or later get into a crisis .
That was what happened in 1931 , and that was how it was in 1992 .
What we need is monetary cooperation with flexible exchange rates which can fend off the adverse effects of economic change in an orderly , agreed manner .
We need that in combination with an active economic policy in the hands of the governments and effective control over movements of finance capital .
Madam President , there is nothing new under the sun .
Even now that we have the euro , growth , employment and stability are still being quoted as the main aims of economic policy .
I entirely agree with this , but I was surprised to hear a very significant comment that is decidedly incompatible with it : that the structure and operation of the European economy have been fundamentally changed by the convergence process .
If that were true , then all this talk about the problem of high unemployment would not be necessary .
Promoting employment was already the aim when the single market was created in 1992 .
Nothing new there , then .
Nor can we expect EMU to solve the problem .
The generic approach of coordinating policies , which the Commission seems to regard as a magic economic cure-all , will not work .
The causes of unemployment are structural , and solutions must be found specifically at regional level .
The current international financial crisis is showing up EMU 's weak points , and it is striking that it is the three main EMU countries that are in trouble and are fighting for breath in the EMU strait-jacket .
Anyone who finds this surprising should read the Minutes from the May 1998 part-session , when it was already clear that France and Italy did not meet the EMU criteria in structural terms .
The Commission is right to call for structural reforms and wage restraint to continue , but it is rather too late in the day for that .
This too is nothing new .
I broadly agree with the resolution as it stands , but we cannot accept any of the 22 amendments that have been tabled .
I hope that Parliament rejects them all .
Madam President , the report we are discussing today is a very important one , because the actual issue here is to establish in advance what will subsequently be the approach of the Community , the union of our peoples , to future development .
There is no doubt that , after an initial period of euphoria , the introduction of the euro has caused us to think long and hard . And that process of reflection has also been prompted by the fact that the development we would have predicted has not materialised - the kind of development that would be part of the natural order of things among our peoples because of their distinctive traditions of activity .
But in order to reach this stage , we have had to adopt policies of restraint and they have had a negative impact on employment .
And so , from now on , the efforts of governments , economies and , consequently , the business community and the workforce must focus on relaunching the kind of process that will give us economic development and , as a result , boost employment .
We Europeans take great pride in our traditions ; we believe in the free market , but we feel that we must safeguard the special features of our economic system , which is not the kind of absolutely ruthless system that exercises freedom in a way that may sometimes have the effect of carelessly marginalising the more vulnerable within our society .
Ours is a tradition of development that respects the conditions within society and , therefore , the needs of all : it is a balanced form of development which may perhaps seem slower in the initial stages but produces the right outcome in the end .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Annual Economic Report has evidently taken on greater significance since the creation of the euro zone .
It provides the means for defining action plans at European level as everyone is aware that significant growth is needed to solve the problem of unemployment .
However , exactly how a European growth policy should be implemented remains to be seen .
In this regard , I think that Mr Fourçans ' report , which is a good report , should be completed with a number of amendments we wisely tabled .
First , we need to develop both public and private investment .
In short , we need to finally set in motion the grand plans we have spent so long talking about .
Perhaps we will have to review our original list and shift the emphasis on to new sectors such as communication technologies , low-cost housing and urban transport , which are factors that promote both growth and job creation .
Perhaps we will also have to consider structural reforms .
These are only possible if our economies are growing , so it is not enough to simply talk in terms of structural reforms to solve employment issues without also considering growth .
In order for this growth to develop , we will clearly have to implement a new fiscal policy and Mr Fourçans ' report quite rightly included some of our amendments on reduced VAT rates .
This is a step in the right direction as it will mean greater tax harmonisation beyond the present situation in the European Union , with respect for a particular code .
If we were to introduce tax harmonisation solely to reduce national budgets ' room for manoeuvre , we would not succeed in the fight against unemployment .
Taxation needs to be readjusted in favour of labour .
Monetary policy also needs to be redeveloped , as proposed in some of the amendments tabled by my group .
We fully understand the present situation , in which the authority and the legitimacy of the Central Bank is being consolidated .
It is a new institution and , as such , needs time to make its mark , but at the same time we need to remain as consistent as possible with the Treaty .
Indeed , the Treaty states that once price stability has been achieved , monetary policy must be instrumental in achieving the other main aims of the Union , including , of course , employment .
As far as tools are concerned , Madam President , I should just briefly like to reiterate the need for a coordinated approach to both the broad political and economic guidelines and the employment guidelines .
To achieve this , we need to take a closer look at the role played by social dialogue , while ensuring that the importance of coordination between the Councils and between the Union 's various policies is not overlooked .
The last point I should like to make is that we would have liked to have seen greater consideration given to the various possible economic scenarios in the Annual Economic Report this year .
I hope that the House will accept some of the amendments we tabled , so that my group can accept Mr Fourçans ' report .
Mr President , faced with unemployment with a structural component of about 80 % , it seems logical to call for structural reforms , despite what Mrs Randzio-Plath might say to the contrary .
However , we must not be naive ; the problem is essentially a political one .
In order to reach a position of power these days , it does not pay to advocate structural policy .
Those who have done so have all been ousted , while those who have come to power have promised easy solutions .
This is what we are seeing today .
It is much easier to lower interest rates , increase public spending and neglect the more difficult issues such as training the workforce , reducing labour costs , etcetera .
So in spite of what Mr Katiforis might say , the disagreements among us are not of an economic or scientific nature .
We are still able to listen , we invite top experts along and all agree : the disagreements are not between economists , they are between politicians .
It is therefore much easier , politically speaking , to develop a macro-economic policy instead of a structural policy .
And that is where the disagreements begin .
Mrs Randzio-Plath , who constantly refers to the success of the American economy , is doing exactly the opposite to what the Americans are doing , exactly the opposite .
She extolls the rationale of the Federal Bank .
But the Federal Bank has a federal budget that is in surplus and a market that is totally fluid .
Its labour costs are 25-30 % lower than ours yet she seems surprised to see that everything is going well in the United States but not in Europe .
So let us be realistic and honest with ourselves .
Policies that succeed in combating unemployment are never popular and that is why they are not pursued in Europe .
It is as simple as that .
Applause
Madam President , embarking on the third stage of economic and monetary union is a sensitive process for which the European Parliament has to assume its responsibilities in regard to the peoples of Europe .
Parliament must make a decisive contribution to the debate and to setting the economic policy guidelines , taking advantage of improved statistical data resources and more detailed analyses .
Monitoring is essential if we are to tackle properly the phase of structural reform which the introduction of the single currency is bound to accelerate .
As a result of structural changes in technologies , we have to have an employment policy that focuses on education , on retraining and on improving qualifications : a policy , therefore , that contributes to increasing productivity and competitiveness .
But that alone is not enough .
Employment is boosted by encouraging the entrepreneurial spirit of competitiveness , by reducing the tax burden and harmonising the fiscal policies of the Member States .
If the confidence of entrepreneurs is boosted , the result will be beneficial for productive investment and employment .
The Member States must continue to pursue the objective of achieving budget equilibrium by reducing deficits but without increasing public spending .
The value of the euro must be determined by the market and by market fluctuations : it makes no sense for the Member States to ask the European Central Bank to reduce rates individually .
Political control must be in the hands of the European Union and not individual states .
We must beware of the risk of asymmetric shocks and try to emulate the position in the United States .
But we shall be able to achieve that only if , after economic union , we move resolutely towards political union .
Madam President , I must begin by saying that we do not agree with the proposals in the Commission 's communication that presents the 1999 Annual Economic Report .
The Commission 's communication is the starting point for establishing the broad economic guidelines , but presents an analysis that we cannot support .
The title of the communication is ' The EU economy at the arrival of the euro : promoting growth , employment and stability ' .
I have tried to find where the stimuli for growth , employment and stability are in the communication .
There is indeed sufficient stimulus for stability , but you will not find stimuli for either growth or employment anywhere in the report .
After two years of growth that , incidentally , was not excessively high , the European economy is currently on hold .
We can debate whether or not this represents the build-up to a recession or if it is simply a slowing down of the economy , but the figures are certainly worrying .
The three largest economies in the European Union , which account for 75 % of the gross domestic product in the euro area , are behaving as follows : the German economy experienced negative growth in the last quarter of last year ; the Italian economy has experienced very slight growth of less than 1.5 % over the past two years ; and the French economy is currently reviewing its growth forecasts for this year , although it is experiencing the highest growth rate of these three countries .
There is therefore a real danger for the European economy and even , if I may say so , for the world economy .
With almost the whole world in recession , except for the United States and the European Union , a possible shutdown in the European engine would have catastrophic consequences for the economy and the global situation . And we have not even mentioned what effects a shutdown of the United States economy could have , which is also a possibility .
In this context , we can debate whether unemployment is structural or cyclical .
What is clear is that , at least in the short term and possibly in the medium term , if we do not have a policy that strongly stimulates growth , unemployment will remain at levels that are unacceptable in our societies .
So what does the Commission say on this subject ?
Having carried out a most satisfactory analysis of stability , it tells us that the situation is promising from the point of view of monetary stability . It tells us that such positive effects could be encouraged by improving the policy mix , as the report states on page 39 .
Yet later on , on page 67 , there is a sentence which says that ' The output gap for the euro zone is still undisputedly negative , both because of the presence of spare productive capacity and the huge slack in the labour market ' .
However , it goes on to say that ' as regards budgetary policy , a gradual structural reduction in budget deficits is expected to resume in 1999 ' .
Even at the risk of sounding Keynesian , we do not agree with this approach .
In fact , we support the opinion expressed in another report that has recently been published under the charge of Jean-Paul Fitoussi , the ' Rapport sur l 'état de l 'Union Européenne ' . This report states the following : ' Nothing indicates that we are facing a situation of an excessive relaxation of budgetary policies .
Moreover , it would appear that excessively restrictive nature of monetary policy has been largely responsible for the increase in public deficit in the euro area in the 1980s and even in the early 1990s ' .
It is in governments ' interests to cooperate openly and in a more systematic manner within the Euro Council and to work on achieving the best possible harmony between the monetary and budgetary policies .
We hope to see decisive action within the Euro Council to stimulate growth , including by means of the budgetary policy . We are currently lacking such growth in Europe .
Madam President , we must reverse this trend of psychological see-sawing with economic analyses and forecasts .
We switch too easily from Europhoria to Euro-scepticism and back .
We rush from consumer optimism to industry doubts .
Yes , we should be concerned .
Yes , we should be aware of the dangers of the economy sliding off the rails , whether they come from outside or inside the European Union .
But the message that we should be sending from the European Parliament to Europe 's peoples and governments should not be a pessimistic one : it should ask them to be rigorous and demanding .
Despite everything , 1999 will be a year of economic growth in the European Union .
It might be 2 % or it might be 2.5 % but it will be growth and the real success will be in using that growth to create jobs .
We need to keep a clear head in order to strengthen the coordination of budgetary , wage and monetary policies .
We need the courage to avoid any temptation to stray from the narrow path that would jeopardise the fulfilment of the stability and growth pact , the credibility of which is the best guarantor of low long-term interest rates and controlled inflation .
We need to make a collective effort , involving both sides of industry to coordinate wage policies and involving the governments of the Member States to speed up the necessary structural reforms and to move beyond their existing stability programmes , in which the budgetary control targets are minimal but nonetheless tend towards a balanced budget , or even a surplus by the year 2002 at the latest .
Public investment in the 15 Member States of the European Union came to 3 % of GDP in 1991 .
That percentage has been steadily sliding ever since , falling tono more than 2.1 % in 1998 .
Giving a fresh boost to the trans-European networks and investing in education , training and the information society could help to reverse that trend .
At the same time , we must reduce the tax burden on labour and reduce budget deficits .
These are the types of news , recommendations and forecasts that we hope to see in the major economic guidelines promised for 30 March .
Growth , employment and stability are the buzzwords in political debate today .
Stability begins within Europe despite the financial crises on the sidelines in Russia , South-East Asia and Latin America and the overheating of the US economy .
It is time to remain calm in the midst of the storm .
Madam President , in his remarkable report , Mr Fourçans very clearly addresses the major issues of European economic policy .
He advocates a stability-based monetary policy and sound budgetary policy .
For that he has our approval .
We share his concern about the French , German and Italian budget deficits which were forecast for 1995 and which amounted to 2 % of GDP or more .
Given the economic power of those three countries , this could well have had serious consequences for their smaller partners in the event of a crisis .
I support many of the proposals in the report , but time permits me to highlight only three , namely the wish to channel more investments into research , education and training for reasons of competitiveness , the wish to restrict the consumption of non-renewable resources while developing new forms of sustainable technology , and lastly the need to reduce labour costs without endangering the funding of social security systems .
Madam President , first of all I would like to make the following comment regarding the American economy . In 1992 , America was in a state of crisis , Mr Herman , and it did not recover from the crisis by relaxing regulations , since regulations in America were already rather loose , and there were no market controls which , you say , hamstring the European economy .
America emerged from the crisis of 1992 and gathered this momentum through the deficits created by Mr Reagan .
These are just a few facts which you cannot ignore if you want to be realistic .
As for the rest , of course our differences are political .
We want to pursue a policy to benefit workers , while you want to pursue a policy to benefit stockbrokers .
Which is more difficult - to come into conflict with workers or with stockbrokers ?
Only time will tell .
Our work is far from easy , as you were insinuating , and we are not looking for easy solutions .
We have a radically different social and political agenda .
As regards the report , I would like to congratulate Mr Fourçans on the intellectual quality of his work , but unfortunately I cannot support his general position , which of course stems from his political approach .
For five years now , the Commission report has been following this method : it takes advantage of any slight , chance improvement in the economy to say to us : ' look , the policy we are implementing is working and Europe 's economy is beginning to move forward ' .
Each time there is a setback , it is not our fault , it is the fault of others .
The fault lies with the crises in the third world , for which the third world is to blame . Our own financial speculators , however , are blameless .
Neither the Commission report nor Mr Fourçans has addressed the issue of the responsibility of our own financial speculators for the disasters in Asia , for which we will also have to foot the bill - indeed , we have already started to do so .
The average growth rate of the European economy has stuck at 1.9 % , which is 1 % lower than is needed to reduce unemployment .
This has been the case for some ten years now .
Investments remain static , although profit from capital has reached 1960 levels .
Neither Mr Fourçans nor the Commission has taken the trouble to ask why .
Two years ago , the corresponding report to the one we are debating today stated that growth in Europe no longer depended on exports and instead was starting to depend on domestic demand and investments .
What are we seeing now ?
As soon as an international economic crisis hits European exports , we are back in a recession .
Where is the internal dynamism you say we are starting to acquire ?
We are taking a remarkable step and we refuse to accept that the policy the Commission is adopting has failed and that we must form a united front and totally reject it .
We have become like the Bourbons , Commissioner and Mr Fourçans , who never learned anything and never forgot anything .
And you know very well what the fate of the Bourbons was as a result of the stance which they adopted .
Madam President , now that the European Central Bank has begun operations , all the EU financial machinery is in place to meet the challenges of future economic development .
There will be great scope for coordinated cooperation on the part of the ECB , the Commission and the various Councils , to try to ensure there is favourable development both for the EU as a whole and for the individual Member States .
It must be stressed that currency stability , whose importance the ECB strongly emphasises , cannot be the only objective of economic policy .
Steady growth and the avoidance of recession must be seen as being equally important , since they are the only way to safeguard high rates of employment , which are of vital importance to our citizens .
The ECB bases its policy predominantly on the regulation of the money supply .
It thus believes in the quantity theory of money .
This is associated with the doctrines of the early part of the century , not the thinking associated with a new millennium .
It is not right either that the Commission should be forever stressing the importance of meeting overrated convergence criteria which do not take account of Keynesian views on economic and budgetary policy .
A surplus should be used to curb overheating ; when a recession threatens , we should be prepared enter into deficit to achieve recovery .
The budgetary deficit should be reviewed within the framework of the whole economic cycle .
The importance of this is particularly obvious now , when the public deficit forecast for the three largest Euroland countries for the current year is at least 2 % , making flexibility and scope for recovery almost non-existent .
Parliament should therefore monitor developments and , if necessary , speak up to advocate policies of growth , employment and recovery , as well as structural policy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , although the need to coordinate economic policies is emphasised at every available opportunity , practice has shown us that there is still a wide gap between analysing and evaluating the main indicators of the economic situation and initiating the necessary decisions .
An action plan is therefore becoming essential if we are to close that gap .
Even the present report by Mr Fourçans , the general thrust of which I welcome , still lacks the courage to draw the logical conclusions from its proposals and demand more and better coordination of economic and monetary policy .
An economic landscape that is overclouded by investment fatigue will not bring forth the necessary growth or the necessary crop of jobs .
In this context , let me say that fear is the only reason why we are now saving more , and worshipping the golden calf of budgetary consolidation - important though such consolidation may be - is surely a short-sighted and inadequate response .
This has nothing to do with Keynesianism , which is often misunderstood .
As long as we cannot conduct a coordinated economic policy based on sound arguments , a policy in which monetary policy also plays a key role , both inside and outside the European Union , it will prove difficult to promote employment , growth and stability .
A gratifying feature of the Fourçans report is the very responsible way in which it deals with the question of incomes and competition .
I believe this approach will guarantee that the present rather complex economic situation will not be exacerbated by an erosion of purchasing power .
That would stifle any additional growth , which is the last thing we want at this precise time .
Impetus is what we need now , fresh impetus and a bolder approach , for more employment and more growth .
Madam President , the 1999 annual economic report , covering the first year of the introduction of the euro , duly mentions the progress that has been made in firmly rooting a culture of stability and an established framework of stability in the European Union .
The report - on which I must congratulate the Commissioner - also talks about a revolution in attitudes in all the Member States .
This has occurred because the nominal convergence demanded by the Maastricht Treaty for entering the euro - achieving an historically low level of inflation and interest rates and an improvement in the budgetary balance - did not jeopardise economic growth rates : 2.7 % in 1997 and 2.9 % in 1998 . The result was an improvement in the employment situation compared with the previous 5-year period , with 5.1 million jobs created between 1996 and 2000 whereas 4.6 million were lost between 1991 and 1995 .
This success was despite the background of considerable instability worldwide , especially in Asia , Russia and more recently in Latin America , with 20 % of the world economy in recession and 10 % nearing it .
This has led to a downward revision of the economic growth forecasts for 1999 but , given the overall results so far achieved , there can be no doubt that we are on target for economic and monetary union .
Rigorous and realistic policies are now called for , as is suggested in the Fourçans report , on which I congratulate our colleague .
Of the other aspects , I should like to pick out just one : the role of public investment is going to call for special attention without a doubt , especially since the requirements of the stability and growth pact mean that the budget deficit cannot be increased .
In paragraphs 25 and 26 of his report , the rapporteur stresses the desirability of performing ' an analysis with a view to a harmonised and consistent definition of public investment throughout the European Union ' since ' rises therein may entail a reorganisation of public spending ' .
Like other equally important - but perhaps less delicate - measures , such as making markets more flexible or training people , public investment is a difficult objective to achieve . That justifies the need for the European Union - and , in particular , the Commission and the Member States - to discuss practical measures that could be taken in order to rationalise the very notion of public investment .
Mr President , the annual economic report is an excellent opportunity for Parliament to have some input in the overall economic policy guidelines .
The main issue is deciding what policy mix to recommend for the Union and the Member States , traditionally involving budget policy , monetary policy and wage movements , since these are the main macro-economic factors that we in the Union can influence ourselves .
External factors play only a limited role , since external trade accounts for only 10 % of the Union 's GNP .
So what policy mix is appropriate in the current situation ?
Economic growth is declining and the Commission is already warning of a further readjustment downwards .
The official inflation figure has fallen below 1 % , which means that the real inflation figure , allowing for miscalculations , must be almost zero .
If price stability is under threat from anything , it is from deflation .
With the employment threshold at 2 to 2.5 % and growing , unemployment is unlikely to fall any further .
Something must be done to reverse the slowdown in growth .
But what ?
There is not yet much slack in the Member States ' budgets , particularly in the bigger Member States that should really be making progress by now .
There is some scope in wage trends , but very little , since wages are still lagging behind productivity , which is really not necessary when Europe 's businesses are so well off .
So wages could be a way of giving a much-needed boost to consumer spending , which is currently what is keeping the European economy afloat .
However , it is vital here that the ECB should lower interest rates further to make investment cheaper and encourage consumers to spend more and save less .
The present state of near-deflation means that this can be done , and in view of the slump in Europe 's economy it needs to be done .
With such low inflation the interest rates are too high , and the ECB must carry out its duty to support the Union 's economic policy .
Madam President , the presentation of the annual economic report always reminds me of the presentation of a list of grievances about what is not working properly in the European Union .
This year , however , the picture is very different .
We have an instrument , the euro , which is binding and compelling and is forcing us towards a new kind of cohesion as compared with the past .
We know that the autumn 1998 growth forecasts of all the Member States have been revised downwards , and we also know that France , Germany and Italy alone now account for three quarters of GDP in the euro zone .
If just one of those countries were to find themselves in crisis , the whole picture would be affected .
We are therefore faced with three new elements for which there are at least three responses .
The three new elements are : firstly , a new kind of homogeneity based on the euro , that is to say fiscal , taxation and banking harmonisation - and only last night , at midnight , we were discussing and criticising the banks which have yet to accept the euro - in order to continue the process of achieving budgetary stability in individual Member States .
Secondly , we have a new kind of sectoral division of the market , namely the development of the tertiary sector : we have to focus more on commerce , on tourism , the service sector and the craft sector .
And finally , we have a new market element : the big companies have their place , but it is in particular to the small and medium-sized enterprises that we have to look for the future .
The three responses are : economic but also social market evaluation , a realistic wages policy , particularly for young people looking for their first job and , finally , public investment that is targeted and dovetails with private investment .
To achieve that , I believe that the economic policy guidelines must be coordinated with employment strategy , and therefore the euro is - and remains at this historic moment in the construction of Europe - the main and most appropriate response .
It is certainly not itself the goal , but it is the means of achieving the goal and must always be considered a sound starting-point , as we intended , and a starting-point at any rate .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are speaking about an employment pact in the belief that jobs can be safeguarded if the representatives of employers and employees jointly formulate policy objectives .
We have to tread warily here , because it is the consumer alone who creates work and determines employment policy .
Consumers , in other words we , the people , decide what to buy ; we choose the manufacturers of the products we want to buy and their regions of origin .
Fortunately , consumers are very objective .
They judge the value of the product on offer .
In that respect they are very critical .
When consumers go into a shop , they do not search the packaging of every product to find out where it was made ; they base their choice on price , quality and customer service .
I believe we must focus far more sharply on the need to train our employees and our businesses to recognise the needs of the customer and to anticipate the customer 's future needs .
What makes a good company is its dedication to identifying the future wishes of its customers .
To that end , such companies need an efficient government .
We must ensure that statutory charges are reduced , that the machinery of public administration operates more efficiently , that we replace redundant departments , by which I mean that we should restructure unproductive departments into genuine service organisations .
That is also a particularly important task for the European Union .
We must set a good example here .
I believe it is worth fighting hard to achieve that aim .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before I begin , I should like to say to the rapporteur , Mr Fourçans , that I appreciate the quality and thoroughness of his work .
Although our opinions differ considerably as regards the best policy to pursue at both national and European level , I should like to pay homage to his intellectual honesty and stress the importance of some of his proposals .
Most of the serious reservations I have about his text naturally relate to what I would describe as an obsession with budget deficits .
Another point of contention , or obsession , relates to workers and their supposed lack of flexibility and adaptability .
This is hardly surprising : we have neither the same approach to unemployment nor the same concept of the role of workers in the economy .
However , there are many things on which we agree , in particular , something that concerns me here , namely , the need for public investment and the criticism of the bank charges incurred by people making payments in euros .
In relation to the first point , I broadly share the rapporteur 's view that Europe needs to give more attention to matters relating to communication and its infrastructures .
I fully believe that society must take on its full responsibilities in terms of training and education in both the short and long term .
As regards the second point , I have already asked Commissioner Silguy and Commissioner Monti on several occasions about the issue of taxation .
In my view , the Commission needs to act promptly on this as it affects the euro 's credibility at this intermediary stage .
To conclude , I think that the Fourçans report is very thorough .
It does not mask the differences between the left and the right and it is even very discrete about calling into question certain workers ' rights .
Nonetheless , it puts forward some very interesting proposals that are worth discussing .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking our rapporteur , André Fourçans , and congratulating him on his report .
The report tells us that the main European economic indicators remain strong , that investments are achieving good returns , and that inflation and interest rates are at an all-time low .
At the same time , however , we note that previous growth forecasts are now having to be scaled down quite drastically .
We must investigate the reasons for this .
It is undeniable that the slowdown is partly due to external economic conditions .
But they cannot be the only reason .
The very fact that our trade with the regions in crisis , such as Russia , Brazil and South-East Asia , accounts for a minimal percentage of the GNP of the European Union shows that this factor is not solely responsible for the slowdown .
The real reason for our low rate of growth - and I believe there is broad consensus on this - is a lack of investment .
Some people blame the European Central Bank and claim that the base rate is too high .
That , however , is an astonishing claim , given that both short-term and long-term interest rates have already fallen to unprecedentedly low levels .
Part of the responsibility for the sluggishness of economic growth in the European Union lies with the uncertainties in the economic policies pursued by some of the larger Member States , as a result of which business confidence is sapped and investments fail to materialise .
Companies will not invest if they have no means of knowing how high their tax and national insurance bills will be at the end of the year .
This is the first problem that the economic policy of the European Union will have to address .
The main reason for weak growth and the threat to jobs lies squarely in the realm of economic policy , and not with the Central Bank .
As an institution engaged in dialogue with the Central Bank , we must not let it be used as a scapegoat for the faults of others .
Another topic that is currently high on the economic agenda is the strength of the European currency .
What determines the strength of the euro , and what matters to the people of Europe , is not the drop in the value of the euro on the world market but its internal stability .
With an average inflation rate of 0.8 % in Euroland at the present time , we have price stability .
The rate of price increase in the United States , with which we tend to compare ourselves , is more than twice as high as it is here in the European Union .
But the reason for the decline of the euro against the US dollar lies primarily in the international finance markets ' lack of confidence in the economic policies of our large Member States .
In the report before us , the majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy expresses its support for an economic policy based on the principles of welfare capitalism and its opposition to a dilution of the stability pact .
That is the only way to win back the confidence that has been squandered and to start fostering growth and employment once again .
Madam President , may I ask the Commissioner to clarify whether he is at odds today with the annual economic report , because in the annual economic report he said that growth alone has created ten million jobs in the United States .
For that reason , I think he should reaffirm that growth is indeed a necessary weapon in the fight against unemployment , be it in the United States or Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner de Silguy made a point of contradicting my statement that unemployment had not changed over the course of this Parliament by saying it had changed from 11 % to 10 % .
If Commissioner de Silguy considers 1 % over a period of nearly five years a success then , if this was a national parliament , perhaps many Members would be asking for his resignation .
As it is , the extenuating circumstances are that there has been a global recession , although Commissioner de Silguy very often claims that we have withstood this global recession almost 100 % .
Madam President , I would like to make the same point as Mr Hendrick .
I am supposed to have said that in my view unemployment has risen .
Of course I realise that it has fallen slightly , but it is by so little that I do not think we can go back to the Member States and tell people that very much has happened at all .
This is why I would strongly urge that we should use the employment guidelines to do the things that Parliament and the Commission have been calling for for years .
Madam President , can I just briefly say first of all that I did not fully understand the question posed by Mrs Randzio-Plath .
I did not actually say that growth was not needed to combat unemployment , because it clearly is .
At no stage did I say otherwise .
However , what I did say - and this is something that was borne out and noted in all the economic analyses - was that growth alone will not be , and is not , enough in Europe to allow us to put an end to the problem of unemployment ; it needs to be accompanied by structural measures .
Secondly , Mr Hendrick , I simply wanted to correct what I understood to be a simple technical error , namely , your claim that unemployment had increased .
I said that it had not increased , but that it had decreased , even though it only fell by 1 % , which is not enough .
That said , Europe is set to create more jobs in the 1995-2000 period , generally speaking , than were lost in the 1990-1994 period .
Therefore , what I am saying is that the trend is reversed , but there is still a long way to go before the scourge of unemployment is fully eradicated .
This will only be possible through a combination of a sound and stable macro-economic policy that is focused on stability and growth , and a dynamic employment policy , which must be implemented in the context of general and consistent structural measures .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 a.m.
EU relations with Central Asia
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report ( A4-0069 / 99 ) by Mr Truscott , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission - Towards a European Union strategy for relations with the Independent States of Central Asia ( COM ( 95 ) 0206 - C4-0256 / 96 ) ; -the recommendation ( A4-0071 / 99 ) by Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the conclusion of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Uzbekistan , of the other part ( 7652 / 96 - COM ( 96 ) 0254 - C4-0418 / 96-96 / 0151 ( AVC ) ) .
Madam President , I should first like to thank honourable Members for their cooperation , suggestions and amendments which have been gratefully received .
Since the five Central Asian Republics - Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan became independent in 1991 with the breakup of the Soviet Union , the European Union has been engaged in the process of building bilateral relations with each of them .
The five states differ widely in terms of population , land area , resources and democratic developments .
The Commission communication on relations between the EU and the newly independent states of Central Asia published in October 1995 stated that the primary objective of the Union was to maintain the stability of the region which could best be done through the development of broadly-based democratic institutions , the reduction of sources of conflict and economic reform .
Given the length of time since this communication was produced perhaps now would be a good time for the Commission to update it .
Parliament was asked by the Council for its assent to the partnership and cooperation agreement with Kazakhstan in July 1995 .
In the case of Kyrgyzstan it gave its assent in November 1995 .
However , given the concern over the internal situation in Kazakhstan Parliament delayed its assent until 13 March 1997 .
In the case of Uzbekistan the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and the rapporteur Mrs André-Léonard decided that the situation was such that it was very clear that the country did not meet the general principles laid down in Article 2 of the PCA , i.e. respect for democracy , principles of international law and human rights .
Thirty months on and human rights and democratic institutions have been further undermined in Central Asia .
The recent presidential election in Kazakhstan was widely regarded as rigged and flawed .
In Uzbekistan , after a series of explosions in Tashkent on 16 February , the government has used this as an excuse to clamp down on opposition groups .
There has been particular concern for the safety and treatment of Mamadali Mukhmurdov and Munira Nasriddinova .
Since the main non-violent opposition parties , Erk ( Freedom ) and Birlik ( Unity ) have been closed down , the Committee for National Security ( KNB ) is also busy arresting and harassing dissidents .
In Turkmenistan and Tajikistan , despite the peace agreement signed in the latter country last year , there has been little or no improvement in the human rights situation , and even in Kyrgyzstan , where human rights are respected in many areas , there are still problems with citizens ' limited ability to change the government , freedom of speech and the press , due process for the accused , religious freedom and ethnic discrimination .
On a positive note it is to be welcomed that both Kyrgyzstan and Turkmenistan have introduced moratoria on capital punishment .
I hope this will be extended to all Central Asian countries .
The Commission has given an undertaking that human rights issues will be regularly raised as a serious issue with the authorities of Central Asia and that the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy will be kept fully informed of developments in this sphere .
I trust that Commissioner van den Broek will keep this promise on his forthcoming visits to Kazakhstan , Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan and report back to committee on his impressions .
It is regrettable that Commissioner van den Broek could not be here today but I hope that he will keep the committee and Parliament fully informed .
Central Asia is an area of outstanding geo-strategic and economic importance to the European Union .
Its importance has been recognised since the days of the ' silk road ' and during the era of the ' Great Game ' .
The natural resources of Central Asia , especially gas and oil , are considerable .
US State Department estimates suggest that the Caspian contains up to 200 billion barrels of oil , enough to supply the world for eight years , and 7 000 billion cubic metres of natural gas , enough to supply Europe for 16 years .
Clearly the EU must be engaged with the countries of Central Asia and encourage them to shed their old Soviet era mentality .
The role of TACIS , in particular the democracy programme , TRACECA , INOGATE and WARMAP are to be welcomed .
But cross-border and democracy programmes , assisted by NGOs , should be given more support .
The legacy of environmental degradation , especially round the Aral Sea and the nuclear test ground of Semipalatinsk should also be tackled with an adequate response from the EU .
The region has suffered from both the Asian and rouble crises .
The Commission , Council and international financial institutions must consider measures to help protect the population of the region against severe economic hardship .
While the EU should encourage foreign investment in Central Asia , part of the solution lies in the region itself in terms of introducing assured legal rights for investors .
Currently the EU is the region 's most important market outside the CIS .
If Central Asia is to develop its economic independence it will require foreign assistance in developing alternative gas and oil pipeline routes and new markets .
In conclusion , the EU should play its part in helping to build a democratic , prosperous and secure Central Asia in a region of fragile stability .
Central Asia may be far away but its future will affect us all .
When the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy appointed me rapporteur on the partnership agreement with Uzbekistan , I wanted to see the situation there for myself , so I went to Tashkent to meet political leaders and representatives of civil society and human rights organisations .
This country , which was part of the former Soviet Union and gained independence in 1991 , has still not fully broken away from the practices of the former Communist regime , though of course efforts have been made to do so .
In December 1992 , a new constitution was adopted , which makes Uzbekistan a pluralist democracy .
A constitutional court is currently in operation , the parliament is working quite well and an ombudsman has been appointed to ensure that human rights are respected .
The problem is that the ombudsman is directly dependent on parliament and is therefore under its charge .
In 1991 , Islam Karimov was elected to power with more than 80 % of the votes cast , against just one other candidate .
The President 's party , the People 's Democratic Party , won a landslide victory in the parliamentary elections in December 1994 , after several opposition parties had been banned .
And in March 1995 , President Karimov was re-elected for a period of five years .
What I saw there did little to reassure me .
In fact , freedom of expression is non-existent , censorship is in force , the press is not independent and there are only four newspapers available , all of which are subject to government control .
The freedom of assembly , the freedom of association and the right to demonstrate are all forbidden , and opposition parties are banned .
Arbitrary arrests and detentions are a daily occurrence .
Torture is frequently carried out and the death penalty is still in force , although we have , of course , asked the Uzbek authorities to commute the death penalty to prison sentences .
My conclusion was that democracy only takes root slowly - even here - and that 70 years of communism and totalitarianism cannot simply be forgotten overnight .
That is why I asked the Committee on Foreign Affairs to postpone our agreement and give Uzbekistan two years in which to make progress in terms of respect for human rights .
Time has unfortunately not changed the situation and today we are receiving some alarming reports from human rights organisations such as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International .
The recent riots on 16 February demonstrated the violence those in power are capable of .
Three people are still in prison and have suffered serious violations to their integrity ; no proof of their guilt has ever been furnished .
One of the prisoners , Mrs Akedova , is 60 years old and is the head of a human rights organisation .
However , I think that we should give Uzbekistan a chance , because this country , this region , needs our help , be it democratic , economic or environmental .
The country has substantial mineral and gas resources that are underexploited .
It is the world 's fourth largest cotton producer , and yet , according to its leaders , 15 % of the population live in abject poverty and wages are almost as low as they are in the third world .
A great many TACIS projects have been set up , ranging from projects promoting democracy , transport , energy , telecommunications , education and the environment , to projects aimed at combating drug trafficking .
It must be noted that the volume of drugs from Afghanistan is huge , and that 40 % of the drugs that reach Europe come from this region .
I do not have enough time to elaborate on environmental issues here but I can tell you that I spent two hours flying over the Aral sea , or rather what is left of it . I witnessed the sheer scale of the ecological disaster there , which Europe has failed to gauge the importance of .
Pesticides that have been used for years in this area have destroyed everything and dried up the sea .
Infant mortality is 10 % higher in this region than in the rest of the country , as is maternal mortality .
Many of the people are disabled , miscarriages are so frequent that they are no longer accounted for , and diseases such as cancer are rife .
We rapidly need to take action in this part of Uzbekistan if we do not wish to bear a heavy responsibility for these stricken peoples .
These observations were what finally influenced my decision and what led to Commissioner van den Broek 's commitment to suspend the partnership agreement should human rights violations continue , as provided for in Article 2 of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
Mr van den Broek is to visit Uzbekistan , Kyrgyzstan and Turkmenistan himself at the end of the month . I hope that he will be able to act as Europe 's spokesman and subsequently give an account of his trip to the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Other elements have contributed to the proposal to conclude this partnership agreement , especially the very worrying regional context in Central Asia .
Mr Truscott already discussed this situation and I shall not go into it here .
The geostrategic situation of Uzbekistan , which shares a border with Afghanistan , and the fear that the Islamic fundamentalism of the Taliban will spread , finally convinced me to adopt this position .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must indeed be vigilant , but it is vital that , at the dawn of the third millennium , we continue in our historic duty to ensure respect for human rights all over the world .
We must also share our knowledge and experience to enable regions to prosper , regions that have been deprived of fundamental freedoms for far too long and that have lapsed into an economic and democratic backwardness that needs to be overcome .
We must therefore have confidence in Uzbekistan , and hope that we will not be betrayed .
In any case , the Committee on Foreign Affairs will submit an annual report to the European Parliament on how the situation is developing in terms of democracy .
Applause
Madam President , I apologise for having to raise this issue again .
It is one I have addressed before .
As Members entered this Chamber this morning some form of demonstration was taking place outside , with people who had labels attached to their clothing advising us to vote in a particular way .
I do not believe that any of them were Members on this occasion .
I offer no comment on the issue they are raising , but I believe Members of this Parliament should be able to come into the Chamber without encountering any form of demonstration outside its doors .
Applause
I entirely share your views , Mr Perry , as I think does a section of the House .
Here in Parliament , we have never cast our votes under pressure from anyone at all .
Madam President , I would like to make a point of order pursuant to Rule 109 on order in the House .
I should like to ask you , Madam President , whether you think that Rule 109 ( 1 ) means that I cannot display a sign saying ' Stop treating us this way , give us a statute today ' , because you think it will disturb the sitting , or whether , on the contrary , this Rule does not mean that this is forbidden , because you think that a statute for assistants is essential for a social Europe and for the rights of all .
I shall certainly not pass judgement on the substance of the matter , Mr Duhamel .
That is not something for the Chair to do .
On the other hand , it is up to me to judge whether what you do disturbs order in the House .
I would not think that to be the case .
Madam President , unlike Mr Perry , I have no problem whatsoever with people demonstrating for their rights .
The only thing I would say to the assistants is that it may be worthwhile exposing certain Members who are not paying their assistants the proper wages which they should be entitled to receive .
We should expose people when they are bringing this Parliament into disrepute .
I would also wish to expose an institution that is bringing Parliament into disrepute .
The institution is Parliament itself .
I understand that people who work for us , such as the freelance interpreters , have not been paid since October .
I find that disgraceful !
And I hope every Member in this House finds that disgraceful .
If I were the shop steward , as I was in Rosyth dockyard , there would not be an interpreter in any of those booths today , until such time as that matter had been corrected .
I ask the Bureau to issue us with a clear , categorical statement as to why people who work for us are not being paid properly .
I would ask the Bureau to issue that statement prior to the part-session in April .
Applause
I can tell you that the Bureau is aware of this matter , Mr Falconer . You will be kept informed of the situation .
VOTES
Madam President , you have just announced that you were going to put Amendment No 90 to a split vote .
Like all other Members , I have the definitive voting list here , in which this split vote is not mentioned .
I should like to know exactly when a request for this was made , and if it was not tabled before the deadline , why is it being introduced now ?
As it was our group that originally requested a roll-call vote , I would not like the request for a split vote to be added to the request for a roll-call vote just because too many of the latter have been requested .
I should like a specific answer on this point .
I will give you a very specific answer , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
As regards the request for a split vote , this was certainly made in good time , since I prepared for the votes last night - I could not do so this morning , as I was chairing a meeting on the Structural Funds - and this request for a split vote was already included in the papers prepared by our services .
As for the request for a roll-call vote , on the other hand , I have just been made aware of this .
But I shall turn a blind eye , and we will take this roll-call vote all the same .
Madam President , I should like to ask the other rapporteurs to reconsider how they intend to vote as we do not want to have an incoherent situation where the amendments and the explanatory statement do not make any sense .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , you know that here in Parliament we never go back on a vote .
I am referring to the current vote but in relation to a vote that will take place later , namely the vote on Amendment No 98 .
And I should like to warn this House that we must be careful when voting on Amendment No 98 so that we are not inconsistent .
Madam President , I am surprised that compromise amendments have been admitted at this stage in the debate .
The report was the subject of many committee meetings and it was even considered by the political groups before it was debated in the House .
Since the deadline for tabling amendments has passed , I object to the fact that we are putting Amendment No 182 to the vote because the request was tabled too late .
To go back to the question I just raised , regarding the request for a split vote , I should like to remind you that the deadline for tabling requests for split votes and separate votes was Tuesday evening and not yesterday evening .
I believe the deadline was in fact before last night .
I simply said that I had at least seen that it had been tabled yesterday evening .
I shall consult the House on putting this compromise amendment to the vote .
Parliament agreed to consider the compromise amendment
( Parliament adopted the decision )
My warmest congratulations to the three rapporteurs , who have done a truly wonderful job .
Loud applause
( Mr Gutiérrez Díaz rose to join Mr Corbett and Mrs Palacio , and the three rapporteurs exchanged congratulations )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have taken a decision in this Chamber which I , as the rapporteur in this instance , believe we have no authority to take .
We decided that questions relating to employment contracts concluded between parliamentary assistants and Members should be governed by general administrative provisions adopted by the European Parliament .
There is no legal basis for this decision in the European Treaties .
That is not only my opinion ; it is also the opinion of the European Court of Auditors and is reflected in the decisions of the European Court of Justice which I cited yesterday .
Moreover , we have contradictions once again in our decision , contradictions which were contained in the report as adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and which we are carrying forward into the vote today .
So if we want to come up with a prudent solution , with a proposal which can be adopted by the Council too and which ultimately clarifies the contractual position between ourselves and our assistants in an effective manner , it is my view that the Legal Affairs Committee should re-examine this report .
On behalf of my group , I therefore request , pursuant to Rule 129 , that the report be referred back to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights . At the same time , I wish to intimate that , should this motion fail , my group will regrettably be compelled to vote against this report .
Mr President , I wish to speak against .
There may be contradictions in what we voted .
Frequently we find that is the case .
But that does not exclude the possibility that we can make significant progress with the dossier .
This is a reform which is both necessary and overdue .
Many of our assistants are potentially vulnerable to exploitation .
Many of our assistants may lack proper social security and other cover .
This House has demanded urgency on a statute for its own Members ; it must treat its own staff with no less urgent respect .
This House has demanded that another European institution should clean up its act .
It should demand no less of itself .
Let us proceed to a vote and let us vote for a statute .
Applause from the centre and the left
Ladies and gentlemen , is there a speaker in favour of the request for referral back to committee ?
Madam President , I am as well aware as Mr Lehne of the difficulties with the legal basis , but the reasons which Mr Cox has just cited for the urgency of this report and of the matter under discussion here make it imperative that we vote now .

The difficulties will have to be dealt with in the framework of the interinstitutional dialogue .
Madam President , I would ask you to reprimand Mr Ullmann for seeking leave to speak when you asked for someone to speak in favour of the motion , and then saying something quite different .
Either we keep to the rules of the House or we do not !
Parliament rejected the request for referral back to committee
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , I have been patiently waiting for the end of that vote before interrupting the proceedings of the House .
But there has been an interview taking place up in the Gallery with cameras and people who have been interviewed .
I believe that to be against the Rules of this House .
I do not think we should allow this Parliament to be devalued by the Rules not being applied .
I therefore ask you and the Bureau to investigate thoroughly what the ushers in the Gallery are actually supposed to do .
If there are rules they should be applied properly ; and if people have special permission to take interviews up there , at least the House should be informed .
I can assure you that the Bureau will look into this matter , Mr Provan .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , along with all the members of my group , I voted against Mrs Haug 's report on the European Union 's system of own resources .
It is regrettable that , on this important issue of the future financing of the Community budget , this House , as is often the case , allowed ideological and political criteria to take precedence over the fairness and transparency which should characterise the financing of the European Union .
In fact , the solution proposed by the Commission and by the Court of Auditors in its report concerning the assessment of the system of own resources was to continue the development of recent years and increase the GNP-based resource , which is the only genuine indicator of Member States ' wealth .
However , the majority of Parliament advocated financial autonomy , for reasons solely linked to a determination to increase the European Parliament 's powers .
This is incompatible with the need to rationalise the Community budget , the overall total of which can be , and must remain , subject to strict ceilings , as the Commission itself confirmed .
I naturally welcome the fact that the various paragraphs on cofinancing have been rejected .
This was the only area of expenditure subject to amendment .
As we have already said , the adoption of such a stance is incompatible with the aims of the Treaty , because agricultural expenditure is compulsory .
Moreover , no provision was made regarding the need to reduce other non-compulsory forms of expenditure .
Therefore , although we welcome the fact that the Committee on Budgets ' proposal on this matter was rejected , we disagree with the overall tone of the report and were therefore unable to adopt it .
Madam President , I should just like to briefly explain that after having drawn up a minority opinion on the Haug report , I voted in favour of it .
I simply wanted to point out that my argument was essentially based on whether agricultural cofinancing , as proposed by the Haug report , was compatible with the aims of the Treaty .
As this was rejected by Parliament , I was able to vote in favour of the report and I am delighted that my minority opinion in committee has become the majority opinion of the House .
Madam President , we reject both the principle of cofinancing and the introduction of a degressive approach to subsidies .
We are opposed to the idea of revising the European budget at the expense of our farmers .
Moreover , we are also vehemently opposed to the development of new ways of providing the EU with its own resources , because we do not wish to impose any additional burdens on the people of Europe .
It is also wrong to dispute the connection between the Cohesion Fund and the euro area .
No country that is ready for the euro is in need of these funds .
Solidarity cannot and must not be one-sided .
In general terms , the aim on the revenue side of the EU budget must be to create greater transparency and an equitable distribution of burdens .
Since the House has rejected the principle of cofinancing - a decision which we welcome - and since some parts of the report that reflect our views were adopted , while others were rejected , we abstained in the final vote .
Today the Danish Social Democrats voted against the report 's proposal for cofinancing of the common agricultural policy through national budgets .
We are of the opinion that the support for agriculture in the EU should be phased out instead .
A change in the EU budget is desirable and necessary for the future .
The EU budget is much too wide-ranging , which is clearly leading to considerable problems .
Not least among these are all the reports of fraud and irregularities , which are costing the EU taxpayers some 40 billion a year in Swedish money , i.e. a sum corresponding to double the Swedish membership contribution to the EU .
There must be changes here .
In the first instance , much of this has to do with the fact that no one has any sense of belonging to the EU , and that most only see the EU and its budget as a source of grants and subsidies .
We consider the proposal that the EU 's biggest item of expenditure , the agricultural policy , should be financed jointly through the national budgets to be an important and correct step in the direction of reducing the total EU budget .
We believe that , as a result of this , the Member States are bound to become more involved in the EU 's agricultural policy and to show greater concern over how appropriations under the agricultural policy are managed .
We oppose all the demands in the report that the EU should take on responsibility for fiscal policy and should direct the coordination of economic policy , especially against the background of arguments such as that of the Union having a role as a ' global political and economic actor of growing importance ' .
The Member States , Europe and the world do not need and have nothing to gain from a superpower , whether it be an economic , political or military one .
We have strong objections to paragraphs 9 and 11 , because they seek to give the Union clear responsibility for fiscal legislation , and moreover powers to raise and appropriate the taxes .
Fiscal policy and economic policy must be decided at national level , even though a certain degree of international cooperation is needed on some clearly specified taxes or duties .
But that is not the same thing as a fiscal policy decided by the EU , in which the EU takes control of the taxes raised .
It is timely that we are discussing this report when European Union leaders are engaged in tough and contentious negotiations on the future financing of the European Union itself .
While we are debating here today the issue of the rebate which the European Union gives the British Government on an annual basis , this matter should now be put into its overall context .
It is clear that some Member States of the EU , most notably the Netherlands , Austria and Germany , believe that they are contributing too much money to the European Union annual budget .
It is argued that the British Government secured too favourable a deal at Fontainebleau in 1984 with regard to the rebate which the European Union gives to it annually .
This is now a matter for negotiations between European Union leaders , the European Parliament and the European Commission .
A framework for the future financing of the European Union for the period 2000-2006 must be put in place .
One particular financial equation is certainly very clear .
The European Union annual budget will still be raised by means of a levy on individual Member States to the maximum of 1.27 % GDP .
Decisions have already been taken that the future financing of the enlargement of the European Union is to come from within the parameters of this 1.27 % budgetary allocation .
It is clear that a compromise is going to have to be found between those countries which are claiming that they contribute too much to the EU , as equally , those countries which have received favourable treatment from the European Union annual budget in recent years .
The British Government certainly falls into this category and as the negotiations progress to the Berlin summit on 25 March next it is clear that there is bound to have to be a relaxation of the rules governing the amount which the British Government receives via rebates from the EU each year .
With regard to the future financing of the European Union , one option which cannot be considered is the possible renationalising of the common agricultural policy itself .
Such a decision would have serious implications for Ireland because of our unique dependence on agriculture and the importance of family farming as an essential feature of the economic and social infrastructure of rural areas .
For the third time since the Luxembourg Treaty of 1970 and the Fontainebleau summit of 1984 , we are faced with the problem of how to finance European integration .
The Member States agree with the assessment of the problem , but are extremely divided as to how it should be solved .
At the heart of the problem lies the complicity and injustice of the way in which Europe is presently financed ; in other words , it rests on four supports with four forms of resource .
The injustice lies in how the burden is distributed .
Germany contributes more than it receives in return , as does France , which is why we talk in terms of ' net contributors ' .
On the contrary , Spain , Ireland , Greece and Portugal benefit thanks to the Cohesion Fund .
However , the Member States ' financial contributions are much more complex than that .
For example , Belgium and the Netherlands seem to pay a great deal because there are customs duties on imports through Antwerp and Rotterdam .
Belgium and the Netherlands therefore seem to pay a great deal but they do not really have to bear the cost of these customs duties .
What is more , each Member State 's financial contribution is subject to the criterion used to make the calculations .
If we were to compare how much each inhabitant pays out of their income in terms of per capita GDP , the result is reversed .
People in the Netherlands who contribute to the Cohesion Fund make a greater individual sacrifice than people in northern Europe .
This just shows how complex the system really is .
An examination of exactly how the VAT-based or GNP-based resources are calculated , as well as the technical mechanism used to cap the British contribution , would reveal an even more unlikely complex situation .
This technical impenetrability hides many mistaken beliefs , in particular , the belief that the European Union is financed by its own resources , by taxes , through VAT , whereas in reality , it is still financed by state contributions .
It is also a mistake to think that enlargement towards the East and the extension of the EU 's powers will be achieved with the same budget envelope of 1.27 % of GNP , as the Commission would have us believe .
Tomorrow 's Europe will require ever more financial resources and will eventually be forced to tackle the problem of taxation .
This is where the disagreements arise in terms of the best solution to adopt .
Although the mistakenly good idea of cofinancing , which in fact would be a new resource created on the sly without being ratified by national parliaments , has been ruled out , fundamental differences on principles and techniques remain .
As regards principles , should the British idea of the ' juste retour ' be upheld ?
Should we limit , out of simple common sense , the sacrifice imposed to prevent the despoliation of some countries , such as France ?
Should we really move towards a ' single tax ' with an ever-increasing GNP-based contribution , even though we know that a single tax is a grossly unjust tax ?
Whichever resource or resources are chosen , should they be progressive as Spain advocates , or proportional ?
Above all , as regards decision making , should the unanimous rule , which is the only way to guarantee security , be maintained or should we opt for majority voting , which we usually do when there are drifts involved ?
The differences involving principles and techniques are inseparable .
Will Europe finance itself by making CO2 pay ?
Only the Greens believe that this is possible .
Will there be a European income tax ?
These concepts are to be avoided . We should instead stick to the present system , in other words , financing through state contributions , because we know that old taxes are the best and are the ones that will be respected .
Like the majority of the French members of our group , we voted against the report as adopted by the House .
Once again , I regret the fact that many Members did not think things through rationally enough .
Although we succeeded in rejecting paragraph 13 , which put forward the idea of cofinancing the CAP , albeit with a small majority , other parts of the resolution were not acceptable and , in our view , should not have been accepted .
Several paragraphs of the resolution stated that Parliament wanted control of the overall Community budget .
As a consequence , I think that those who voted in favour of this resolution are also in favour of eradicating the principle of compulsory expenditure .
In fact , since the Treaty of Rome , all agricultural expenditure under the Guarantee section of the EAGGF has been compulsory .
In other words , Parliament is limited to giving an opinion on this type of expenditure and the Council is the only institution empowered to make decisions on it .
Since the beginning of this legislature , some have been critical of the fact that 48 % of the Community budget is allocated to one socio-professional category representing less than 5 % of the European population .
Experience shows that if the European Parliament were ever to gain full control of the agriculture budget , it would progressively reduce it in order to transfer funds to other areas and policies , forgetting that the CAP is the only fully integrated policy at Community level .
In terms of the European Union 's GNP , I should like to remind you that the agriculture budget only represents 0.5 % of the Member States ' GNP .
A second factor influenced my decision to reject this report .
Several sections of the text adopted by the House propose increasing the budget of the EU 's institutions through the creation of additional forms of resource , without , however , increasing the overall fiscal burden on the people of the Member States of the European Union .
The question immediately arises as to how this will be possible , with the only plausible answer being to transfer funds from the Member States ' budgets to the European budget .
In view of the enormous difficulties we are experiencing today in balancing the European budget with regard to all the constraints imposed by the convergence criteria linked to the introduction of the euro , I think that such a proposal is completely unrealistic .
The European Union 's priority is to give precedence to its common policies .
It will not solve budget problems through cofinancing or by gradually reducing agricultural subsidies , but by providing these policies with the necessary budgetary allocations .
Not so long ago , before 1992 , the CAP accounted for 70 % of the Community budget , and at the outset , it even accounted for almost the entire European budget .
European farmers have contributed financially to the introduction of the euro by doing away with the differences between the rate of the ecu and that of the green ecu .
Today , all we are doing is asking them to finance the EU 's enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , while being fully aware that their future hangs in the balance . This is because the European Union only thinks in terms of concluding free trade agreements and dismantling what is left of the Community preference .
The Haug report contains some very positive ideas , such as its condemnation of the principle of the ' just return ' and the ' British correction ' and the suggestion that VAT as a base should be fully replaced by GNP .
As can be seen from an interesting table to be found in the Valdevieso report , this would do a lot to help us escape from the current regressive trend , already reduced in 1997 , because of the proportionately greater importance given to GNP among the current resources .
This is something to be borne in mind when we consider a suggested ' new ' resource , a tax on carbon dioxide emissions .
Two other suggestions that could be implemented by the European Union are a tax on profits made from coin minting by the European Central Bank and a tax on short-term speculative investment ( the Tobin tax ) .They are both very interesting , but need further consideration and , in any case , would make only small contributions to the budget .
Given that it would lead to greater revenue , fairly distributed and identifiable by the public ( thereby strengthening the desirable notion of accountability ) , we cannot understand why progress is not being made , as a priority , on a tax linked to personal income .
Finally , with regard to the CAP , rather than renationalise it we should be making moves to reform it , lowering consumer prices , taking measures to restructure agriculture and give the less favoured farmers income support .
There is a need to change and reform the EU 's system of own resources .
However , I am opposed to the proposal contained in paragraph 8 of the resolution , because it will lead to increased supranationality .
I believe that in principle only the Council should continue to decide on the Union 's own resources .
As regards the cofinancing of agricultural expenditure , I do not think that is an appropriate solution .
The agricultural policy currently pursued must be radically reformed , and we should reduce expenditure without delay .
As we need to devise a general system , I reject the principle of cofinancing .
The current system of own resources has a number of shortcomings .
For example , the collection of the traditional own resources gives rise to a great deal of red tape , irregularities and fraud .
It is therefore entirely appropriate to carry out a detailed cost-benefit analysis of this source of own resources , as the rapporteur proposes .
Another important point is that the benefits and burdens of the EU budget are unfairly distributed among the Member States .
I am quite happy to support the rapporteur 's proposals here , such as the introduction of cofinancing of agricultural expenditure by the Member States .
I also share his criticisms of the correction mechanism for the United Kingdom .
Five other Member States are now in more or less the same net contributor position as the UK , so there is no longer any legitimate reason for maintaining the correction mechanism just for one country .
However , I feel it is going too far to reject any correction mechanism on the revenue side of the EU budget out of hand .
I think a compensation mechanism which applied to all Member States could be a perfectly viable instrument for helping to remedy the unfair distribution of the financial burden among the Member States .


Although I support all these various proposals , I felt I could not vote for the Haug report , mainly because of the proposal for a fundamental review of the own resources system , eventually replacing the national contributions to the EU budget with European taxes .
This is designed to create a Union which is entirely financially independent of the national governments , and while this is very much in line with the supranational European model that many people in Parliament still want to see , it is completely at odds with the kind of Europe we support .
The European Union must remain a collaborative undertaking between national Member States , and this means that the national governments must continue to have influence over how it is financed .
An integral system of national contributions based on the level of affluence of each Member State ( GNP ) , which is what Mr Fabre-Aubrespy calls for in his minority position , offers the best guarantee for a balanced and transparent financing system , with a cost-benefit ratio which is also in its favour .

Madam President , the Lehne report focuses on an extremely worthy objective , that of rendering the treatment of Members ' auxiliary staff and assistants more transparent and fair .
Unfortunately , it exploits this good idea in that it harmonises , or begins to harmonise , a statute at European level , in which the European Parliament , in particular , would be the employer , even if the Member himself was naturally free to hire and fire his staff .
According to the rapporteur , this development would be based on a broad interpretation of the new Article 190 ( 5 ) of the EC Treaty , as consolidated by the Amsterdam Treaty , which provides for the implementation of a standard European statute for the Members of this House .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations opposes this standardisation as , in our view , such a statute should remain under the remit of each country .
My group therefore also opposes the broad interpretation of Article 190 ( 5 ) , which seeks to extend this harmonisation to Members ' assistants .
In our opinion , each Member of the European Parliament represents his country and should be remunerated or compensated by that country , and his assistants should be treated in the same way .
If this is not the case , we will soon have assistants that are fully integrated into the European regime and way of thinking , making spontaneous proposals to their Member on positions to advocate ever deeper integration since they will have become functionally incapable of thinking anything else .
I am very wary of the potential influence such a statute might have on an individual 's behaviour .
This is why I think that the equity needed in the management of assistants must be established at national level .
What is more , the assistants of the Members of the European Parliament must be managed according to the same laws and practices and by the same services as the assistants of members of national parliaments .
At present , Members can employ their staff according to the rules of either Belgian or home-country employment law , under terms of employment involving normal social security obligations .
The present system has led to considerable differences in conditions of employment as between staff from different political parties and Member States .
The majority of staff , including those employed by the Swedish Social Democrats , have conditions of employment geared to home-country rules , whereas other staff have neither a contract of employment nor trade union representation .
The lack of an acceptable personnel policy and failure to observe the rules of employment law which the Assistants ' Association reports is a cause for concern .
Such abuses must not be allowed to happen .
We also do not think that assistants should be taxed according to Community law .
The conditions for a joint solution to be worked out are not yet present .
Although the Lehne report seeks to regulate working conditions for the staff of Members of the European Parliament , the details have not been sufficiently well thought through .
Today the Danish Social Democrats voted in favour of introducing decent conditions of employment for parliamentary assistants .
The situation at present is that 23 % of the assistants have no contract .
Unfortunately , there are examples of assistants being employed without any salary or social security .
We have therefore voted in favour of introducing binding rules for recruitment , dismissal , remuneration , social security and pensions , amongst other things .
We have voted in favour of introducing binding rules before the end of this parliamentary term .
We hope that the Council will also accept its responsibility , so that we can have proper conditions of employment for all the assistants as soon as possible .
The Commission proposal to extend the European Staff Regulations to cover MEPs ' assistants goes much too far , in our view .
The Members themselves are responsible for ensuring that their secretarial allowance is spent properly , but unfortunately many of our colleagues offer their assistants too little security and pay them widely differing wages .
The rapporteur wants assistants working in Brussels to be covered by Community rules .
The income he proposes is less than in the Commission proposal , but it is still too high by national standards .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has created a rather obscure hybrid , with assistants being covered by the Staff Regulations but in a highly ambiguous manner , creating even more uncertainty for some of them .
The PSE Group amendments introduce some fine-tuning , but also take the staff budgets out of the Members ' hands .
In our view , we must focus on combating unfair treatment , for example by introducing a code of conduct with minimum conditions of employment , limiting the duration of probation periods , etc .
Members must agree to abide by this code when they receive their secretarial allowance .
We were therefore unable to support the proposals in question .
We fully endorse the assistants ' attempts to obtain decent recruitment , remuneration and working conditions .
It cannot be our intention , for example , that assistants can be dismissed at one day 's notice or if they are called up for military service .
They too have a right to normal periods of notice .
We are opposed to unnecessary bureaucracy and believe quite unequivocally that national social security schemes can and should be respected .
Although the proposal before us is not perfect , we have still decided to vote in favour of the report , in order to put a stop to the black market in labour .
Members of the European Parliament are elected by the people of the Member States and represent them in the EU .
They are not the EU 's representatives in the Member States .
Their salaries and taxation arrangements should therefore be governed by the rules that apply to national parliamentarians .
The assistants of Members of the European Parliament are assigned to the Members and should not be treated on the same footing as employees of the groups , who are directly subordinate to the federalist structure of the European Parliament .
Our assistants , both those who work in the home country and those based in Brussels , are covered by the national collective agreement and tax system .
In our opinion , this arrangement has worked extremely well .
Any attempt by Parliament to regulate conditions of employment in detail , to restrict the freedom of expression and informants ' protection to which assistants are entitled and to introduce huge pay differentials is alien to us .
This does not mean that we favour the exploitation of staff which is practised by some MEPs .
But such matters should be resolved in some other way , without the disadvantages introduced by the proposed Council regulation to amend the Staff Regulations , the Lehne report and most of the amendments tabled for this part-session .
There is a need for conditions of service and contracts of employment that regulate the social and other entitlements of assistants .
Their employment should , like that of Members of Parliament themselves , be governed by the legislation of the home country or the legislation of the country in which the person is actually resident .
What is important is not that there should be common rules , but that the rules should be clear and unambiguous , and that the conditions should be acceptable to both the assistants and Members .
Assistants , like Members of the European Parliament , should not pay EU tax but should be taxed in their home countries .
Madam President , my group has been entirely opposed to the tabling of a resolution in advance of the Berlin summit .
This House has , over the last few months , spent hours and hours in detailed work , passed by this plenary , on the Agenda 2000 package .
It is completely inappropriate , in our view , that we should have a resolution adopted in literally a few minutes , by comparison , which in some places repeats and in places contradicts the work that went on for the Agenda 2000 package .
It was on that basis that we determined to vote against all the resolutions that were put forward in this House other than our own , which determined that we should adopt and abide by the Agenda 2000 package , as per our first reading .
That is the basis of our opposition .
I can only repeat our pleasure that the plenary rejected the resolutions .
Madam President , as rapporteur for the general regulation on the reform of the structural funds I voted against the PPE resolution and the compromise resolution .
This resolution does not fully reflect the negotiating priorities agreed by the PPE and the PSE in the McCarthy / Hatzidakis resolution and , as such , can only give a partial and partisan view of Parliament 's priorities .
It is , in my view , deplorable that the PPE seek to undermine our joint rapporteurship and negotiations with the German presidency .
Parliament has a commitment to continued investment in Objective II-type areas and has requested two additional Community initiatives for urban and industrial areas .
The PPE appear to have weakened their support for these areas and are abandoning them by omitting them from the priorities of the text .
They have sent a signal to Berlin that these areas and communities are not a political priority for them .
I could not support this text .
I hope that the communities from these areas will show their displeasure in the ballot box in June 1999 .
Yet again the PPE have demonstrated their inability to sustain any support for the shambolic approach to Council resolutions and , in particular , Agenda 2000 .
It is correct that Parliament voted down this compromise as it only sought to undermine agreements in Berlin .
It is extremely important that the forthcoming European Council meeting in Berlin should cut the Gordian knot on Agenda 2000 .
Reform of the agricultural and structural policies and new agreements on the financing of the Union are absolutely vital if the Central and Eastern European countries are to be able to join .
Broadly speaking , we agree with the joint resolution on this issue and therefore voted in favour of it , but we would still like to make the following points .
We can live with the Commission proposal to set aside 0.46 % of GNP per year for structural measures in the period 2000-2006 , but only under two conditions .
Firstly , as with other expenditure headings , this must be an expenditure ceiling rather than a spending target .
The current privileged status of the Structural Funds tends to mean that the available budget has to be spent at all costs , which does nothing for efficiency and is financially irresponsible .
Secondly , the appropriations for structural aid for the applicant countries must be integrated into the EU programmes upon their accession without exceeding the expenditure ceiling of 0.46 % of GNP .
This means that clear priorities must be set .
The Agenda 2000 proposals are too focused on the acquired rights of the southern Member States , and we must realise that in future the poor regions are going to lie to the east .
We do not share the PPE and ARE Groups ' objections to the Council 's plans to nominate a new Commission president before the European elections in June , and we therefore did not vote for the amendments on the subject .
The Commission President is the most senior official in the European civil service .
Officials are not selected , they are appointed , and the appointment of the Commission President is first and foremost something the Member States must agree on among themselves .
The decisive factor here must be a candidate 's personal qualities , not his political affiliations .
If the nomination is made dependent on the outcome of the European elections , then too much weight will be attached to the candidate 's political background .
The Berlin European Council , which will discuss enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , might be the opportunity to finally adopt a friendly attitude towards Belarus .
The accusations levelled against that country are unfounded and it is wrong to say that freedom of expression does not exist there .
Belarus is gradually developing a regime that gives greater precedence to progress and freedom , based on the present constitution .
Any step backwards would be a mistake .
The criticisms levelled against Belarus are reminiscent of those levelled against General de Gaulle by some Anglo-Saxon circles during the Fourth Republic .
On the pretext that he intended to create a new constitution through a referendum , he was accused of anti-republican fascism .
This type of accusation is absurd .
There is far more respect for human rights in Belarus than in pro-American countries such as Turkey , which benefits from an association agreement with the European Union .
We must stop making accusations that are inconsistent with the principle of friendship among peoples , something that is particularly essential in today 's enlarged Europe .
The Berlin summit , which will focus solely on Agenda 2000 , is of particular importance for the future of the European Union .
Apart from the financial aspects of this reform , the principle of subsidiarity is at stake .
Like our President , José Maria Gil-Robles , I think that this reform must be viewed as a whole , so that we can give a clear political message to the people of the European Union and of the applicant countries .
As regards the more specific proposals put forward by the Commission , I have several comments to make .
First , as regards the CAP , I think that , on one hand , we need to guarantee a stable income for the whole of the agricultural sector , and on the other hand , we need to promote an agricultural model that is not connected to world markets and that is responsible for planned rural development that is accepted by all .
With regard to structural policies , I still support the idea that areas leaving Objective 1 should be given a transitional period in which to adjust .
Another challenge that the European Union must face relates to areas that are very densely populated .
We do not need to be reminded of the number of Europeans living in such areas to reaffirm the relevance of the URBAN programme and the need to maintain it , as the European Parliament has already mentioned .
Similarly , I also share the view that the Structural Funds must be consolidated as a tool for creating jobs and combating unemployment .
In this respect , I agree with the fact that the European Union must consider establishing a system of own resources that allows us to prepare for enlargement without undermining the principles of solidarity and cohesion , two of the most fundamental ideas behind European Union integration .
Finally , I agree with the ideas on human rights and balanced development , which must be major objectives for those countries wishing to join the European Union .
The Berlin summit is undoubtedly of particular importance and it forces our leaders to send out a strong message a few weeks before a deadline when our citizens will take full advantage of the opportunity to express their views on the Europe they are being offered .
The fact that the European Council will be held in Berlin is already a significant symbol of the new strategic order , as Germany is taking advantage of its presidency to defend its interests in the financing of the European budget , in enlargement towards the East and in the CAP .
France 's interests are different in all three cases .
The industrialised and Atlanticist Germany would easily sacrifice the agricultural Europe , giving Washington a monopoly over the food weapon .
France , on the other hand , would not .
Germany - which is the leading net contributor to the European budget , since it pays in more than it receives - would like to receive at least a financial return that is not extremely unjust , if not quite a ' juste retour ' as Margaret Thatcher demanded in 1984 .
With regard to this budgetary issue , France , which has lost more than FRF 20 billion in a single year of financing the European budget , is sensitive to the excessive inequalities in each Member 's financial contribution .
However , we must not forget that , although Germany makes a substantial contribution to the European budget , it has also made other states in the Union pay a considerable amount since its reunification .
The high interest rates imposed by the Bundesbank to finance the five Länder of the former East Germany are one of the major causes of the recent economic recession and the fact that six million French people are unemployed .
France has paid a large part of the dowry for the marriage of the two parts of Germany .
Lastly , enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe is displacing the European Union 's centre of gravity further towards the former Comecon area , where the currency was the Deutsche mark .
This shows the extent to which we are under Germany 's sphere of influence . For France , the accession of the countries of Eastern Europe , where 25 % of the active population work in agriculture , is going further than the problems posed by the present CAP reform , which goes against our national interests .
In other words , the interests of the Franco-German partnership are not necessarily the same in terms of the independence of nuclear energy , the reform of the CAP , where we reject the idea of cofinancing as it would make us pay with giving us any power of decision , or the financing of the CAP , where no clear decisions have been taken on the principles involved .
Instead of talking about limits , ceilings or correction mechanisms , we really need to make a decision on the principles , that is , whether or not Europe should be financed by taxation or by contributions from the Member States .
If we opt for fiscal measures , what form should the tax take ?
Should it be progressive , as Spain hopes , proportional to wealth , or a head tax ?
In fact , in Berlin , Europe is at a junction where all roads meet : the roads from the East , the budgetary roads and the strategic roads .
The time has come for European integration to get rid of any ambiguities and the first of these is to decide if we are building a European Europe or a globalised Europe .
Since the beginning , the National Front has made its choice clear : it favours the Europe of realities and truths , the tangible Europe , and the Europe of states and nations .
In these times of lack of ambition and any sense of responsibility , we should rejoice at certain aspects of the resolution that we have just voted on in the European Parliament .
This is true of the point made in recital A that the Structural Fund and the Cohesion Fund are the main instruments of economic and social cohesion , while the importance of economic cohesion is also emphasised in paragraph 5 .
Emphasis should also be laid on the statement in paragraph 4 that budgetary restraint needs to be reconciled with the guarantee of sufficient funds for the essential tasks of the European Union .
Another point to be emphasised is the approval in paragraph 6 of the proposal to earmark 0.46 % of the European Union 's GNP every year for structural actions during the period 2000 to 2006 .
Let us hope that these are not just good intentions since the most powerful leaders , focusing on Agenda 2000 instead of worrying about having enough resources to meet Europe 's ambitions , are basically concerned with setting a sacrosanct limit of 1.27 % of GNP for the Union budget . What is more , in Agenda 2000 the Commission is proposing to transfer EUR 45 billion from the Structural Funds to actions preparing for the accession of the new Member States , leaving the current 15 Member States with EUR 10.2 billion less or , in other words , 0.39 % of GNP .
These are major points which should have been resolved or clarified .
The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0272 / 99 by Mr Imbeni and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-0295 / 99 by Mr Vinci and Mr Ripa di Meana , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; -B4-0317 / 99 by Mr Santini and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; on the disaster in Cermis ( Italy ) and the verdict of the United States court-martial .
Madam President , on 3 February 1998 , a US military aircraft that had been violating the rules of aviation caused the Cermis ski-lift disaster , with the deaths of 20 European citizens .
Just a little over a year later , the American court-martial at Camp Lejeune has delivered an absolutely scandalous verdict , clearing the pilot and refusing to try to identify responsibility elsewhere , even though the Italian judicial authorities have established , beyond all doubt , that there was a clear breach of the rules of aviation .
European Socialists are scandalised by this verdict , which makes no attempt to try to establish responsibility and prosecute and punish the guilty parties , and is offensive and hurtful to the families of the victims and all of those affected by the Cermis tragedy .
We are asking the US authorities to use all the procedures available to them to identify where responsibility for the tragedy lies , to punish severely those who are guilty and guarantee that relatives of the victims are fully compensated , both in terms of moral support and materially .
We therefore support the stance taken by the Italian Government , which has put these views and requests directly to the President of the United States .
However , events in Cermis also show us that we need to reconsider and act to change the rules contained in the 1951 London Convention , so that tragedies of this kind - which would certainly be more likely were there to be a general feeling of impunity - are prevented in the future , and to guarantee that there would , in any event , be no obstacles in the way of the investigations and judicial proceedings against elements of NATO armed forces that violate the laws of the countries in which they are stationed .
Finally , we are asking for joint action to be put in place to ensure that any form of military exercise within the territory of the Union takes place in conditions of complete safety for the civilian population .
Once again , I join with all who have extended their condolences to those who lost their loved ones in the Cermis tragedy .
Madam President , the few words I wish to say on this sensitive issue can be summed up by way of two premisses and three specific proposals .
My first premiss is that , in the Cermis incident , in which 20 people lost their lives , there was collective responsibility on the part of the NATO command in Aviano which has always authorised training flights , even over densely populated areas , because it has been too liberal in its interpretation of the 1951 London Convention .
My second premiss points the finger of blame at the pilot , Captain Ashby , who broke every rule of care by interpreting even more recklessly an already dangerous flight plan .
It has been said in his defence that the military maps did not show the ski-lift cable : that is unbelievable given , after all , that it has been there for more than 25 years and was reconstructed after an earlier incident , on 9 March 1976 , in which 43 people lost their lives .
If the pilot was right , then in any event , the responsibility of those who failed to update such important maps ought to be established .
However , you do not have to be a pilot to find it difficult to imagine that when you enter a mountain gorge at 800 kilometres per hour , at an altitude of only 80 metres , it is still feasible to consult a map .
The inhabitants of the villages situated along the route of the ski-lift know a thing or two about this , and they testified that extremely low-flying aircraft were a common occurrence .
Again , according to their evidence , it seems that the Cermis cable , extending over 80 metres , was considered a challenge for the young Aviano pilots , almost a test of courage , a baptism of fire , swooping over people 's heads .
Some , a very few , managed to fly under the cable , while others pulled the nose up at the last minute and cleared the cable .
Unfortunately Captain Ashby stopped half-way .
He severed the cable and caused the death of 20 people .

I believe there are three proposals to remedy this situation : firstly , we need to review and update the London Convention , particularly with regard to overflying ; secondly , we need to recognise that the ordinary courts have to take precedence over the military courts in cases of this nature ; and , thirdly , we have to put pressure on the US Government to speed up the process of compensating the victims ' families .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Vecchi , the person who tabled the resolution , has just said , the American court-martial has delivered its verdict and the pilot of the aircraft involved has been cleared .
It is not our intention to comment on the verdict as such , but we do have some serious questions about the system established under the London Convention .
We would point out that a legal system such as Italy 's is perfectly capable of guaranteeing a proper trial , so why , in cases like this , can the airmen responsible not be tried by the regular courts in Italy rather than by special courts , such as the court-martial here ?
Do not misunderstand us , this is not a call for a people 's court , for emotional justice or for revenge , but for new international procedures so that responsibility for accidents or offences can be determined at the place where the events occurred .
The acquittal of the crewmen concerned also leaves a number of questions unanswered , which is why we expect the investigation at least to continue .
Why did the pilots not have the correct maps ?
Why was the ski-lift not shown on those maps ?
Why did the NATO authorities in charge not have information on the permitted flight altitude in the region ?
Something or someone in this whole unsavoury business has to be responsible .
Finally , we want the promises and commitments given about compensation for the victims to be honoured , because here too justice must prevail .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the acquittal of the American pilot whose reckless behaviour a year ago caused the deaths of 20 European citizens , including five young people from my immediate neighbourhood , cries out for revenge .
Justice was clearly not done when , despite the incontrovertible evidence , the pilot was not only acquitted of involuntary manslaughter , but even the charges of dereliction of duty and reckless conduct were apparently not admissible .
When Parliament sent its condolences to the victims of this terrible accident last year , calls were already being made for a review of the London Convention , under which jurisdiction in the case of military offences lies with the country to which the military personnel in question belong .
The unacceptable verdict delivered by the court-martial shows once again just how necessary this review is .
There is also the question of whether recourse to the separate system of courts-martial is still justified in peacetime .
Is it fair that a serviceman who commits an offence in the course of an operation which serves no military purpose and in which civilians are harmed should be tried by a separate legal structure made up almost exclusively of other servicemen , in other words colleagues ?
The special circumstances such as a war which justify the existence of courts-martial did not apply in this case .
We all agree that actual responsibility must be determined and fair compensation must be paid without delay to the families of the victims .
I wish to add my voice to what has been said by other honourable Members and express the indignation of the Green Group at a verdict which is not only an insult to those who lost their lives , but highlights a situation that is totally unacceptable .
Moreover , I have to say that we understand the reaction of the people of the Cermis region and the response of the victims ' relatives .
I think that is right , and I also think it right that the victims ' relatives should be compensated , even though compensation can never bring back those who lost their lives .
Setting all of that aside , I think we are right to ask how it is that , almost 50 years on from the London Convention , incidents of the kind we have seen can still happen .
I would remind the House that last year , on 19 February , when we were discussing the Cermis tragedy , I tabled a resolution in which I called for the London Convention to be reviewed .
I therefore believe that not only should we call for the inquiry to be reopened to establish whether there is responsibility at a higher level , we should also consider whether it is necessary to retain the NATO bases , as if we were colonies of some kind , or to react and ask for the current rules to be amended so that the national courts are finally given jurisdiction over criminal acts of this nature .
Madam President , the Cermis incident is without doubt a tragic episode , and the impression of US justice which Italy and the rest of Europe have been given has certainly left us with a bitter taste in the mouth .
We feel that sense of bitterness first and foremost for the relatives of the victims , of course , but also for all those who have regarded the Atlantic Alliance in the same way as we have always viewed it : that is to say as an Alliance which has guaranteed our countries ' security for 50 years .
I believe it is right that , after the Italian Parliament stated its view yesterday , we in the European Parliament should now be discussing the issue and taking an interest in seeing that justice is done , although much - too much - remains unclear about this incident , which is also protected by the provisions of the 1951 Convention .
I do not , however , believe it either right or helpful that we Europeans should be raising for debate , on the basis of these incidents alone , matters which could have been discussed elsewhere .
That seems to me , at any rate , to be a dangerous mix .
Madam President , I think that everyone here in the House can imagine what the families of those who died at Cavalese must be going through and , whatever our politics , would share their outrage today at the fact that a year after the disaster , the pilot responsible has been found not guilty by an American court-martial .
However , I think that we , as politicians , should not simply confine ourselves to a few non-committal words of moral support or criticism of the London Convention .
As the European Parliament , we must have the courage to face up to our political responsibility and say that this is about much more than just the guilt or innocence of one man , of one pilot .
Over the last few weeks , we have been forced to face the facts , facts that we might sometimes prefer not to know .
The facts show that the American troops stationed in Europe are actually above the law in the Member States , they can contravene laws and regulations with impunity , as we have seen , and will never be called to account before the European courts or the courts of the Member States .
We must ask ourselves whether this court-martial verdict , sadly , is not indicative of a certain American mentality today that clearly regards the American troops in Europe as a sort of army of occupation which , like all armies , is above the laws and regulations of the countries in which it is stationed .
We must therefore now not just demand compensation for the victims ' families , although it goes without saying that they can never be compensated for their suffering , we must also condemn this totally unacceptable American attitude that can only be described as neo-colonial .
The countries of Europe are not America 's vassals , they are not negro villages , and they must not be treated as such .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is surprising how justice goes out of the door when it is left to the country of origin of NATO troops , which is responsible for accidents or breaches of the law , to assign responsibility and exercise a remote - in both a physical and a moral sense - form of justice , from thousands of miles away .
The attitude taken by American pilots to Cermis hardly bears description : they were supposed to be carrying out military exercises , but in fact slaughtered defenceless people . Particularly unjustifiable , however , is the apathy of a court-martial that is incapable of guaranteeing that justice will be done , taking refuge behind international agreements , in this case the London Convention which dates back to 1951 and now needs , as a matter of urgency , to be brought into line with changing times and international political reality .
Equally unjustified , however , is the surge of anti-American feeling which is going so far as to challenge the basis of the international agreements with the United States , those same agreements which have protected Italy from the strategies and subversion of the Communist International .
The non-attached Members therefore wish to dissociate themselves from the protests coming from those who still hanker after the Warsaw Pact , and to affirm the importance of the partnership between the United States and Europe , and between the United States and the Italian Republic . Once again we are voicing our support for the establishment of a European security and defence policy which cooperates and works with the NATO structures and , if necessary , acts independently to defend the interests of the whole of Europe .
Madam President , I think it appropriate and right that this House should state its position on the Cermis tragedy - and not only on the incident itself , but above all on the verdict from the other side of the Atlantic which failed to condemn it .
We consider the expression ' concern ' , which is used in the resolution on which we are to vote , completely inappropriate .
I do not know what compromise led to that word being used , but I reject it .
There are two things we should be talking about here : about condemnation - condemnation of the action of those pilots who play at cowboys in the skies , risking the lives of others - and above all censure of the verdict of the American court-martial , which is failing to give our people , our nations , justice .
On behalf of the Padania bloc , which I represent in this House , and certain that I am speaking for the people , I therefore ask Parliament to be very firm in the stand it takes .
This Parliament is reaching the end of its mandate , but I think that we should begin to set an example for those who will come after us .
This Europe of ours will either gain respect or regularly be walked over by people and states that want to be our friends , although we know that the essential basis for friendship , between both individuals and states , is mutual respect .
I am therefore asking for the wording of the resolution to be much more forceful than it is at present .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's thoughts are primarily with the families of the victims of the tragedy in Cavalese . The Commission would like to express its deepest sympathy with them and it shares their pain and grief .
The Commission also shares your feelings regarding the conditions under which this accident took place and , like many of you , regarding the questions that remain unanswered .
Like Parliament , the Commission hopes that there will be swift and fair compensation for the families concerned .
Moreover , I note that President Clinton himself has recognized that the United States may have had some responsibility .
An acquittal has just been pronounced by the American Court-Martial .
This is the Court that has authority in this matter , under the provisions of the Treaty of London of 1951 , which determines the courts that are empowered to rule on infringements committed by NATO troops abroad .
Any decision to amend this Treaty is the sole responsibility of the members of NATO .
The issue must therefore be dealt with within and by the appropriate institutions .
The Community does not have the authority to rule on issues concerning the security of military flights .
There is a directive , Directive 56 of 24 November 1994 , which establishes the basic principles governing enquiries into accidents and incidents in civil aviation .
However , this directive does not apply to military aviation .
It is therefore up to the Member States to adopt any decisions which may be necessary on this matter .
Thank you , Mr de Silguy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0234 / 99 by Mr Moorhouse and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-0275 / 99 by Mrs Berès and Mrs Jöns , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-0279 / 99 by Mr Pasty and Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group ; -B4-0288 / 99 by Mrs Schroedter and Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; on support for the peace process in the Caucasus .
Madam President , we can think ourselves lucky that since the cease-fire in the Caucasus in 1994 , things have remained relatively quiet , at least as far as the clatter of weapons is concerned .
But things have been far from quiet when it comes to human rights violations .
We have seen in Armenia , Azerbaijan and the Caucasus that human rights and democracy are still not being given a chance , and the negotiations for a peaceful solution to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict have still not produced positive results .
As I said , thank goodness there has been no real outbreak of violence yet .
At the moment the so-called Minsk group - the United States and France - is working to try to achieve something through the OSCE .
Let us hope that this resolution helps to publicise the problem of Nagorno-Karabakh once again .
Madam President , after the collapse of the Soviet Union , the region of Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan experienced some difficult times .
Fortunately , there has been a cease-fire since 1994 which is opening the way for negotiation , and the Minsk Group is taking charge of this .
Today , we have on the table a proposal from this Group , which the OSCE has entrusted with finding a solution to this long-standing conflict .
I think that we should welcome this , as it respects two principles we all support : the inhabitants ' right to self determination and the respect for borders as they are currently laid out .
Nevertheless , we cannot accept changes that would come about as a result of the use of arms .
This is one of the reasons why , once again , we feel that this proposal by the Minsk Group is headed in the right direction , insofar as it proposes a large degree of autonomy within the existing borders , and we feel that this is a fundamental point .
A window of opportunity is therefore opening for us to begin a process that could bring about a solution to this conflict .
We hope that all the parties will be capable of seizing this opportunity to put an end to the conflict and arrive at a situation whereby the people can live together peacefully within the existing borders .
Madam President , the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh , which my own eyes have witnessed , is a conflict with innumerable tragedies .
Since 1992 there have been countless refugees , and their children , who have only ever known a state of emergency , have been growing up in tents and covered wagons .
It is not only the hatred that is constantly growing , and the irreconcilability of two peoples who used to live side by side and to intermarry as a matter of course ; there are also the diverse interests of various European powers which keep preventing a peaceful solution , as they did again only recently .
Nor has the European Union achieved anything with its partnership and cooperation agreements ; it has not taken the opportunity to use them as an instrument in pursuit of a peace settlement .
What we most need to do now is to break down this hatred , because otherwise there can never be peace in the region , and that is why we must not rely entirely on political instruments but must concentrate above all on supporting the key players within society and make them the starting-point for a concerted reconciliation campaign .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been said , even after five years of cease-fire , there is still no sign of a lasting settlement of the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh .
There are still more than a million refugees , most of them living in inhuman conditions .
They have been driven from their native areas and have no prospects , while the continuing absence of a permanent peace settlement for this part of the Caucasus is disrupting the cooperation between Azerbaijan , Armenia and Georgia that this region so desperately needs , which is ultimately stifling the economic development of the entire region .
The European Parliament supports the untiring efforts of the Minsk Group to find a political solution that will lead to a stable peace in Transcaucasia .
We call on the OSCE to continue its efforts and to set up an observer team which would constantly monitor respect for human rights and democratic development in those countries .
Such a commission of observers would operate as a political early-warning system , so to speak .
For all the progress that has been made in developing democracy and strengthening human rights , there are still some real problems here , of which last year 's presidential election is but one example .
The latest arrests in Azerbaijan are also a cause of great concern to us .
The European Union will continue to support the development of democracy in these young states .
In this context , we call on the Council to increase the allocation of economic aid to Transcaucasia but to link it , I need hardly add , to the process of establishing democracy .
There can only be economic stability , however , if the political conditions are right , in other words if Azerbaijan and Armenia make a determined effort to reach a political compromise on the future of Nagorno Karabakh .
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of our colleague , Mr Francis Decourri & # x010D ; re , who drafted one of the motions for a resolution .
We have had several opportunities to discuss the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh , in terms of the human problems caused by the war and as regards our desire to help solve the conflict .
Since 1993 , the OSCE has been trying to find a solution , to negotiate and to draw up a peace plan , but we all know that these negotiations have encountered many obstacles , and that in November , the peace plan proposed by the Minsk Group was rejected .
In this respect , we want to firmly reiterate our support for the peace process in the Caucasus and also our support for the peace plan presented by the Minsk Group .
The proposals in question are a good basis for negotiation to help find a peaceful solution to this conflict , and it is essential that negotiations are resumed so that an agreement can be reached as quickly as possible .
I would like to point out that , following the recent rejection by the Azerbaijani Government of the peace plan proposed by the Minsk Group , some political leaders in Azerbaijan itself warned the government against such a refusal and asked it to enter into direct negotiations with the Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh and to propose a political solution that would grant self-government to the area and make it a free zone .
This is a new and positive element .
At the same time , the European Union must continue to make its aid to the region conditional on visible progress in terms of human rights .
During all information and observation missions , the OSCE must also pay special attention to the level of respect for human rights in the area in order to prevent an escalation of violence if any incidents do occur .
To conclude , I would like to say that the European Union must increase its aid and assistance to the NGOs in the area , which , through discussion and political education , are trying to promote mutual understanding of the history of the communities that live in the region .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Caucasus region - and in particular the three Transcaucasian republics - are of considerable importance for the countries of the European Union . It is our duty to monitor closely what is happening in these three republics and do everything we can to bring about peace in the region , which is of a much greater significance than is represented by its population alone .
It is therefore right for the Member States of the European Union to show concern for the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh .
It is up to us to do everything we can to put an end to this conflict , to establish peace in the region , of course , but also to promote economic development .
Such economic development can only benefit from the resolution of the conflict .
The Delegation for relations with the Transcaucasian republics has had several opportunities to visit the country and it got the impression that both the Armenians and the Azeris sincerely want to see a solution .
This great expectation extends to Europe and to the European Parliament , which could help find a solution , as we have said ourselves .
The Minsk Group was given the task of drawing up a lasting peace plan .
The leaders of the countries involved - Azerbaijan and Armenia - have put forward proposals .
Armenia , in particular , has come up with proposals that are likely to restore peace in the region .
This is precisely the aim of the resolution in support of the peace process in the Caucasus region , which I personally signed on behalf of my group . We want to make a modest contribution to solving a problem which has been going on for several years and which urgently requires a solution .
I would like to add that , clearly , in co-signing this resolution , which relates to both Azerbaijan and Armenia , we are not forgetting the problems that both of these countries are facing .
We could not of course forget the tragedies that Armenia has experienced , nor its repeated demands , in particular , that the tragedy of the Armenian genocide be recognised . Nor are we forgetting that the human rights situation in Azerbaijan leaves a lot to be desired , and that we must make all efforts to improve it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Union is working to develop regional cooperation in the Caucasus region and it is supporting the efforts of the Minsk Group and of the OSCE , which is the most appropriate body to seek a peaceful solution to the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh .
The peace plan presented by the three co-presidents is a good basis for negotiation to find a solution to this conflict .
In order to contribute to bringing the regional players together , the Union has set up technical assistance programmes through TACIS with the aim of developing cooperation between Armenia and Azerbaijan .
The presidents of these two Caucasian countries have demonstrated their support for these initiatives .
They are contributing effectively to improving dialogue between the parties , which facilitates the search for common solutions to the regional problems .
In this context , the Armenian Prime Minister , Mr Darbinian , took part in the presidential transport summit which was organised last year in Azerbaijan with the support of the Community .
The Armenian and Azeri Prime Ministers also attended a conference in Brussels in February on the transport of oil and gas .
The Azeri , Armenian and Georgian Presidents have agreed to participate in a summit organised by the German Presidency in Luxembourg on 22 June to mark the entry into force of the partnership and cooperation agreements between the European Union and the Caucasian countries .
The main priority of these agreements is to support democracy and human rights , in line with Parliament 's wishes .
Finally , the Commission notes Parliament 's desire to strengthen the work of the ' democracy ' aspect of the TACIS programme in the region .
However , up until now , it has only received a very limited number of projects from non-governmental organisations .
The Commission therefore believes that the very small number of NGOs established in Armenia and Azerbaijan means that , for the moment at least , it would be premature to increase the resources allocated to this programme .
Thank you , Mr de Silguy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Cuba
B4-0240 / 99 by Mr Bertens and Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-0249 / 99 by Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group ; -B4-0258 / 99 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance ; -B4-0274 / 99 by Mr Linkohr and Mr Cabezón Alonso , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-0298 / 99 by Mr Burenstam Linder and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; -B4-0308 / 99 by Mr Sjöstedt and Mrs Pailler , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; on the situation of human rights in Cuba ;
Colombia
B4-0237 / 99 by Mr Bertens and Mrs Larive , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-0251 / 99 by Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group ; -B4-0273 / 99 by Mrs Miranda de Lage , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-0287 / 99 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-0292 / 99 by Mrs Sornosa Martínez and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; -B4-0296 / 99 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; on human rights violations in Colombia ;
Indonesia / East Timor
B4-0252 / 99 by Mr Janssen van Raay , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group ; -B4-0264 / 99 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-0268 / 99 by Mr Titley , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-0306 / 99 by Mrs McKenna and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -B4-0307 / 99 by Mr Ribeiro and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; on the human rights situation in Indonesia , in particular on the Moluccan Islands and on East Timor ;
Session of the UN Commission on Human Rights
B4-0238 / 99 by Mr Cars and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-0248 / 99 by Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group ; -B4-0266 / 99 by Mr Barros Moura , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; -B4-0281 / 99 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance ; -B4-0291 / 99 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; -B4-0300 / 99 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; -B4-0303 / 99 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; on the EU 's priorities for the 55th Session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights ;
Belarus
B4-0239 / 99 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -B4-0289 / 99 by Mrs Schroedter and Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; on the situation in Belarus ;
Russia
B4-0280 / 99 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance ; -B4-0299 / 99 by Mr Lehne and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; on respect for human rights in Russia .
Cuba
Madam President , the blessing given by the Pope during his visit has simply made Castro more determined than ever to go on with his evil practices , adopting new penal legislation and reimposing the death penalty .
It reminds me of when I was a little Catholic boy and the religious procession came through the village , all the curtains were open as the image of Christ and its two candles went by and things were absolutely still , you could have heard a pin drop .
Then as soon as it had passed , the curtains were shut again and people went back to drinking and beating their wives and committing all manner of sins until the next year .
Castro - and I should know , I lived there for four years - is no good .
He may be all right as an image of the ' last revolutionary ' , but we have had quite enough of all that .
I think it is sad and in fact almost pathetic that we are still trying to get along with this caudillo , another word for dictator .
All he is doing is strengthening the American line on the boycott .
So Europe must not change its policy here .
We must carry on providing support for democratisation and renewal , and this is what our programmes must focus on , rather than some image of Che Guevara .
Now he was a real revolutionary , but unfortunately he died young and , as you know , Castro had a hand in that too .
Our programmes and our political dialogue with Cuba must be actively pursued , and we must make it clear to this caudillo that unlike the Pope we are not to be trifled with .
The people of Cuba deserve democracy and the renewal of their country , even the gullible among them .
Madam President , I am very pleased at what Mr Bertens said .
Despite all the human rights violations and the lack of political freedom in Cuba , Parliament - encouraged by the left-wing parties - has unfortunately always turned a blind eye and has thus allowed the situation to become entrenched .
The dissidents who have put up opposition have never once been honoured with the Sakharov Prize in five years .
It is enough to make you weep , and I think it is a very serious omission on our part .
What is more , our extremely selective approach has not helped the people of Cuba one little bit .
Now , at long last , we have a resolution , albeit one which adopts an extremely mild tone .
It talks about help for constructive dialogue instead of sanctions , which is fine .
But a year or more after the Pope 's visit , when there were such great hopes of improvement , the people of Cuba have less freedom than ever .
The opening-up of the economy has not helped the Cuban workers but party officials and a single Italian and Spanish investor .
It all reminds me of the way things went in the Batista era : prostitution , drinking , rich tourists - these are surely not what you would expect to find in a socialist revolutionary administration ?
As I see it , today 's investors should have to sign contracts with the workers themselves and not with the government , because what happens is that firms investing there hand over all the wages to the government , which then creams off everything it wants and gives a few pence to the workers .
It is scandalous !
No diplomats or journalists were allowed to be present at the trial of the dissidents .
The European Union said it was an oversight , but when the same thing happens in Turkey , the whole of Europe hits the roof .
What I mean is that we take a very selective view .
In the resolution we talk about observing human rights , but really , as Mr Bertens said , a great deal more than that needs to be done .
Never again must Fidel Castro be given the red carpet treatment anywhere in the world .
He should face the same fate as Öcalan or Pinochet : a trial .
Should not the international community be speaking out against the arrival of 300 Cuban troops in Angola and Brazzaville , as reported in the Portuguese newspaper Diario de Noticias ?
They are there to help dictators cling to power and to bring oil and diamond revenue to Cuba .
This House has waited a long time to hold its trial .
The time has now finally come , but from the communication I received from the Cuban ambassador this morning , he clearly thinks it is all nonsense .
I do not .
I hope that our resolution brings hope to those in Cuba who support freedom .
Madam President , last year , just as John Paul II was arriving in Cuba , the radical party was holding a demonstration in Rome against this visit and what it stood for .
Many people criticised this at the time , saying that we needed to have confidence in the process of democratisation , and that the signs of this process were apparently demonstrated by the Pope 's visit .
I think that Christmas was celebrated in Cuba , and that is about all .
When we see that this trial is dealing with the terrible and deplorable crime of having had contacts with the foreign press , we realise that this so-called democratisation is very far from being achieved .
From that point of view , this resolution does not go very far .
We should have affirmed more strongly that while human rights are not fully respected , this dialogue - this attempt to take a few small steps - is doomed to failure .
Madam President , this is not a resolution against the Cuban people .
The text that we are debating today , and which I should like to see approved , is a criticism of the corrupt and incomprehensible way in which the Cuban Government interprets freedoms , such as the freedom of expression , the freedom of assembly and the freedom of association .
If there is no acknowledgement of the right to disagree and the right to political dissent , then there is no freedom .
For this reason , we must condemn the detention , arrest and imprisonment of Cuban dissidents and political opponents simply because they think differently to the current regime .
Political dissent is a right , it can never be interpreted and judged as a crime of sedition or as a crime against national security .
In a free regime , such detentions would not have occurred .
Using the North American embargo as an excuse is too simplistic .
We have condemned - and I have condemned - the attitude of the United States administration as being mistaken , amongst other things . But their attitude cannot be used as a reason for detaining , imprisoning and sentencing all those who do not comply with the dictates of the single party , which in Cuba is the Communist Party .
We fully and unreservedly support Vladimiro Roca , Félix Bonne , Marta Beatriz Roque and René Gómez Manzano , who were detained on 16 July 1997 after having written and distributed a text entitled ' The homeland is for us all ' which went against official government positions .
We feel great solidarity with the Cuban political prisoners who have been imprisoned due to their political beliefs .
I sincerely hope that condemning the Cuban regime in this way will not destroy the fragile framework for dialogue that is still alive between the European Union and Cuba .
The Cuban Government 's mistakes are not the mistakes of the people , they are the mistakes of the ruling party .
Its political positions , its defensiveness and its negative attitude towards anything that involves a cultural , political , economic or social opening up cannot destroy all possible dialogue between Cuba and the European Union . These attitudes must not lead to the Cuban population being condemned , as they are the ones who will suffer the consequences if such dialogue is destroyed .
Madam President , the delegation of which I am chairman , the Delegation for relations with Cuba , has made extraordinary efforts to maintain our ability to hold talks with the Cuban authorities and with Cuban society as a whole .
Even without a cooperation agreement , this House has given its full support to Cuban society , and the European Union is the largest donor of humanitarian aid to Cuba in the world . In this way , the Union is demonstrating its awareness of the problems and shortages Cuba is suffering at this point in its history .
In this same spirit , and as Mr Cabezón Alonso said a moment ago , we have spoken out as often as has been necessary to condemn the extraterritorial effects of the Helms-Burton Act .
And now we also have to speak out to defend human rights and democratic freedoms in Cuba because moderation becomes a vice when it means a lack of commitment .
This House has an irrevocable commitment to freedom that is , and must be , our ethical and aesthetic guiding light .
I have already said in this House - quoting an illustrious colleague of mine - that the future cannot be imposed on individuals or peoples without their support and that there can be no individual dignity unless every man and woman is able to play a part in determining their future as a society .
As a result , this House must show its solidarity with those who are suffering and be firm in its inevitable demands for freedom .
Therefore , my group is once again calling for the release of Vladimiro Roca , Félix Bonne , Marta Beatriz Roque , René Gómez Manzano , Jorge Luis García Pérez and all those who , having been deprived of their freedom , fight in Cuba for their freedom and dignity .
Madam President , there are several hundred political prisoners in Cuba .
Under the Cuban Penal Code , it is possible for opposition politicians to be found guilty of so-called crimes such as lack of respect and hostile propaganda .
Opposition politicians are sent into internal exile within the country , and there are many reports of police brutality .
Altogether , restriction of democratic rights and freedom is extensive in Cuba .
This must be unequivocally condemned , which Parliament has done in its resolution .
Cuba is under intense pressure from the USA , through a long-standing economic blockade and other forms of aggression .
The blockade against Cuba must be lifted if the country is to engage in positive development .
However , the US aggression can never be an excuse for deficiencies in democracy and human rights in the country .
There are many progressive elements in Cuban society , for example a level of social justice which for the region is advanced , and endeavours in the field of education and health care .
But clearly none of these things can compensate for any restriction of the democratic rights of the Cuban people .
The Cuban people are fully entitled to choose a socialist model for their society .
The problem is that they are not allowed to choose , because political pluralism and fundamental democratic rights are lacking .
Madam President , as has already been said , our group is naturally in favour of the respect for and promotion of human rights and freedoms , as well as the right of peoples to determine their future .
Therefore , when a nation such as Cuba has been suffering for so many years due to an embargo that is illegal in international terms and to a relentless pursuit by the United States , we begin to understand the suffocating situation of the Cuban Government . We begin to understand the defensive attitude it must adopt to be able to defend itself against these problems and shortages , particularly now with the Helms-Burton Act , which is also illegal in international terms .
However , we believe it is important to help so that a process promoting human rights can resume , and so that democracy and freedom can be re-established , values that are clearly compatible with socialism .
The European Union can end this American siege and promote this alternative path , a path we believe to be satisfactory .
Integrating its economy and its cultural relations could bring normality to cultural and political life in Cuba . This is largely dependent on us as the United States is not prepared to help in this respect .
I therefore believe that now is the time to make a considerable effort to bring Cuba into the framework of economic , political and cultural relations .
Madam President , Cuba , as we know , is not the United States .
In contrast to the United States , Cuba has guaranteed schooling and free health care , as well as all the achievements that have freed it from its former dependence on the United States .
So why does the Cuban Government imitate one of the most appallingly undemocratic and totalitarian systems ever invented ?
Why on earth do the Cubans not launch a campaign to prove themselves more democratic than the United States by respecting human rights and abolishing the death penalty ?
The Cuban Government has done the exact opposite .
It has added to its list of capital offences .
No democrat or Socialist can approve of that , because it is a gross violation of the most fundamental of all human rights , namely the right to life .
Societies are changing everywhere , and Cuba is no exception .
We should make it unmistakably clear to the Cuban Government and the Cuban people that we are prepared to develop our economic , social and cultural relations with Cuba , and that to this end we need to establish contacts with open-minded , creative and democratic Cubans and their organisations , whether within the ACP framework or on the basis of a bilateral agreement .
In order to accomplish this , we seek dialogue .
We hope that the Cuban leadership will be far-sighted enough to pull together with us in this venture .
Colombia
Madam President , the situation in Colombia is still very worrying , despite the promising reports we received some months ago that President Pastrana had started a new peace offensive .
At the moment , however , it appears that paramilitary groups and as a result the guerrillas too have started carrying out attacks again .
We heard yesterday evening that three Americans have been brutally killed .
When will the warring factions finally realise that there is nothing to be gained from this constant destruction ?
I think the Union must continue to stand up for human rights , but it must do so in cooperation with President Pastrana .
We cannot be indifferent to the way in which the constitutional state of Colombia is being systematically destroyed .
We must try to persuade the United Nations and our own Union to convince others that peace and human rights go hand in hand .
Madam President , I am going to appeal to the Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces and to the insurgent forces because it is neither revolutionary nor heroic to assassinate defenceless voluntary workers , it is neither revolutionary nor heroic to kidnap civilians and it is neither revolutionary nor heroic to demand a ransom for anyone 's life .
Any action taken against unarmed people cannot be considered heroic .
The course of history will not be changed by resorting to using violence against the weak .
The insurgent forces still have a chance of going down in Colombia 's history as a factor in creating peace .
They have received political recognition - including at international level - but we must ask them to respect international humanitarian law . We must ask them to release all kidnapped civilians , some of whom are ill .
Do not harm yourselves even further with such reprehensible actions .
Do not demand justice whilst being unjust yourselves .
We must also talk about the other form of violence : the terror caused by the paramilitaries .
It is easy to shoot those who are defending human rights , to shoot trade unionists or journalists committed to freedom or to shoot women and unarmed farmers . In short , it is easy to shoot anyone who may seem slightly suspicious because they support democracy .
Paramilitary action represents evil , fascism and all the worst aspects of an intolerant and exclusive sociology . It claims to protect whilst killing and eliminating the best people in society .
There is no room for any form of consideration for paramilitary activity , other than its persecution , dismantling and condemnation .
Peace in Colombia will not be easily achieved but it must be done .
The years of violence have affected several generations .
President Pastrana 's offer must have our full support and must have sufficient international economic support so that it can meet the social demands that are really at the root of this violence .
War , Madam President , is much more costly than peace .
Madam President , when President Pastrana took office last year , many of us hoped that the protection of human rights in Colombia would greatly improve .
Unfortunately that seems not to have happened , and so far it does not look as though the President has developed any action plan to increase respect for human rights .
Both the paramilitary forces and the guerilla groups continue to commit crimes .
There is systematic elimination of persons and groups campaigning for human rights in Colombia , for example social workers and trade union activists .
Of course we demand that the archives of the state intelligence service should be searched under international supervision .
These archives contain large amounts of information on persons who are actively campaigning for human rights and democracy in the country .
Clearly , this must not be allowed to continue .
Human rights must be defended and we must do all in our power to defend and support those people in Colombia who are campaigning for these rights .
I therefore expect the Council of Ministers to prepare a very forthright declaration on Colombia for the forthcoming UN meeting in Geneva .
Madam President , kidnappings and murders continue to entrench the culture of violence in Colombia , and how often have we had to say that here !
This time we have the cases of three US citizens whose bodies were discovered and a French geologist who died shortly before he was due to be released by his kidnappers .
We have also repeatedly condemned the crimes committed by paramilitaries in addition to these murders and kidnappings , or even in connection with them .
I must say that it is sometimes difficult for us to understand how President Pastrana can continue his peace talks with the guerrilla organisations in the face of these atrocities , how he can go on negotiating with FARC in particular but also with the other main guerrilla organisation , the ELN .
Such an approach may appear contradictory , but I believe it represents the only way forward , and we therefore vigorously support the President in his efforts to continue the peace negotiations and ultimately to conclude an agreement .
Nevertheless , we can only repeat time and again that human rights will not be respected and protected in the long term unless the rule of law is established .
The European Parliament has also repeatedly stressed its endorsement of the demand made by the Colombian office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights that the safety of human rights activists should be guaranteed .
We believe this is an important issue , and we hope that the Council and the Commission will be helping to make that point to the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva .
We call on the Colombian Government not to relax its efforts to combat violence but to continue them vigorously , because it is our sincere wish that the Colombian people should be freed at long last from this cycle of corruption , murder and violence , that peace should descend on the country and that these horrifying crimes should cease to be associated with the name of Colombia .
Madam President , this is the third time in four months that this Parliament has held a special debate on Colombia and we will continue until the gross violations of human rights come to an end .
We call upon the UN Commission on Human Rights , when it meets in Geneva , to condemn the Colombian Government 's failure both to disband paramilitary groups and to protect human rights defenders , both called for last year .
They have failed ; UNHCR must now act accordingly .
Let us never forget the human cost that this failure represents .
Terry Freitas had spent two years helping the Uwa indigenous people defend their territory from oil exploration by Occidental Petroleum .
He had been followed by people he believed to be paramilitaries and had received a message on his answer-phone : ' back off or die ! ' .
Evidence of complicity by the Colombian armed forces is that the military had forced him to sign a statement absolving them of responsibility for his safety .
Earlier this month , Terry and two colleagues were kidnapped by two hooded men with machine guns and later their bullet-ridden bodies were found dumped across the Venezuelan border - the murder of one 24-year-old who believed in the defence of human rights .
Stop the paramilitaries , end the killings , respect human rights !
Indonesia / East Timor
Madam President , Indonesia is a complex country .
It covers a two-hour time zone and has 13 000 islands , many different races and many different languages .
For 350 years it was governed in a very centralised , colonial way by my country , and even then there were uprisings in Aceh , the Moluccas and Irian Jaya , just as there are now .
After independence , the constitution - the Pancasila - ensured that different races and religions could live freely and safely side by side .
The fall of Suharto and the economic crisis have now , unfortunately , brought all the various differences to the surface , as we are seeing in the clash between Muslims and Christians in the Moluccas .
I very much regret that it should be happening in the Moluccas , because we too abused and repressed the people there , some of whom are now living in the Netherlands .
But Indonesia is on the road to a new era and a new order .
Forty-eight political parties have registered for the elections in June , and they deserve our support .
The resolution calls for a referendum under UN auspices on allowing East Timor the right to self-determination .
Let us hope that this is carried out , and that it goes smoothly .
I would point out that an independent East Timor could well open Pandora 's box and encourage other Indonesian races to demand the same , which would present a major risk for the stability of the Asiatic region as a whole .
This too is something we cannot afford to ignore .
Parliament has adopted some harsh resolutions against Indonesia , but I feel that recently there has been greater scope for constructive support for the steps that are being taken towards democracy , and I welcome this approach .

Madam President , Mrs van Bladel said in a nutshell exactly what I wished to say .
Indonesia 's complexity and the clashes and explosions - both literal and figurative - in the Moluccas and on the island of Ambon in particular have all shown how difficult things are likely to become if we allow the last pillar of strength that we have at the moment , President Habibie , to fall .
The underlying cause of the unrest in the Moluccas lies in the serious political and economic crisis that the country is going through .
It is extremely important that we should try to ensure that democratic elections are held as soon as possible , and we should certainly support them .
This enormous , great and beautiful country - the ' emerald belt ' as it was called in our geography books - must not be allowed to become isolated , and we have to find some way to show it that we are not disowning it but embracing it .
Europe , and in particular the Netherlands , still bears a great responsibility from the past here .
Mr President , this House has repeatedly condemned human rights abuses in many parts of Indonesia over the years and some appalling crimes have taken place in that beautiful country .
This resolution deals firstly with outrages which have been committed more recently on the Moluccan Islands .
Over 200 people have been killed there and their homes and those of others have been destroyed .
Nine thousand troops are deployed there and the people are very badly repressed .
This is taking place at the very time when we would have expected , because of the changes that have taken place in Indonesia , a movement in a different direction .
This resolution again recalls the situation in East Timor , where appalling crimes have been committed .
The forthcoming election provides the opportunity for a change , and it is very important that we should give every support to those people in Indonesia who are trying to achieve a new departure .
We must also press very strongly for the referendum which is being talked about to go ahead to provide the people of East Timor with the right of self-determination .
It is quite appalling that those people have been denied that right .
Over the years a third of the population has been killed .
The European Parliament has pressed persistently throughout those years for changes to take place , and that possibility now exists .
It is therefore extremely important that we should maintain our pressure for change at this particular juncture and I hope that once again we will give unanimous support for this motion .
Mr President , we are prepared to support the efforts to establish democracy in Indonesia .
I believe the entire House and the other EU institutions are also willing to lend material support to a peaceful democratisation process .
However , Indonesia will also have to show that it wants a peaceful process and that it is actively encouraging democracy , and in this respect there are two regions that we consider to be very important .
The first of these is East Timor .
The referendum in East Timor must be organised as quickly as possible ; in actual fact , the independence of East Timor is historically inevitable .
The repression there has to be ended , and Mr Habibie knows that .
I believe we should act quickly to assist in the transition to independence .
Such assistance might , for example , take the form of training for East Timorese administrators in the European Union , in the Member States , with a view to the creation of an administrative infrastructure that would enable East Timor to manage its own affairs .
The second region is the Moluccas , where we must ensure that an end is put to the conflicts which are raging at the present time and which are apparently being encouraged by the police .
On Ambon , we have a situation in which 85 % of the island 's population are Christians .
We must prevent the outbreak of hostilities between religious groups , and in this respect a heavy burden of responsibility falls on the government in Jakarta to demilitarise the population by restraining the police and by using the police force to uphold law and order , rather than to fan the flames of conflict .
If that happens , I believe our only option is to call on the Commission to provide humanitarian aid in these conflict-torn areas and to support the campaign for democracy and the elections , and to do these things as quickly as possible in order to ensure that peace prevails throughout Indonesia .
Applause
UN Commission on human rights
Mr President , some time ago we discussed the Bernard-Reymond report on China .
On that occasion my group , the Liberals , brought up the question of the UN Human Rights Commission .
A majority in the House did not want to discuss this subject and were also against taking it as an urgency .
When will we learn that we need to adopt or discuss resolutions that can genuinely be of some influence in good time ?
The UN Commission meeting in Geneva starts in eleven days ' time - how can we still hope to influence the Council 's priorities in any way now ?
A new ice age has started in China , as everyone knows .
Dissidents are being rounded up in large numbers , Internet users arrested , and there is a crackdown on the formation of new political parties such as the Democratic Party .
The Union must behave honourably here .
Human rights dialogue must carry on as normal , but if it is to be effective , we must also be prepared to bring public , international pressure to bear : the carrot and stick approach .
If this process is to be effective , the Council must itself table a resolution on China , lobby for it actively and stop countries from supporting a ' no action on China ' motion .
When we see how China is using its influence towards Macedonia and is thus undermining the Contact Group 's Balkan policy , I think we are entirely justified in using public pressure on China .
The Chinese will accept this , provided that they are taken seriously .
My group thinks it is a pity that we always have to fight so hard to say what we want to say about China .
But then , money makes the world go round , or at least so we think .
Mr President , I think that the resolution drawn up this time for the UN session is a very good and balanced one .
I think it is very important that we should call for a millennium amnesty for political prisoners and for a ban on the use of children in warfare .
We are right this year not to have a list of countries that are failing to observe human rights , but instead to concentrate solely on China .
In this morning 's Herald Tribune , there was a photo of the Dalai Lama in northern India , five years after the invasion of Tibet .
The point has to be made that the day after the China report was adopted in Parliament , dissidents were being rounded up and missiles were being aimed at Taiwan from southern China .
We have to give China a signal .
Not for ourselves or just to be a thorn in its side , but to guarantee stability in the region , because peace is , and will always be , important .
Mr President , over recent years the European Parliament has established a record on human rights throughout the world of which we can be very proud .
It is , therefore , highly appropriate that we should put forward our priorities for the forthcoming 55th Session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights .
Our motion recognises that poverty is a fundamental obstacle to the realisation of human rights .
Freedom of thought , speech , religion and all other political , religious and civic liberties are absolutely vital .
Economic rights and their close links to other rights must not , however , be overlooked , above all at a time when more than a thousand million people in our world are deprived of adequate food , pure water , proper clothing , reasonable shelter , education and health-care .
The motion before this House calls for coordinated action to fight the scourge of racism and discrimination , which has led , even in recent years , to genocide or massacres like that in Rwanda .
The motion also calls for positive action to end the appalling discrimination against , and exploitation of , women and children .
Everywhere we must work for the liberation of prisoners of conscience , the outlawing of torture and the ill-treatment of prisoners and an end to the barbaric institution of capital punishment , which should be seen to be utterly unacceptable in the world and the civilisation of today .
Therefore , we particularly call on the Council and the Commission to pursue issues raised by human rights resolutions in this Parliament and we hope very much that they will be reflected in the work of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights .
The achievement of full recognition of human rights in every country in the world is a challenge to us in our time .
I believe that by passing this resolution , we shall be reaffirming our intentions of carrying on the struggle to achieve that .
Mr President , I think that this resolution is a good one for two reasons : firstly , because we succeeded in the compromise meeting in eliminating all the demands concerning rights such as the right to housing , the right to work , etcetera , that is , all those rights that cannot be claimed . And we managed to concentrate - quite rightly - on rights that can be claimed by proposing three initiatives to the Council in three different areas .
The first point relates to the universal moratorium on executions .
In this respect , we are calling for this session in Geneva to be the last at which a resolution is passed on the moratorium , and for this year 's General Assembly to vote for the universal abolition of the death penalty .
The second point involves taking an initiative in favour of the ratification of the international court for war crimes , genocide and crimes against humanity .
Finally , the third point relates to China , which was mentioned by Mr Bertens and Mrs van Bladel .
We do not hold out a great deal of hope .
The policy on the People 's Republic of China has been a disastrous policy not only for Mr Brittan , but also for Mr Jospin , Mr Dalema , Mr Schröder and many others .

It is a policy that is slowly edging towards despair .
Mrs van Bladel spoke about Tibet .
On this matter , I am afraid that we must recognise that as in Kosovo , there are limits to the capacity for suffering and acceptance both of the Tibetan people and of all the people of China , and that we will once again arrive too late .
We are obviously calling on the Council quite seriously to reverse this policy and to finally place democracy and human rights at the heart of its concerns .
Mr President , we are debating an extraordinarily detailed resolution and we will vote on it later . I believe that it is perhaps one of the best texts on human rights that we have ever held in our hands in this Parliament .
But I believe that we now have to put to the Council something that is even more important than the very relevant issues in this resolution , such as the ' Millennium Amnesty ' , promoting the defence of those defending human rights - please forgive the repetition - making the rights of women and children a priority , abolishing the death penalty and pressing for the International Criminal Court to finally become a reality . We must ask that our involvement as the European Union and as member countries in the 55th Session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights serves mainly to defend two principles : the universality and the indivisibility of human rights .
We have just discussed some related issues .
For example , we cannot allow a government such as the Cuban Government to impose certain conditions on the respect for human rights , such as the lifting of the present embargo by the United States . We also cannot allow , for instance , the dictator in Equatorial Guinea to tell us that the human rights tradition in his country is different to the tradition here in Europe .
As a result , I believe that it is vital to defend those principles .
And in this era of globalisation , indivisibility also means linking political rights to social and economic rights .
Mr President , I cannot but endorse the words of my colleagues here .
It is utterly impossible for me to contradict anything that has been said on this subject ; what we really need to do today is to make a very forceful appeal to the Commission and the Council , not least in view of this meeting in Geneva .
The fact is that , every year when this meeting comes round , it carries the hopes of people around the globe who want to hear our Member States loudly and clearly denouncing violations of human rights .
We therefore call on the Commission and the Council - especially the Commission , since it also serves as a coordinator for the Member States - to put our message across in no uncertain terms .
A great many countries have featured in the resolutions of the European Parliament in recent months .
Some of them have repeatedly been the subject of resolutions . Colombia , which featured again today , is one example .
But I should also like to list a few others , such as Afghanistan , Algeria , Burma , Burundi , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Iran , Iraq , Kosovo , Rwanda , the Sudan and Turkey , although I am aware that Kosovo is not a country but nevertheless a major problem .
The reason why we have not included this list in the resolution is that the names of far too many other countries occurred to us , and we could not list them all .
China , however , is mentioned .
I cannot argue with that .
I should also have liked to see China on the agenda for Geneva , because we know that this touches a raw nerve with the Chinese and elicits a crystal-clear response .
We take that response very seriously too .
If the Chinese Government is serious about its dialogue with the European Union , it must not follow up these meetings with more waves of arrests , not to mention its position on the Tibetan question .
Other catchwords we should like to mention include repression and trafficking in women , child soldiers , religious intolerance and the death penalty .
Let me say once again to the Commission and the Council that we earnestly beg you to take firm action and to ensure that our Member States ' diplomatic scruples do not cause them to dash the hopes of the watching world .
We have a huge responsibility here , and we want the Commission to make it clear that it demands compliance with democracy and human rights clauses .
Then the European Union would truly be setting an example .
Applause
Mr President , there are numerous indications that the history of human rights has entered a new era .
Immediately after the end of the Second World War , they were essentially a political manifesto .
Now , however , they have become a legal reality , and this , of course , gives rise to an entirely new set of problems .
We are discovering new aspects of human rights , the social dimension , and it has become apparent that the human dignity and human rights of women and children are particularly at risk .
We see the need to abolish the death penalty worldwide , we see the legal reality of human rights in the form of the new international court , and we appeal to the Council and the Commission to do everything in their power to ensure that progress is made in ratifying the constitution of the International Court of Human Rights .
But there is also a great danger that , precisely because human rights are now a legal reality , they will be ground down in the mills of foreign policy interests .
What can be done to prevent that ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the European Union has a very , very important role to play in the transformation of foreign and security policy in the traditional sense into a ' peace policy ' , in other words a coordinated political approach that is governed by the overriding aim of establishing and preserving peace .
You all know how often Members of this House have called for a mechanism through which the European Union can speak with one voice so that this transformation can be effected .
This Parliament can already speak with one voice , as today 's debate has shown , and it should use that voice to ensure that respect for human rights , which is now enshrined in international law , is enforced .
I therefore wish to re-emphasise what previous speakers have said and to appeal to the Council and the Commission to assist in promoting the achievement of this aim .
Belarus
Mr President , the situation in Belarus is still very worrying .
President Lukashenko is still a dictator and is blocking any form of normal political and economic development .
The Union must support what opposition parties there are and must try to establish dialogue .
This seems about as likely as snow in summer , but the recent resolution of the ' embassy conflict ' could indicate that President Lukashenko is beginning to realise that international isolation is not in his interest , and hopefully this will encourage him to make certain concessions .
If this happens , the Union must be prepared to provide assistance to support the process .
A dogmatic approach is not what is needed here .
We need to do everything we can to solve problems and improve the lives of the people .
We have had a whole series of dictators under review this afternoon , but President Lukashenko is the one nearest to us , and this may be our chance to convince him that he is a dictator and that he needs to change his ways .
Mr President , Belarus will soon be one of our neighbouring countries .
However , the situation there , Mr Bertens , is still marked by the absence of democracy .
Perhaps that does not apply to the embassy , but it applies to the population there , and all attempts by the opposition to re-establish fair interaction among the forces of democracy by peaceful and democratic means have been thwarted by the dictatorial rule of President Lukashenko , who simply keeps issuing decrees that criminalise opposition activities .
But the opposition MPs are not criminals .
That is the problem .
By criminalising their activities , Mr Lukashenko is prohibiting fair play , a prohibition that even extends to the forthcoming local elections .
That is why the opposition has refused to take part in these elections - not because it is against democracy , but because it insists that there should at least be a minimum catalogue of fair conditions .
One of these is freedom of the press .
It is truly calamitous that the Belarus people do not even have the opportunity to find out about alternatives to President Lukashenko , because he uses the press to such a great extent as an instrument of power , and I know that situation from personal experience .
That is why we must make every effort to ensure that changes are made in Belarus and in particular that freedom of the press is restored , because that is one of the main prerequisites of free elections and the democratic process .
In spite of everything , the Belarus people continue to yearn for democracy and personal freedom , which is why we are called upon to ensure that the agreement between the Council , the Commission and Parliament is upheld , and above all that it is implemented in such a way as to help that nation to satisfy its longing for democracy and does not subordinate this purpose to economic interests .
Mr President , both of the previous speakers have highlighted the critical points .
Allow me to add a little to their comments .
We have tabled a joint resolution , and we are reaffirming that we want to welcome Belarus into the democratic world and that it is our wish that Belarus should be part of that world .
But the latest spate of arrests has naturally raised new difficulties and new problems , and as has so often been the case in Belarus , one step forward towards democracy has been followed by two steps back .
The President is now dreaming of a pan-Slavic union , and I can only hope that Russia does not seize upon that dream and that the Ukraine remains aloof and does not jump on the bandwagon either , otherwise the results would be devastating for all of us .
I must say , however , that the argument which is currently raging over the elections announced by the opposition for 16 May 1999 will certainly have devastating effects .
As my colleague Mrs Schroedter has already indicated , the European Union would do well to follow this process very carefully and to lend all the support it possibly can .
I am thinking here in particular of the assistance that the OSCE will need .
This also means , Commissioner , that financial support is required .
I know that Ambassador Wiek has approached the Commission to ask for funding so that the proper training can be guaranteed for those involved in the organisation of the forthcoming elections , and I ask you to look at the relevant documentation again and to do everything we in the European Union can to support this process ; let us not use bureaucratic difficulties as an excuse for not delivering the necessary funds .
The situation this year is exceptionally critical .
The economic situation is unstable , the political situation is extremely unstable and as future neighbours , as my colleague rightly pointed out , we are called upon to do everything we can to help Belarus to find a decent path that will lead it to democracy .
Mr President , I am delighted to be able to follow Mrs Mann , because her fine words express what I also intended to emphasise .
First of all , it is a fact that the people of Belarus are a very likeable people and also have cultural links with us somewhere along the line .
Secondly , Belarus perhaps offers the best evidence of the destructive nature of the regime which ruled that part of the world for 40 years .
When we criticise President Lukashenko here , we must not forget what school he was trained in and the education he received there .
Somehow we must even find it in ourselves to sympathise to a certain extent with this man , for he was led in this direction , and most of his wrath has so far been vented on foreigners .
I believe that Mrs Mann was right when she said we must do everything we can to assist the Belarus people and guide them slowly but surely to the path that leads to freedom and democracy , the path which I am certain they instinctively wish to follow .
Anyone who knows these people will appreciate that they need to be helped if they are to progress gradually towards those goals .
Kicking them in the shins , so to speak , will not induce them to move in that direction .
On the contrary , we must make every effort to form a peaceable and fruitful relationship with Belarus , quite irrespective of the fact that Belarus will continue to be of vital importance to us in the future , since we shall be sharing a common border .
We need only look at the map to realise how vitally important it will be for all of us , especially our Baltic friends , which is why we must do everything we can to guide Belarus , one step at a time , back into the fold of the civilised and democratic nations .
Russia
Mr President , Russia is never out of the headlines .
These usually tell of economic problems , the effects of which are reverberating through Europe .
Far less loudly heralded but no less intractable are certain other problems we hear about in Russia , problems that do not sit well with a country which has been campaigning very vigorously for membership of the Council of Europe , since they relate to actions which are incompatible with the Council of Europe 's Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and with the provisions of the partnership agreement with the European Union .
Only this week , in what might almost be termed a live commentary , a delegation from the Congress of European Jews confirmed some of the facts from this list , for example the gradual resurgence of anti-Semitism , which has some political support , especially from the Communists .
Our resolution covers various other areas under the same heading , areas which cause us grave concern .
These are increased religious intolerance , the treatment of conscientious objectors and the lengthy delays in enacting legislation on this matter and the grim conditions in the armed forces , which led in 1998 to more than 1 000 suicides and unexplained deaths . It is not only courageous mothers in Russia who are providing this information .
All of these , I am sorry to say , are vestiges of the Soviet empire that have not been swept away .
Our resolution should be understood as an expression of concern , a message of concern that we wish to send with our colleagues who are travelling to Moscow in the coming week for talks with representatives of the Duma and the authorities .
We in the European Union are especially anxious that Russia should be a strong partner , a country where democracy and the rule of law prevail .
That is absolutely imperative for this Europe of ours , because it would create solid common foundations for a peaceful and free Europe in the next century .
This is precisely how we want our message to be understood .
It undoubtedly expresses criticism , but it is intended to be constructive and to show the depth of our commitment to helping to improve conditions in Russia .
Mr President , as Mrs Lenz said , this resolution speaks of anti-Semitism , and it does not condemn comments made by just anyone , but the views of Mr Zuganov , who is , in fact , the chairman of the Russian Communist Party , the main party in the Duma .
I think that our delegation that is to visit Moscow shortly should remember this and should ensure that the people there realise that the European Parliament knows about these statements and is fully aware of their seriousness .
Another issue is conscientious objection .
The European Parliament is somewhat concerned about the delays on the part of the Duma , which is again under the control of Mr Zuganov 's party , the Communist Party , and which for four years has systematically blocked the adoption of a law on conscientious objection , a law which is nevertheless provided for in the Russian constitution .
Along with colleagues in my party , the Transnational Radical Party , in Russia , we are trying to get past this deadlock by launching a campaign , which I think Parliament should support , to bring an end to military conscription and to establish a professional army in the country , which would be a significant step in the right direction .
Mr President , I believe we are at one in our criticism of the situation in Russia with regard to human rights and anti-Semitism .
On the other hand , Mrs Lenz , I would not oversimplify matters by blaming it all on the Soviet empire .
After all , the Soviet era was not exactly preceded by a Golden Age of democracy and respect for human rights .
Repression , regrettably , has a long tradition in Russia and was to assume appalling and criminal dimensions during the Soviet era , especially under Stalin .
I can subscribe to the criticism of all political forces in Russia , including the Communist Party , which is unfortunately blocking progress on respect for human rights and bears its share of responsibility for the regrettable resurgence of anti-Semitism .
In view of the heinous crimes that have been committed by anti-Semitic regimes , there can be no tolerance on this point .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists therefore backs the delegation in its mission to convey this message in very clear terms during the forthcoming visit to Russia .
Mr President , when we ratified the partnership and cooperation agreement with Russia , we criticised the fact that the human rights situation in Russia did not meet the criteria laid down in the human rights clause of the agreement , to which Commissioner van den Broek replied that the agreement provided an excellent basis for changing that situation .
That , however , was three years ago , and nothing has changed !
Conditions in Russian prisons do not accord with international standards , and nothing is being done to rectify that situation .
No progress is being made in the provision of alternatives to military service .
The maltreatment and humiliation of young people in the Russian army is driving many of them to suicide .
May I therefore ask the Commission to specify where it has intervened on the basis of the agreement .
Where has it applied pressure on the basis of the agreement ?
When did it intervene during the WTO negotiations to remind the delegates that human rights were a priority issue ?
I expect answers to those questions now !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am going to answer point by point , as is the custom with human rights issues .
I will therefore begin with Cuba .
The Commission shares Parliament 's concerns regarding the development of the human rights situation in Cuba , and it is concerned about the adoption of a reform of the criminal code which considerably reinforces the repressive nature of the legislation .
The Commission is also worried about the outcome of the trial of four dissidents .
In consultation with the Member States , it will very shortly consider what position should be adopted in order to respond to these attacks on human rights .
Nevertheless , the Commission will continue with firm but vigilant dialogue with the Cuban authorities .
The Community cooperation policy , which - I would remind you - is a European policy is governed by the principles established in the common position of 8 December , which , as far as I am aware , is revised with each new presidency .
This policy is aimed at encouraging a peaceful transition to democracy , promoting human rights and supporting the economic development of the island .
In this respect , the activities funded by the Community that are planned for the 1999-2000 period mainly involve food aid , support for economic reforms and the development of civil society .
Finally , at the end of June 1998 , the European Union granted Cuba observer status in the negotiations between the European Union and the ACP countries .
That is also dialogue .
Full and complete participation in those negotiations , including Cuba 's accession to the future convention , depends on it making substantial progress in terms of human rights , the rule of law , what is known as ' good governance ' in English , and political freedoms .
With regard to the second issue , Colombia , the Commission entirely shares Parliament 's concerns about the development of the situation in the country .
The Commission is particularly concerned about the repeated violations of human rights committed in recent years by the guerillas and paramilitary forces .
Above all , it regrets the breakdown of the peace negotiations between the government and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia , the FARC .
More than a thousand political murders are committed each year .
Over 300 people have been kidnapped and are still being held , including around 20 foreigners .
With regard to the case of the four members of the Colombian NGO , the IPC , Instituto popular de la capacitación , who were abducted by a paramilitary organisation , the AUC , the European troika approached the Colombian Vice-President and Mr Lemus , who is responsible for human rights , to demand their release , which has since taken place .
The Commission fully shares Parliament 's desire to see dialogue swiftly resumed between the guerrillas and Mr Pastrana 's government .
The European Union gave its support to the peace process in a declaration on 8 January .
A meeting between the government and the opposing armed movements is planned for 24 April .
Support for actions to promote human rights and help with the implementation of judicial reforms are a priority of the Commission in its work to help Colombia .
I must remind you , or perhaps inform you , of the figures : in 1998 , the Commission set aside EUR 17 million for NGOs , along with EUR 2 million for human rights and EUR 12 million for ECHO to help displaced persons .
With regard to Indonesia , the Commission strongly condemns the violent and murderous events that are currently setting Muslims and Christians against each other in some parts of the Moluccan Islands .
The Commission supports the steps that have been taken on behalf of the Union to inform the Indonesian authorities of Europe 's concerns about the development of inter-ethnic tension .
In particular , the Union has asked the Indonesian authorities to ensure that the police forces act with greater restraint in Ambon , where there were several deaths in January as a result of repression .
The Commission is monitoring the development of the situation as closely as possible .
The European Community Humanitarian Office , ECHO , sent a representative to the area who is working in close cooperation with the Commission representatives in Jakarta and the NGOs present in the region .
Through ECHO , the Commission is preparing to provide aid of around EUR 1 million for the people of the two communities that are victims of the conflict .
The implementation of this decision will be entrusted to the European NGOs present in Indonesia , in cooperation with the World Food Programme .
This will involve food as well as health and medical aid .
It will also provide basic necessities for the displaced people living in shelters .
The fact that elections are being held in June is also an important factor in resolving the current tensions between the communities .
The Commission will support them , while liaising with international organisations and other donors present in the area .
A programme worth EUR 7 million is currently being prepared for this purpose .
With regard to East Timor , which many of you mentioned , the Commission hopes that the discussions that are taking place under the auspices of the Secretariat of the United Nations will allow the people of East Timor to be consulted on the future of the region .
The Commission shares the concerns expressed by Parliament , which have just been repeated here , about the military situation and the arming of civilian militias .
This could endanger a peace process which is still fragile .
The Commission supports the conclusions of the Vienna European Council , which call for the disarmament and dissolution of these militias and which also ask that a United Nations mission be sent to the area in order to ease the tension .
The fourth issue is the United Nations Commission on Human Rights .
You are aware that the preparation of work for the Commission on Human Rights is carried out by the Council 's ' Human Rights ' group .
This group has already met several times for this purpose since the beginning of the year .
During the annual session of the Commission on Human Rights , which , I would remind you , lasts six weeks , experts from the Union meet every day in order to decide on the speeches to made by the presidency , on behalf of the Union , and the motions for resolutions to be presented by the Union .
The Commission participates systematically and actively in the work of the ' Human Rights ' group , and in all the meetings of experts in Geneva .
I can reassure Mrs Lenz on this point .
Nevertheless , I have taken careful note of comments that have been made .
I am thinking , in particular , of what Mr Ullman said concerning the Commission 's attitude .
I can assure you that the Commission is doing everything necessary , and will do all in its power , to convey your views to the Council .
You know , as I do , that it is the Commission 's job to take a position on the wishes expressed by Parliament in its motions for resolutions .
More specifically , regarding China , which many of you mentioned , all the Member States of the European Union decided in 1998 not to table a resolution condemning the country .
On 22 March , the Foreign Affairs Council will decide what stance the Union will take in Geneva in 1999 .
For this purpose , your resolution will be a useful source of information in those debates .
The fifth issue relates to Belarus .
The Commission is extremely concerned by the recent deterioration of the situation in Belarus .
In economic terms , the population has become poorer , a situation of hyperinflation has developed and serious social tensions have emerged .
In political terms , the disagreement over the application of the constitution has led to a deterioration in terms of fundamental liberties and has resulted in the arrests of several opponents .
The presidential decree adopted in January , which means that the activities of political parties and associations must be authorised by the administration , is undoubtedly a sign that the regime is becoming tougher .
The Commission is sincerely asking the Belarus authorities to establish an open , constructive , public and democratic dialogue with the people and with the opposition with a view to resolving the economic and constitutional problems affecting the country , and to make a real effort to move towards democracy .
In this respect , the Commission fully supports the work of the OSCE towards restoring the democratic operation of the institutions .
The Commission is closely following the development of the situation with regard to human rights and fundamental liberties .
Mr von Habsburg , I can assure you that we aim to support the Belarusian people in this process .
I can also reassure Mrs Erika Mann that we are considering how the Commission can play a useful role in the electoral process .
Finally , the last issue relates to Russia .
The Commission is concerned about the frequent anti-Semitic comments made by certain political figures who are members of the Duma .
On behalf of the European Union , the German Presidency has brought this issue to the attention of the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs and the leaders of the Communist Party and made them aware of its concerns .
The European Union has taken measures to promote tolerance and the advent of a civil society in Russia .
Notably , under the TACIS programme , it is currently involved in work to promote democracy which is aimed at creating an environment that will eradicate such demonstrations of racial hatred .
The Commission will continue to monitor the situation very closely and hopes that these anti-Semitic outbursts from another age on the part of certain members of the Russian Parliament will end .
With regard to human rights , and the death penalty in particular , you know that the Commission shares the European Parliament 's concerns on this issue .
In this respect , it has been involved in an approach made to the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs by the troika to express its concerns about the possible re-introduction of the death penalty .
The Minister assured us that Russia intended to comply with the obligations arising from its entry to the Council of Europe , which , I would remind you , includes a moratorium on the death penalty .
Mrs Schroedter mentioned a problem concerning specific examples .
I think that in my perhaps general answer , I have answered these more specific questions .
Mr President , may I say to Commissioner de Silguy that I naturally appreciated that it would be difficult for him to answer specific questions which lay beyond his own area of responsibility .
Let me therefore request , Commissioner , that you submit these questions to Mr van den Broek and ask him to provide me with a written reply to them .
You have my word , I will do it this evening .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , a veto by one of the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council has blocked the extension of the mandate of the UN preventive deployment force in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia because that country has entered into diplomatic relations with Taiwan .
That is extremely serious , particularly bearing in mind the institutions to which this House belongs and the nature of the United Nations .
In both cases , in fact , we are dealing with organisations designed to overcome the kind of nationalistic tendencies which underlie the veto by the People 's Republic of China .
And yet , the United Nations ' force has played an important part in keeping the peace , not least by preventing the threat of the conflict in Kosovo spilling over into Macedonia .
The Community institutions must therefore take resolute action to get the veto lifted .
But at the same time , it is essential that we have , as of now , the ability to make a virtue of a vice : if the United Nations Security Council fails to take a positive decision , the European Union and its Member States would have to shoulder the responsibilities hitherto exercised by UNPREDEP , in conjunction with the other institutions , primarily NATO and the Western European Union .
That could act as an important incentive , albeit in very sad circumstances , encouraging us to put into effect the foreign and security policy that everyone claims to believe in , but which is all too rarely put into practice .
Mr President , I regret the fact that this resolution limits itself to stating the obvious , as it is clear that neither the United States nor the European Union can give in to the veto , to the attempts of the People 's Republic of China to blackmail us over the presence of troops to guarantee peace and security in Macedonia .
It is therefore clear that solutions will have to be found .
These are already being considered with a view to replacing , if necessary , the current formula with another formula that will not be met by a Chinese veto .
I also regret the fact that , since everyone is talking about stability in Macedonia , we have not dealt with the real issue of stability in Macedonia , in other words , its economic development , its democratic development and , above all , its swift entry into the European Union .
In this respect , the European Union is absent , which I find absolutely scandalous , and the Commission has set out an incomprehensible policy .
I hope that Mr de Silguy will also be able to mention this matter to his colleague Mr van den Broek this evening .
The Union 's funds to Macedonia are being reduced by ECU 3 million .
Given the difficulties that Macedonia is facing , this is truly staggering .
Moreover , everything has been done , and is still being done , to convince the Macedonian authorities that they will only be able to ask to join the European Union after they have ratified the cooperation agreement and the association agreement .
They will therefore have to wait for decades before they can present a request for accession .
This is wrong from both a legal and political point of view .
Therefore , we have launched a campaign directed at Mr Georgievski asking him to present a request for accession to the European Union immediately .
Here is a postcard with a lovely picture of the flag of the European Union , and , in the middle of that flag , the Macedonian flag , so that , in the coming months , Macedonia may be an official candidate for membership of the European Union .
Mr President , perhaps not everyone will agree with me when I say that Macedonia , or FYROM , ought surely to have proceeded somewhat more adroitly and made a more judicious choice of tactics in its policy on diplomatic recognition , but that does not in any way justify the Chinese veto in the UN Security Council .
In fact , I cannot recall any recent use of the veto in the Security Council by a major power , be it Russia or , as in many cases , the United States , which was actually justified , but that is another matter , and there is little to be gained by debating it here .
I am entirely in favour of the aim of the resolution that the mandate of UNPREDEP should be extended if at all possible and that provision should be made for military protection of the Macedonian borders , which will not only afford protection to Macedonia itself but will also protect the observers in Kosovo .
As far as our aid to Macedonia is concerned , I should like to make one thing clear : we can probably never help enough , but the crux of the matter is that our aid should be used effectively , that the country itself should have the capacity to absorb the aid , and it is up to the government , of course , to create that capacity .
There have undoubtedly been some missed opportunities in the past .
The new government is doing its best on issues ranging from the Albanian question - on which , I am glad to say , some progress has been made - to the economic and social situation .
But , however much political continuity can be guaranteed , we should not raise any false hopes .
Whether Macedonia manages to find its way to Europe will depend primarily on its own efforts , and the way to Europe in the sense of the European Union will naturally be a long one , whenever the membership application may be submitted .
Mr President , the Green Group also considers China 's veto of the extension of UNPREDEP 's mandate in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia totally unacceptable , not least because it amounts to a kind of retaliation .
But this also reveals all the limitations of the Security Council in its current form and therefore the need for Europe , as a whole , to seek to change the current UN system .
However , given that the problems of Macedonia are real ones - and we have only to remember what is happening next door to that region , in Kosovo , to appreciate the importance of continuing with the UNPREDEP mandate - it is clear that we Greens also believe that , were it to prove necessary , the European Union should shoulder its own responsibilities .
The Green Group also considers it appropriate to extend the debate on Macedonia to Bosnia-Herzegovina , to deal with the problem of the Brcko corridor , and it has therefore tabled a number of amendments to that effect .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the only republic of the former Yugoslavia to survive the demise of that state more or less without bloodshed and to achieve statehood without warfare was Macedonia .
There is absolutely no doubt that our preventive measures were instrumental in this .
We were there in the territory of the former Yugoslavia to prevent trouble , and we deployed UN forces on the border between Serbia and Macedonia - and now these preventive measures have been scrapped .
It is incomprehensible to me that a Chinese veto in the Security Council should jeopardise the safety of Macedonia .
There is surely something wrong if it is possible to veto preventive measures when they have finally been implemented and , what is more , to take such action for quite transparent reasons which could effectively be described as revenge for poor little Macedonia having had the temerity to recognise Taiwan .
We can all well imagine why it did so .
It hoped that recognition would bring it a great deal of investment and financial aid , which of course it could never obtain from China .
As you know , China and Russia have often used their veto in the Security Council to prevent us from providing military assistance to people and nations that are subject to persecution and aggression , as has been happening for a year and a half in Kosovo , and as was the case in Bosnia for a number of years .
Something is rotten in this UN Charter .
It ought to be designed in such a way that preventive measures , at least , cannot be vetoed , and it should naturally allow intervention to thwart the plans of a dictator and criminal , thereby protecting people and nations from such criminals , as in Bosnia and Kosovo .
In view of the crisis in the neighbouring country , in Kosovo , there is a real need to avoid any instability in Macedonia .
The UN forces known as UNPREDEP have helped to do that .
They have not only contributed by their presence but have also , as I discovered in my own conversations , helped to bring together the Albanian minority and the Macedonians in special discussion forums on specific subjects in order to promote harmony between the two ethnic communities .
Until the Security Council can finally decide to renew the UNPREDEP mandate , to which end we have included a special appeal to China in our resolution , the NATO forces deployed along the border to protect the OSCE observers in Kosovo will have to perform that function too in order to prevent insecurity from spilling over into Macedonia at the very time when the country is developing fruitful cooperation among the peoples within its territory .
I should also like to endorse the view of Mr Dupuis that we in the European Union should support these extremely promising steps towards fruitful cooperation by forging additional links with Macedonia , including the provision of financial aid .
The Macedonians have earned it .
Mr President , a few days ago , the UNPREDEP forces were actually withdrawn on the basis of a veto by the People 's Republic of China .
That has thrust us very suddenly into an extremely dangerous situation , because the situation was relatively stable until then .
I myself have been in Macedonia several times , and I know what these UNPREDEP forces on the border have achieved and how they have enabled the Macedonian Government , which is indeed of high quality , to launch a process of development that would have stood up to close scrutiny .
The Macedonians were criticised because they recognised Taiwan , but there is one thing we must not forget .
The nation we are discussing lives in indescribably wretched conditions , for which the border conflicts , incidentally , must take much of the blame .
And of course we must remember that the Greek blockade in the south and the Serbian blockade in the north have stifled economic growth , since the major trade routes all ran from north to south .
We must also recognise that sizeable loans have now been secured from Taiwan , because none could be expected from other sources .
A government simply cannot be criticised for adopting such a course of action .
That is why we must reflect on how we can guarantee Macedonian security again with forces from Europe , and in that context , I can only recommend that you look at the past .
It is time we began to take our lead from the Organisation of African Unity .
They more or less sort out their own affairs .
We always ask the United Nations , instead of simply saying ' Europe for the Europeans ! '
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the past , since 1992 , in fact , UN forces have played an important role in stabilising the Balkans .
Like all the Members who have just spoken , the Commission therefore sincerely regrets the failure to extend the mandate of UN troops in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Following the recognition of Taiwan by the FYROM , China decided , as you know , to exercise its veto in the Security Council against the extension of the mandate of UNPREDEP .
The presidency of the European Union tried to get the authorities in Peking and Skopje to reach a consensus , but these attempts were unsuccessful .
It is unfortunate that a bilateral disagreement should be behind this Security Council decision .
The Commission believes that an international presence is more necessary than ever in this part of the Balkans , following the withdrawal of UNPREDEP .
It is appealing for the participation of the WEU in a Petersberg-type mission in the area .
I apologise to Mr Dupuis for being unable to answer him either with regard to the level of aid or the request for accession .
I had prepared a response to the issue of the breakdown in diplomatic relations , but once again I promise to pass on his question to my colleague Commissioner van den Broek this evening .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following six motions for resolutions :
B4-0241 / 99 by Mr Frischenschlager , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the disastrous avalanches in the Alps ; - B4-0242 / 99 by Mrs Stenzel , Mrs Grossetête , Mr Ebner , Mr Böge and Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , on behalf of the PPE Group , on disastrous avalanches in Austria , France and Italy ; - B4-0255 / 99 by Mrs Leperre-Verrier , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the Alpine avalanches ; - B4-0267 / 99 by Mr Swoboda and Mr Bösch , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the disastrous avalanches in the Alps ; - B4-0277 / 99 by Mr Pasty , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the avalanches in the Alps ; - B4-0304 / 99 by Mr Voggenhuber , on behalf of the V Group , on the disastrous avalanches .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rarely does this House deal with natural disasters , but there is no doubt that the disaster we are discussing today demands all our attention because of its enormity , its unpredictability and its scale .
It also demands our attention because it affects a region , the Alpine region , which should be particularly prized in the process of Community integration .
The Alpine area actually provides a culture that is unitary , broad , clear , specific and in harmony with itself , and which has for centuries been accustomed to being not a barrier but a link between Europe , north and south and east and west .
The national frontiers , which gradually became more rigid during the nineteenth and the first half of the twentieth century , then sought to some extent to break up the Alpine region ; and the same is true of the national legislations which failed to take account of the special nature of the region and the special characteristics of what we might call the culture of the mountains .
That is why the avalanches which have struck various areas of this extremely important part of Europe should serve to draw our attention to these issues , which go far beyond the natural disaster , and stir us into planning for a range of measures - not only short-term and preventive measures , but ones that are designed to tackle this problem and this situation in a comprehensive way .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this resolution on the situation following the avalanche disaster in the Alps is a matter of paramount concern to the Austrian delegation and its leader , Mrs Stenzel .
We are also grateful for the special gesture by the European Parliament in granting our request for a minute 's silence in honour of the Galtür victims .
But we do not merely wish to express our general condolences in today 's resolution .
There is more to it than that .
We have combined our expression of sympathy with a request for concrete financial assistance for the disaster area of Paznauntal in the Tirol and for all the other areas , such as those in Italy and France , which were hit by the avalanches .
We have received support from all the other groups .
This is a sign of solidarity that has been extended to us both inside and outside the House .
The regions that have sustained long-term economic damage are particularly grateful for this solidarity .
I therefore appeal to the Commission to associate itself with this gesture and to make every effort to ensure that help can be given to the stricken areas as quickly as possible .
Europe can demonstrate real solidarity here .
I earnestly beg you to do that .
Mr President , with regard to these avalanches , we must offer support to the victims and their families and pay tribute to the rescue teams and to the local communities . However , the problem that we are faced with today is that of preventing such disasters from re-occurring .
It is true that we should not underestimate the work being done by the European Union , which , through the Interreg programme , is already funding work on mountain safety in cross-border regions .
I am thinking , in particular , of the experiments that have been carried out in the Mont Blanc massif .
Nevertheless , the European Union should take account of the specific nature of mountain regions and increase its aid to the regions that are affected as well as its involvement in preventive measures .
Although it is difficult to define with any certainty where the avalanches are going to strike , it is clear that the equipment used to detect avalanches has proved to be very effective , and mapping of the risk areas should therefore be refined .
I would also like to highlight other factors involved in the prevention of avalanches .
Firstly , given the deterioration of the mountain ecosystem , we should call on the Member States to be more vigilant when granting building permits .
In the same way , the development of mountain sports - both winter and summer sports - should lead to the organisation of genuine multilingual information campaigns in order to give a sense of responsibility to those participating in such sports .
My group has tabled several amendments on these two points .
I hope that you will support them because this is the sine qua non condition to ensure that the mountains are still the area of freedom we love so much , despite the fact that the European Union is not paying enough attention to them .
Mr President , I believe that this debate today is not about political , party-political or personal point-scoring , but rather about a common wish to join together in expressing our solidarity with the victims . Otherwise , Mr Rübig , we should have to ask why , when this matter is so close to Mrs Stenzel 's heart , she is not here in person .
But that is not what this debate is about .
We are debating what we can do to help with resources from the European Union that are available now for the various areas , and we urge the Commission and its staff to do everything in their power to cut through the red tape and ensure that these funds can be injected quickly and used efficiently .
The areas concerned may not be in the poorest regions of this continent , but they are areas which need our solidarity in their present plight .
Of course there is every justification for asking a secondary question : could these disasters have been prevented ?
What is the settlement structure and what is the planning policy in these areas where there may be a risk of avalanches ?
I would not like to claim that building plans and settlement patterns in all our Alpine areas have been designed so as to avoid potential risks .
Many things which are done in the name of tourism or economic interests are not particularly prudent and could certainly have repercussions and lead to disasters , if the worst came to the worst .
Be that as it may , as far as I am aware there is no evidence at all , at least in many of the areas we are discussing today , that human error or political mistakes were at the root of these disasters .
And so it really only remains for me to ask the Commission to cut through the red tape and to help quickly wherever help is needed .
Mr President , firstly , with regard to the distressing subject of avalanches , the Commission wishes to express its distress and to offer its heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims of these events .
In answer to the questions that have just been raised , I would point out that the Union has various tools to help prevent disasters and to deal with their effects .
Firstly , as far as prevention is concerned , the European Union can help the mountain regions , notably through afforestation programmes for agricultural land .
Objective 5b of the ERDF and the Structural Funds also allows us to implement forestry measures .
The Commission 's proposals on the ' rural development ' aspect of Agenda 2000 will further increase the possibilities for aid for afforestation and forestry improvement , if the Council agrees with the Commission 's proposals .
In the context of these proposals , compensatory payments could be made in order to preserve and improve the ecological stability of forests in areas where they have a protective and environmental role that is in the public interest .
Within the framework of the 5b programmes in the Tyrol and Vorarlberg areas , the European Union is cofinancing the improvement of agricultural land , land management measures , planning and advice on the agricultural use of areas that are ecologically sensitive .
In relation to what Mrs Leperre-Verrier just said , the Commission also supports the idea to draw up forestry maps and forestry development plans .
Finally , and still on the issue of mapping , the ERDF can support cartographical studies of the mountainous areas that are at risk within the framework of transnational cooperation programmes .
Initiatives could also be cofinanced by Interreg , especially during its next programming period .
Therefore , the tools do exist , and I can assure you that the Commission will do all in its power and spare no efforts to put those tools to use , especially in areas that are at risk .
Secondly , moving on from prevention to dealing with the effects of avalanches , I would remind you that in 1997 , Parliament blocked heading B4-3400 , which was precisely aimed at providing emergency aid for the victims of disasters .
The budgetary line B4-3300 , which relates to civil protection and environmental emergencies , does not provide for intervention to reconstruct damaged areas through economic aid or emergency aid .
Nevertheless , it is possible to re-focus the existing provisions on measures to re-establish the potential for agricultural and forestry production that was harmed within the existing financial envelopes .
It is also possible to transfer funds between the Länder .
Finally , in the framework of the Community action programme for civil protection , the Commission is prepared to examine - within the limits of its funding capacities - any proposals submitted by national or local authorities to improve their ability to act when disasters occur .
The joint debate is closed
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
That concludes the topical and urgent debate .
The sitting was suspended at 5.20 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m.

VOTES
Mr President , a point of order under Rules 119 and 120 concerning roll-call votes , in which I know you have a special interest .
At this morning 's sitting we had any number of roll-call votes .
We are destined to have more again this evening and Members can look forward to a fairly healthy-sized volume of roll-call results in their pigeonholes tomorrow morning .
Rules 119 and 120 referring to roll-call votes state they shall be recorded in the Minutes .
Rule 133 states that the Minutes shall be distributed to the Members .
I wonder whether , in the interests of economy , efficiency , and certainly of modernisation , you could either rule as President or call for an investigation to see whether the word ' distribution ' could be interpreted to mean ' distributed electronically ' , so that those Members who want to access the full list of recorded votes can do so through the computers or a certain number of copies can be made available to those Members , rather than going through the expensive and wasteful procedure of distributing hundreds of pages to everybody .
Thank you very much for that thought , Mr Evans .
I did in fact send a letter to the President of the European Parliament , and this very afternoon the Conference of Presidents debated the matter .
One of the issues I raised in the letter , which of course will be distributed , is the excessively large number of roll-call votes , which often reach 100 or more . This is of course my own opinion , and does not commit anyone else .
Apart from the waste of time , each of these cost the European taxpayer EUR 300 because , as you know , the results of the votes must be published the following day . They also have to be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities , and that costs a great deal of money .
An initial debate has taken place in the Conference of Presidents but I do not think I should expand on that now , since it is neither the time nor the place for a more general debate .
There is a problem and , of course , we note your recommendation .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at first sight Mr Evans 's proposal to save paper by not distributing the results of the spiralling number of roll-call votes may well appear very tempting .
But let me make another suggestion .
Let us discuss in the relevant committees how we can get back to the original purpose of roll-call voting , which was to enable us to hold a special vote on particular issues of genuine importance .
I believe it is rather pointless to take a roll-call vote on every single phrase .
For that reason , I believe we should be well advised to review this procedure , and then the paper problem would automatically be solved .
Mr Konrad , thank you very much for your comment .
I do not want to broaden the debate .
This is not the time , and we are not prepared for a debate without an opinion .
I think we should stop here so that we can continue with the votes .
Mr President , I should like to draw the attention of the Chair to the fact that under Rule 19 every word spoken by the Chair , even though it might prove superfluous , is nevertheless printed in the full report as well .
That costs paper and trees .
Applause
Mr President , let me take up Mr Konrad 's excellent suggestion at this point and ask the PPE Group to agree to this very sound proposal now and withdraw the flood of roll-call votes which they have requested on this report , so that we can indeed put this good idea into effect .
Mr Rehder , I do not want this debate to continue . It should take place in the political groups , since we need to find out if we can do anything more .
Parliament adopted the legislative resolution
Mr President , I merely wanted to announce some sad news to the House .
The German Federal Minister of Finance , Oskar Lafontaine , has just resigned his posts as finance minister and party chairman .
Applause
Mr President , I wanted to vote in favour of that , but my machine was not working !
Laughter
Mr President , I only wanted to say that it does not really befit the dignity of this House to greet a domestic political decision with applause .
We ought to bear in mind that such a decision is a matter for the Germans , for the German Federal Government . It is not the concern of this House .

Mr Swoboda , I do not want us to continue this discussion , but it goes without saying that the information that was given is of interest to the House , even though Parliament did not ask for it , since Mr Lafontaine is the current President-in-Office of the Council of Finance Ministers .
Mr President , I must nevertheless take the liberty of contradicting Mr Swoboda on that point .
Negotiations are about to take place on the tough conditions presented by the Agriculture Council , and we all know that Mr Lafontaine is President-in-Office in the finance policy sector .
So to that extent , his resignation most definitely affects the European Parliament .
Applause
We have decided to abstain from voting on the Adam report on trans-European networks .
Trans-European networks are , on the face of it , a sensible arrangement which improves both security of supply and competition in the energy market .
However , there is another side to the coin which people should be aware of , namely that the various energy providers cannot supply on equal terms .
Small , environmentally friendly , decentralised combined power and heating stations , which are owned and run by local interests , cannot be expected to supply electricity at the same price as nuclear power stations and large , coal-fired power plants .
Renewable sources of energy are also uncompetitive because the external costs of the large plants are not included in their prices .
There is therefore a risk , as things stand at present , that a healthy , environmentally friendly development in the power supply industry could be destroyed by the trans-European networks .
The June Movement actively supports the development of environmentally friendly forms of energy , and believes that the Member States should have the opportunity to promote renewable energy with all the means at their disposal .
In Kyoto , the European Union committed itself to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 8 % compared to 1990 levels before 2012 .
Given the fact that energy consumption in the Member States is set to increase by 50 % in the next 20 years , we need to make an extra special effort in terms of energy efficiency .
Sufficient resources should therefore be allocated for this purpose .
Our rapporteur is concerned about ' the low budget allocated to SAVE II ' and says that , as a result , ' the programme 's potential is being overestimated . '
In its opinion , the Committee on Budgets takes the same line .
It stresses that the Union 's dependence on energy imports is increasing and goes on to highlight the importance of the SAVE programme , since its objective of saving energy ' will thus reduce this dependency ' .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is of the same opinion .
It states the following : ' The Commission proposal on the promotion of energy efficiency is somewhat disappointing .
The measures it contains are far too weak if the targets set at Kyoto are to be anything more than empty words . '
It is unfortunate that the European Union is not providing itself with the resources needed to achieve its objectives . However , I will support this proposal since , above all , it does at least exist .
But we need the resources to implement the policy .
With this in mind , I would like to highlight another of the conclusions reached by the Committee on Budgets : ' Tax policy can also influence the achievement of these objectives and to this end an agreement should be reached on a common energy and CO2 tax at the first opportunity . '
I am opposed to any form of subsidy for the tobacco industry .
I believe subsidies of this sort cannot be justified and should be stopped completely .
I have therefore cast my vote in accordance with this principle .
I and other British Labour members voted against this report because it recommends increasing subsidies for growing tobacco , not in poor countries in regions totally dependent on growing tobacco , but in four of the richest countries in the European Union .
Tobacco-growing subsidies should be phased out , not increased , with support for growers in Objective 1 and 5b areas to assist change to other products .
Many thousands of European Union citizens die every year and millions suffer years of ill-health due to smoking-related illnesses , discovering too late that the dangers they were warned about in their teens become apparent when they suffer heart attacks and cancer in their 40s , 50s and 60s .
There is absolutely no justification for continuing to use taxpayers ' money to support the growing of tobacco .
Increasing subsidies is completely unacceptable .
Money saved should be diverted into rural development programmes and health promotion programmes .
I am wholly opposed to this report from Mr Trakatellis and the Agriculture Committee , because it wants subsidies for tobacco cultivation to continue in the EU .
I cannot support this , because I do not think that the EU should give money for tobacco cultivation .
On the one hand the support is unreasonably high , and on the other hand tobacco is harmful to health ; tens of thousands of people in the EU countries die every year from tobacco smoking .
At the same time , the EU has programmes encouraging smokers to stop smoking .
This contradictory policy must cease .
One cannot give the tobacco growers 10 billion in support at the same time as spending a few hundred million on programmes to encourage people to stop smoking .
I have instead chosen to support the amendments tabled by Mr Collins and others , calling for the EU 's tobacco support to be phased out and to be discontinued completely after a few years .
I consider this to be both reasonable and possible .
The entire system of support for tobacco must be abolished .
This must take place over a transitional period , however , so that the growers do not suffer economic problems and so that unemployment is not made even worse .
I am voting in favour of the amendments proposed by the Trakatellis report on the regulation on leaf tobacco .
The amendments reaffirm the need to support European tobacco production which , I would like to point out , only represents 23 % of the volume of leaf tobacco consumed by the European processing industry .
The battle against smoking , which , in my view , is essential , should not involve the reduction or abolition of this production , as some of my colleagues have suggested .
It would be immediately replaced by production from countries outside the European Union , which already account for 95 % of world tobacco production .
Moreover , this report proposes a greater increase in premiums .
This is doubly justified , firstly , because of the losses that resulted from the withdrawal of the green ecu , for which there is no compensation as it is below 1.98 % - which represents a loss of ECU 1 million for French producers - and secondly , because of the losses suffered over the years when subsidies were not increased to account for inflation .
The Members belonging to the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations are aware of the importance of tobacco production for the economy of many rural regions .
This production requires a considerable workforce and allows many jobs to be preserved on relatively small farms .
We are therefore opposed to the amendments proposed by the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , which seek to eventually abolish the aid granted to the tobacco production industry .
We are all aware of the European Union 's low level of self-sufficiency : it only provides 20 % of its own needs , which means that any reduction in aid will lead to a decline in European production to the benefit of tobacco imports from third countries , especially the United States .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations voted in favour of Amendment No 5 , which provides for full compensation for producers for the negative effects of currency conversions in the transition from the ecu to the euro .
In France , for example , we know that compensation aid and official prices have fallen by 1.9 % for all farmers in the transition to the euro .
This provision obviously requires additional budgetary resources but it preserves the principle of equality .
We regret that , although their income decreased during the 1997-1998 season , farmers were not treated fairly : the challenge of the single currency was more important to some people .
Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 9 aim to transfer the guarantee thresholds from group III ( dark tobacco ) to group II ( Burley ) and group I ( Virginia ) .
Although this transfer does not affect the budget , it encourages production to move towards quality tobacco .
The level of nicotine in dark tobacco , in particular , is higher than that of the other types of tobacco which would benefit from the transfer .
To conclude , I would also like to make a stand against the principle of gradually reducing agricultural aid , as proposed by the Commission on the basis of a French initiative .
This phased reduction would represent 3 % per year as from 2002 .
Taking account of the depreciation of the currency , that would mean that official prices and compensation aid would decrease by around 5 % every year .
Initially , the lowest performing producers will be forced to stop producing and the level of European production will therefore fall .
A uniform phased reduction of 3 % will primarily penalise the sectors of production which receive the most aid , such as tobacco growing .
It is a mistake to think that our producers ' productivity gains could compensate for this decrease in compensation aid .
The European Union must react vigorously and oppose the arrogance of the United States of America , which has unilaterally announced that , as of the beginning of March , it will be imposing sanctions ( 100 % customs duties ) on a whole list of European products , even though the final decision of the WTO 's banana panel has yet to be announced .
By already imposing 100 % customs duties on imports , the USA is actively limiting the import of products , threatening the fragile economies of the less favoured countries and regions of the Union .
Europe must stop kow-towing to the USA .
We must have a trading policy commensurate with the European Union 's importance in the world .
That is why we are calling on the Commission to use every means at its disposal to oblige the USA to comply with WTO rules .
I am voting in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the US imposition of sanctions against EU companies as a consequence of the banana dispute .
I completely condemn the US 's unilateral action and its failure to wait for the decision of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) panel on 12 April 1999 .
The US action will cost the EU euro 450m .
It will throw thousands out of work , devastating and blighting the future of all those families and communities in the interests of American multinationals , who appear to buy their influence through donations to American politicians , who are waging an economic war against some of the poorest communities in the Caribbean .
I ask President Clinton and the US Administration to think again and wait for the WTO to rule .
Mr President , given the political balance in this Parliament , Mr Colajanni 's report was , in its initial version , undoubtedly the lesser of all the evils that could have come out of Parliament on the subject .
I did not , however , vote in favour of the report , as I think that it has unfortunately been distorted by certain amendments .
This does not make it any less interesting , as it is a very good example of the contradictions of European policy .
On one hand , we give excessive unconditional support to the claim for a new Palestinian state alongside Jordan , while on the other hand , we say that the proclamation of that state would create an explosion situation . Added to this , we state that , in any case , it is too expensive and the administrative structures are not viable .
Undoubtedly , and absurdly , this is what is interesting about the report .
But it is not a reason to adopt it , since it sets out a position which explains why , for a long time to come , Europe will continue to pay without truly being able to make any decisions .
Luigi Colajanni 's report contains several strong ideas and we must give them our immediate support .
Following the Wye Plantation agreements and the deadlock in the situation on the ground , the Palestinian authorities have decided to declare the independence of the territories unilaterally on 4 May .
The Israelis have stated that if that happens , they will occupy the territories with military forces .
As it is obvious that there is not enough time left to achieve the considerable progress that is necessary , I believe that the rapporteur is right to ask the two parties to engage immediately in negotiations in order to put back the date of application of the provisional agreement until after 4 May .
I also share his view that the negotiation process must result in the constitution of an independent Palestinian state and that the existence of the State of Israel and its right to security must be recognised by the Arab world .
As I said in this House in 1998 , to try to resolve each conflict in the region separately would be to erase all the historical , ethnic , religious and cultural differences and to forget the international strategies that aim to control the raw materials and maintain areas of influence through the military alliances .
The European Union 's aim , in fighting every form of extremism and fundamentalism , must be to strengthen its political role in the region and to support a process that establishes security and cooperation between all the countries of the Near and Middle East and benefits all those involved . It must also support any moves towards finding regional solutions .
I hope that the Euro-Mediterranean Conference to held in Stuttgart between 4 and 6 April will enable us to make progress in that direction .
It is in this frame of mind that I will visit Syria next week with a delegation from the Socialist Group . We are now at a stage where Syria and Israel have expressed the will to resume peace negotiations on the basis of regional cooperation founded on the common interests of the countries and the region .
The Wye Plantation agreements , which were concluded with American backing , enabled the Oslo Agreements , which had been completely grounded for 18 months , to be relaunched .
We must welcome this along with the fact that for the first time , all of the main Israeli political forces seem to have accepted the principle of exchanging land for peace .
However , what is much less pleasing to us as Europeans is that we have been in no way associated with the political negotiations , despite the fact that the European Union is the region 's main financial backer .
In a way , we are paying , but we do not have anything to say .
There are two main reasons for this .
Firstly , despite a few institutional steps in the right direction , the Union 's common foreign and security policy is still largely in its embryonic stages .
Secondly , the considerable sums of money given to the Palestinian Authority were not enough to improve the lot of the Palestinian people ; quite the opposite .
To be more specific , I should in fact say that , on the one hand , these funds were used in an inappropriate manner , and on the other hand , their distribution was hindered by the administrative obstacles put up by the Israeli authorities and by the repeated closures of the territories in the wake of attacks .
On this particular point , I would like to express my own personal belief that it is not advisable to link the resumption and continuation of the peace process to a cessation of terrorist activities .
The terrorists ' very goal is to block the path to peace , and those who plant the bombs will continue with their terrible acts as long as their crimes serve their political objective : to bury the peace process .
Having said this , like our rapporteur , I would like to stress the need for the European Union to establish a common position as quickly as possible , especially with the prospect of 4 May 1999 .
We have voted in favour of the report because , in many parts , it highlights the value of improved cooperation between the EU countries and the states around the Mediterranean .
It also points out how important it is that the peace process in the Middle East should continue and that measures should be taken to ease the situation of Mediterranean countries struggling under the burden of international debt and to cancel debts .
This is positive .
However , the report also contains points which seek to strengthen the EU 's common foreign and security policy and to give the Commission increased powers in the foreign policy area , to which we are opposed .
Despite this , we have chosen to vote in favour of the report in the final vote , for the reasons indicated at the beginning .
Mr President , the idea behind giving aid to improve the safety of nuclear power stations in the applicant countries has always been that they should be shut down completely in the long term .
The trouble is that this has not happened , and there is no sign that it will happen .
Having extended the lifetime of the nuclear power stations with the help of EU aid , the applicant countries now claim that the safety of their nuclear plants has become so good that there is no reason at all to close them down .
The Adam report has not taken this into account .
It does not link aid to the demand for closure in the long term . Nor does it spell out a clear policy for financing the form of energy which will replace the nuclear plants .
On top of that , the nuclear power industry in the West is also having its lifetime extended .
The order book was more or less empty , but with EU money a new and lucrative market has emerged .
The June Movement recognises the right of countries to choose and manage their own forms of energy , including nuclear power .
But under no circumstances will we be party to giving economic aid to maintain nuclear power as an energy source , at the expense of developing more environmentally friendly sources of energy .
The June Movement will indeed vote for a short-term improvement in reactor safety , if it is aimed at phasing out nuclear power .
The Greens ' amendments provided for that , but since they were all rejected , we have voted against the Adam report .
Despite the decline of nuclear power in Europe , the EU continues to waste massive resources on promoting , researching and developing it , via the Euratom Treaty .
It was one of the three original treaties of the European Union , and still maintains the ' atoms for peace ' lie in a legal constitutional form , so as to ' permit the advancement of the cause of peace ' ( recital 1 ) ' by creating the conditions necessary for the speedy establishment and growth of nuclear industries ' ( Article 1 ) .
While the European Parliament has a major say on the EU Budget , it has , exceptionally , no real control over the activities which take place under the anachronistic and non-transparent Euratom Treaty .
The European nuclear industry , having been badly hit by Chernobyl , has turned that around into a business opportunity .
They have made millions of ecu working on nuclear safety projects in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union , funded largely by the EU .
However , EU Court of Auditors Special Report No 25 / 98 on the PHARE-TACIS nuclear safety programmes recently showed that no real safety improvement has taken place , as we have claimed for years ( and was shown in a Parliament STOA study commissioned at the initiative of the Greens ) , so that over 800 MECU have been largely wasted on producing reports .
And yet , the European Commission is currently considering three safety-related Euratom loans , for the completion of Khmelnitski 2 and Rovno 4 ( k2 / r4 ) in Ukraine as part of the Chernobyl closure agreement , for Kallinin unit 3 in Russia and for Kozloduy units 5 & 6 in Bulgaria , all Soviet designed reactors .
These projects neatly illustrate the sort of problems associated with EU enlargement negotiations as far as the safety of nuclear power plants is concerned .
Ukrainian President Kuchma has written that his country originally wanted gas-fired stations as part of the Chernobyl closure deal , but the G7 , looking after the interests of their nuclear industries , forced Ukraine to accept the completion of these two VVER 1 000 MW reactors , whose construction had been abandoned after the collapse of the USSR , and which have not been that well preserved in their incomplete state .
The Least Cost Study on this project carried out by a panel led by Prof. John Surrey of SPRU at Sussex University showed that they were far from least cost , and yet the Commission and G7 continue to press the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) to fund these reactors ( 190 MECU ) , alongside Euratom 's 400 MECU , in breach of all rational procedures , technical and financial concerns .
Energy saving is clearly the least cost investment in Ukraine , where energy intensity is an order of magnitude higher than in the EU , a situation common to the former Eastern bloc states .
Kozloduy illustrates another crucial aspect of this problem .
Units 1-4 are of the more dangerous VVER 440-230 type , and should be closed forthwith .
Bulgaria made a closure agreement with the Nuclear Safety Account run by the EBRD for the G24 countries in return for finance , but the conditions attached had to be carried out by Bulgaria , allowing them to legitimately extend the closure dates by not meeting those conditions , which they have now done .
In both cases the interests of the Western nuclear industry takes precedence over everything else , something that must be changed during the rest of the enlargement negotiations - firm dates without escape clauses for the reactors are essential as a pre-condition for entry to the EU .
It is of course worth noting that there are equally dangerous nuclear installations in the EU , such as the UK Magnox reactors , which have no secondary containment , not to mention all of the unstable high-level waste and other dangerous materials associated with the UK and French reprocessing plants ( something not found in Eastern Europe ) .
Nuclear power will leave a heritage of nuclear waste , for tens of thousands of generations to come .
But , a more subtle heritage is to be found in the permanently altered genetic stock of every living thing on the planet .
Atmospheric nuclear weapons testing was the first of many reckless activities to spread radio-isotopes all over the planet , which is why the military scientists made sure that radiations standards were set at an unreasonably high level , so as to avoid consequent claims against the weapons states that they had compromised the health of the human race .
This problem is still with us today , as the science is manipulated , prevented or simply neglected , which shows that despite the reductions in levels , they are still way too high , as was demonstrated in a Parliament workshop initiated by the Greens , the basis of a STOA study published on this matter .
What is worse , the Radiation Standards Directive ( Euratom / 96 / 29 ) , which should protect the public and workers as from 2000 , actually has features which facilitates the dilution and recycling of radioactive waste , so that consumer products might even contain these materials and no one would know .
A radical revision is urgently needed , before these materials are released .
And the new areas of radiation protection research need to be urgently pursued by the EU , such as Genomic Instability and DNA mini-satellite research , so that we find out the long-term effects of low-level exposure .
Since 1999 , nuclear power has been an important issue for the European Union 's relations with the Central and Eastern European countries and the new independent states .
It is essential that in the new enlargement process nuclear safety is put at the heart of the negotiations .
Agenda 2000 , the European Commission 's Framework for the Development of the European Union , states that most of the power stations operating in the applicant countries are still using Soviet technology and do not meet international safety standards .
From an EU perspective , reactors are placed in three categories : reactors of Western design , reactors of Soviet design and unsafe reactors .
The European Commission must agree to an energy strategy for each of these countries under partnership and cooperation agreements in which provision is made for the closure of unsafe nuclear reactors at an agreed date .
While the initial assessment by the European Commission and the Agenda 2000 programme is not sufficiently detailed , the Mochovce plant in Slovakia which is still operating must be singled out for special attention .
If this plant is to meet international safety standards , together with other nuclear installations in the Czech Republic , Hungary and Bulgaria , modernisation programmes will take at least seven to ten years to ensure that the highest environmental and public health standards are met .
Bulgaria , Hungary , Romania , Slovenia and Slovakia also have to find solutions for the storage of the nuclear waste that they produce .
All these problems are broad in their implications for the European Union and we must ensure that no enlargement of EU takes place until we are sure that the nuclear plants operating in the applicant countries meet the highest international safety standards .
This is not going to be a particularly easy task .
For example , it is now fourteen years since the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl .
It is hard to believe that this nuclear plant is still a key supplier of energy needs for the people of Ukraine .
It is clear that Western finances will still be needed to close this nuclear plant down once and for all .
The overall cost involved in ensuring that no further environmental or public health affects arise from the plant is estimated at £ 1.7 billion .
This is designed to ensure that the two reactors which are still functioning at Chernobyl are safely closed down and defused .
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development will have a role in this process and I welcome the fact that they have contributed close to $ 200 million last year alone to help the Ukrainian Government to close down the Chernobyl Plant in the near future
There is no doubt that growing numbers of people have a great sense of insecurity as regards nuclear power in the EU countries , in the Central and Eastern European countries and in the New Independent States alike .
Retrogressive nuclear policies are increasingly being abandoned , a process which has led amongst other things to decisions by Sweden and Germany to begin the phasing-out of nuclear power .
It would be more than desirable if the Central and Eastern European countries and the New Independent States did the same .
The report from Mr Adam and the Energy Committee contains several points which , in my opinion , tend in the opposite direction ( encouragement instead of the phasing-out of nuclear power ) .
For example , the nuclear power industry in the EU countries is encouraged to continue its activities in the countries concerned .
I consider on the contrary that the EU must provide economic support to help those countries commit themselves to moving away from nuclear power .
In this context , the economically stronger EU countries must offer help .
I have misgivings with regard to the assistance programmes addressed by the report , in view of the problems which have arisen hitherto in the EU 's assistance programmes , on which the Court of Auditors presented a report last year .
The problems seem to be very wide-ranging , and the money which the EU had set aside has not brought about any noticeable improvements .
This is a serious matter , and the EU should consider how support for the phasing-out of nuclear power and support for renewable energy and efficient use of energy should be formulated in order to produce tangible results .
Finally , in the vote I have supported all the amendments which we tabled in the Green Group and which are of great importance for the future .
A natural consequence of the introduction of the euro is that the euro countries will be compelled to follow a uniform economic policy .
There is nothing surprising about that , but it explains , amongst other things , why we believe the euro is a political instrument for closer integration .
Individual Member States should insist on following their own economic policies , including their own policies on tax , VAT and employment .
The heart of state sovereignty is having independent instruments to manage the economy .
With the euro , the states have to give up this right and subordinate themselves to the interests of the Union , thereby undermining what is best for the individual state .
The EU should not meddle with the economic instruments of the Member States .
Monetary union and a central bank will not be able to survive in the long run unless they are controlled by a common government and a common parliament .
Therefore , monetary union must either be followed by a new leap towards political integration or perish .
In principle , we believe that voluntary coordination of economic policies and currency cooperation between the Member States could be an excellent idea , but this report does not prepare the way for voluntary coordination .
On the contrary , it maintains that the Member States should be committed to coordinating fiscal policy ( paragraph 43 ) .
The report calls for systematic coordination of the taxation of enterprises , capital and energy .
We do not think the EU should be deciding macro-economic goals and instruments , which are the essence of democracy in the Member States .
We are therefore voting against this report .
However , we do share the report 's concerns about the global economic crisis .
We endorse the report 's criticism of the EU 's inability to fight European unemployment , which has admittedly fallen , but is still very high .
The Commission regards the growth of the European economy over the past year as broadly positive , although it appears rather worried about the repercussions of the international economic and financial crisis . It acknowledges that these repercussions are already visible in the economy of the European Union , and forecasts a slowdown in growth for 1999 .
The conclusion it has reached on what should happen is based on the well-known logic of unilateral austerity , further reducing financial deficits and the public debt , and strengthening anti-inflationary policy .
The Commission fails to mention that the stifling restrictions on national budgets will limit the scope for action in the event of the crisis deepening .
It fails to explain why , despite ever-increasing returns on investments , increased profits , reduced labour costs and low interest rates , there has been no stimulation of private investment .
The Commission and the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy both call for measures to reverse the downward trend in public investment .
But how will this come about , when the scope for action is extremely restricted as a result of the obligations deriving from the Treaty on European Union and the stability and growth pact ?
Our fear is that this will lead to a reorganisation of budget infrastructure , resulting in further cuts in social spending .
We are particularly concerned by the attempt to bring about closer links between the procedure for approving general economic measures and the policy on employment .
While admitting that the EU and Member States have failed to tackle unemployment , the Commission is further subjecting wage policy and the other aspects of employment policy to the requirements of the Maastricht criteria and the stability and growth pact .
A typical example of its hypocrisy is that we were initially told that adding a chapter on employment to the Treaty would solve the problem .
Subsequently , we were told that the process to implement the relevant provisions was to begin .
Then we were told about special measures that were to be decided upon at the European Council meeting in Vienna . Now we are being told to wait for the European Employment Pact , but although this is now at the drafting stage , it merely covers the same ground as the German action plan on employment .
It is clear that the idea of greater convergence of the political choices made in terms of the general direction of economic policies and employment policies , as called for by the Commission and by the majority of those in the European Parliament , is resulting in more job opportunities in the sense of an increase in part-time and atypical forms of employment , as well as an undesirable restructuring of the social security system .
Moreover , the two reports that were published by the Commission on structural policies , known as Cardiff I and II , call for greater flexibility and for greater changes to be made in labour relations and in the labour market , which the Commission regards as the extra key ingredient in our macro-economic endeavours .
We are also seeing that almost all new jobs are part time , while the number of full-time jobs is falling .
The Commission has failed to state that it will take decisive initiatives at international level in order to limit the movement of capital for profit and to promote productive investment .
We call on the Commission to include in the next round of multilateral negotiations the problems created for international monetary and financial stability by the unchecked movements of capital , and to promote the adoption of measures such as the Tobin tax .
It is painfully evident to the people of Europe that the policy currently being followed will get us nowhere .
It is clear that there is no future for the deception perpetrated on the people of Europe through insipid debates about employability and entrepreneurship .
With increasing force and coordination , the people of Europe are demanding specific measures in favour of full-time , stable employment , budgets for the redistribution of income in favour of working people , an end to the scandalous impunity enjoyed by multinationals , a totally different policy in Europe , and that the Member States should pave the way for sweeping changes which will promote peace , progress and social prosperity .
That concludes voting time .
EU relations with Central Asia ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the report by Mr Truscott and the recommendation by Mrs André-Léonard .
Mr President , I would simply like to inform the House that this morning I said that some people had been arrested during the riots on 16 February , including Mrs Akedova , who is one of the leaders of a human rights association .
I have just received a quite alarming telegram informing me that one thousand arrests have been made since then .
As the Uzbek Ambassador is honouring us with his presence in the gallery , I would like him to be our messenger to Mr Karimov and to ask him for clemency for these one thousand people who have been arbitrarily arrested .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the two rapporteurs in this joint debate .
I have been a member of the Central Asian Delegation for the last two years and was privileged to visit Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan with the European Parliament Delegation in May 1997 .
This is an exotic destination for Europeans with its image of the ' silk route ' .
I was particularly struck by the warmth and friendship for Europeans expressed by the people we met .
We visited the Aral Sea and saw at first hand the environmental problems that exist .
We also learned of the economic problems of those landlocked countries and the difficulties of transition from Soviet domination to independence and the change to a market economy .
I have recently learned from the ambassadors at the last meeting that the problems have increased with the collapse of the Russian rouble .
However , I must point out that there are considerable human rights problems in Central Asia as was vividly expressed by Mr Truscott this morning , although the extent of the problems varies from country to country .
Consequently , although I give the interim agreements a cautious welcome I must ask that the Commission to remain vigilant on human rights and , whenever possible , continue to point out to the respective countries the need to observe human rights properly .
I should like to congratulate Mr Truscott on his excellent work and on the way in which he has accommodated the various opinions which have been delivered .
I had the honour of drafting the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations , and he took full account of the recommendations I made , which can really be summed up in one proposal .
The Commission 's proposals are very good , but we in the Committee on External Economic Relations would stress that they need to be incorporated into an overall policy , so that the infrastructure work , communications , pipelines , roads - everything that has been planned to help open up the countries of Central Asia and enable them to become part of a modern economy - will be dealt with all together rather than in isolation to create a genuine basis for their development .
This proposal was accepted without amendment .
The rapporteur said he was happy with it and the text before the House therefore takes due account of it .
I think this is an excellent example of cooperation between different committees and rapporteurs , for which I should like to thank Mr Truscott once again .

As chairman of Parliament 's delegation for relations with these Central Asian states , I would like to sincerely congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mrs André-Léonard and Mr Truscott , as I have witnessed the excellent and , above all , meticulous work they have carried out .
For my part , I have also seen that in some of these states , or in practically all of them , there is a clear lack of democracy and respect for human rights . If pressed , we can appreciate how difficult the transition to a free regime and a market economy can be .
But I have always defended the theory that the important thing is that these countries did not stop working towards these freedoms , rather they were heading in the right direction to a greater or lesser degree .
It would have been unfair to ask these countries to behave in the same way as our consolidated Western democracies .
There has been a certain lack of understanding and it is clear that the development we wished to see is indeed taking place .
It is perhaps slow , but it is happening nonetheless .
I am therefore delighted to see that , in the text of the recommendation on Uzbekistan , the rapporteur explicitly welcomes the efforts made by the authorities there to strengthen democracy and respect for human rights . I am also pleased that the report by Mr Truscott welcomes the progress that has been made towards establishing a functioning democracy along the terms set out in the CSCE documents .

Moreover , we must not forget that the guarantee of democracy also comes into play as soon as the corresponding partnership and cooperation agreements include a conditional clause linking such cooperation to democratic principles , human rights and the rules of the market economy .
As regards developing these principles , the government of Uzbekistan has stressed that it is willing to make progress in this field . And as proof of this , it cites the fact that offices of the OSCE , Human Rights Watch and the Uzbekistan National Centre for Human Rights have already been opened and that an ombudsman has been appointed .
What is more , an excessive delay in ratifying such an agreement could cause problems during the country 's transition to democracy . And the importance of this country for Europe in terms of energy is very clear from a socioeconomic perspective .
Therefore , Mr President , we support the recommendation and the report .
Mr President , partnership agreements such as the ones we are discussing do have conditions attached .
The countries that sign up to them must be prepared to tread the right path towards democracy and human rights .
Ten years ago , no one knew where Uzbekistan , Turkmenistan or Kazakhstan were ; perhaps if you had read the book ' The Courier of the Tsar ' you might know where Central Asia began , but not where it ended .
This is why I think it is a good thing that now , ten years after the Wall came down and what we called the Russian bear disappeared , we politicians can blithely say ' these countries are going to do this and this ' .
I therefore wholeheartedly endorse Mrs André-Léonard 's report on the partnership agreement .
We also support the Commission communication on the whole of Central Asia .
The agreement on intensive human rights dialogue will be a way of both encouraging and checking up on the countries in question , which are to be actively monitored and advised .
Should they relapse , we can always suspend the agreement , although I would not recommend this .
We must be patient in view of their history and the ground they need to make up socially , for whatever reason .
Some of us may have known where Uzbekistan was , but I find it a liberating experience to be able to find out about this huge area of our planet in this way .
I should like to thank both rapporteurs .
Mr President , may I say to my colleague Mr Bertens that we should not always judge others by our own standards .
We have an important responsibility , which arose , of course , when the Wall came down , for the East and for ensuring that its difficult transformation process leads to the development of democracy and stability .
For that reason , I am inclined to wonder about the real motive behind the interest of the European Union in close relations with the states of the East .
When I examine the Commission documents , the Council statement and even the Truscott report , I begin to doubt whether the issue is really the stable development of these countries or whether it is all about their natural resources . Are we more interested in those countries ' natural resources than in the future of their people ?
That is why one of the key issues for me concerns the ways in which this partnership and cooperation agreement with Uzbekistan and comparable agreements with other states actually affect stability and the balanced social and economic development of these countries .
I have my doubts there as far as the exploitation of natural resources is concerned .
For that reason , I attach paramount importance to the human rights and democracy clause , because democracy is an absolutely categorical imperative if difficulties in the transformation process are to be properly overcome .
The population must be involved ; employees must have a say .
For the second time today , I am led to wonder about the value of this human rights clause if there is no way of penalising violations of human rights , if such violations are simply condoned as before , and if the human rights clause cannot be used to guarantee the creation of genuinely democratic and stable structures in the country in question .
So here is the situation : we have no clear division of powers , we have problems with free and fair elections , we have huge problems with freedom of the press , the death penalty is still on the statute book , we have criminal trials against opposition newspapers , against journalists , against interest groups and against demonstrators .
That is the problem .
To my mind , the question we have to ask the Commission once again is whether this agreement is really the answer , or should we not actually be doing far , far more for these countries ?
That is why I think it prudent for us , before we ratify this agreement , to reconsider which measures are actually in place to stabilise this region .
I should also like to remind the House that we also have an obligation under the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees .
We must ensure that the requirements of that Convention are satisfied before we can recognise these states as reliable partners .
The same clause is contained in the partnership and cooperation agreement .
We cannot rubber-stamp the agreement before the proper conditions are created .
Mr President , the new states of Central Asia are particularly fragile .
Their populations are not homogenous .
They cannot rely on state traditions as they are emerging states that up until now have only been Empire dependencies .
They are used as a channel by the drug rings , and they have to assert their existence in a highly dangerous international environment .
They are caught between Russia , which is the former dominant power and which still has a considerable interest in the area , Turkey , whose ambition is still to be the leader of a great , Turkish-speaking Central Asia , and Pakistan , which supports a plan for a great , fundamentalist Afghanistan , on the basis of the particularly dangerous tool of militant Islamism , just as Iran does .
We must of course be vigilant with regard to respect for human rights in all regions , but if we judge these countries solely by normal human rights standards , we are in danger of condemning ourselves to powerlessness and ineffectiveness , which other countries such as the United States know how to avoid .
We must be capable of looking beyond the rulers of the Soviet era who are still in place , the powerful mafias and the nomenklatura seeking to go on for ever .
We must also take account of the encouraging fact that , apart from the tragic events in Tajikstan , these countries are not ravaged by civil wars and there is a tradition of secularism which could form a barrier against the spread of Islam .
It is therefore better not to subject the implementation of partnership agreements with these countries to conditions that would deprive us of any form of influence .
We have seen that postponing the agreements is ineffective .
It would be more appropriate to provide ourselves with specific tools for action , which must be closely coordinated , under the auspices of the Council , with the Union 's other instruments for external action and with the bilateral policies of the Member States .
That , Mr President , is the price of effectiveness .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by ratifying the partnership and cooperation agreement between the EU and Uzbekistan , the European Parliament will send an encouraging signal to the Republic of Uzbekistan , which became an independent entity in 1991 .
It is a country that is suffering from the effects of the Russian crisis as well as having felt the full impact of the fall in raw material prices , as is rightly noted in this report .
It must be recognised that the government of Uzbekistan has taken some steps to improve the human rights situation by admitting an observer from the OSCE and by appointing an ombudsman .
The continuing existence of the death penalty and the atrocious conditions in the country 's prisons , however , show that there is still a huge gap between our expectations and the situation on the ground .
By conferring its approval , the European Parliament is also recognising the will of the government , which has at least been documented for the outside world , to improve the human rights situation in this part of Central Asia .
The fact that the Commission report calls for Parliament to be presented with an annual report on democracy and human rights and for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy to be kept informed of developments is a sign that Uzbekistan has a long way to go before it can complete the process of democratisation and stabilisation .
We still have grounds for concern , not only on account of the ethnic tensions that keep flaring up between Uzbekistan , Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan , but also because of the Ferghana Valley , which has to be regarded as a potential trouble spot .
The partition of the valley among three states after the collapse of the Soviet Union has fuelled ethnic conflicts .
The region is far from having overcome the destabilisation and general economic depression that resulted from the partition of this valley , which was one of the most fertile and densely populated in the region .
Another cause for concern is the fact that the Ferghana Valley , as well as being a tourist centre , is also a hotbed of drug trafficking and internationally organised crime and a breeding-ground for Islamic fundamentalism .
The brutal bombings on 16 January of this year illustrate how tense the situation remains .
Indeed , it was the most serious act of violence in Central Asia since Uzbekistan became independent .
The way in which it was carried out suggests very thorough organisation , although the Karemov government has been anxious to play down the incident .
We believe that stabilisation can only be achieved if the TACIS programmes are used in pursuit of specific targets and if the ethnic conflicts are defused .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the joint debate today highlights the particular importance that Parliament attaches to the issue of human rights in all the countries of Central Asia and particularly in Uzbekistan .
The Commission welcomes the decision by your rapporteur , Mrs André-Léonard , to ratify the cooperation and partnership agreement with Uzbekistan .
Continuing to veto this agreement would have penalised the country and would have had the involuntary yet negative effect of reducing the level of protection of human rights .
It would also have had a negative effect on the process of transition to democracy , as Mr Camisón Asensio has just pointed out .
Unlike the trade and cooperation agreement and the interim agreement that have been applied up until now to bilateral relations between the Union and Uzbekistan , this new partnership and cooperation agreement will enable us to directly tackle the issue of human rights through political dialogue .
This partnership agreement will provide a structural framework for political dialogue and will also cover economic , commercial and cultural matters .
In answer to your rapporteur , Mrs André-Léonard , I can confirm that Mr van den Broek is committed to discussing the issue of human rights at the various bilateral meetings , and particularly during his next visit to Tashkent at the end of March .
He will report back to you on this , as you requested this morning , Mrs André-Léonard .
Uzbekistan is currently experiencing difficult times , as Mr Rübig reminded us a moment ago .
From an economic point of view , the fall in the price of cotton - which is its main export in terms of raw materials - is largely responsible for the deterioration in its balance of trade .
From a political point of view , the wave of explosive attacks on Tashkent demonstrates the fragility and sensitivity of the situation on the ground .
Mr van den Broek immediately wrote to the President of Uzbekistan to offer his condolences to the families of the victims , but also to remind him that the legitimate search for the perpetrators of the attacks should be carried out with full respect for individual rights .
Mrs André Léonard , a moment ago , you mentioned that the Uzbek Ambassador was here to listen to your debates and I would like to welcome him this evening .
Allow me , on behalf of the Commission , to reiterate the appeal you made to him .
Despite these problems , the Uzbek Government is working to step up the economic reforms and to improve the protection of human rights .
The recent contacts that we have had with the authorities have highlighted their determination to continue along this path .
Secondly , I would like to comment on Mr Truscott 's report .
This report relates to the 1995 Commission communication and also focuses on the issue of human rights .
In particular , it draws a comparison between all the Central Asian republics and the Commission shares your rapporteur 's concerns .
However , I would like to point out that , as in the case of Uzbekistan , all the partnership and cooperation agreements provide the legal framework and , in my opinion , a basis and an appropriate structure to look at the issue of human rights with the countries concerned .
This is the reason behind the political dialogue , which , for the first time in the Union 's bilateral relations with these countries , is officially laid down in each agreement .
Mr van den Broek will keep you closely informed of the development of the situation in the area , as Mr Truscott also requested this morning .
Furthermore , in relation to Uzbekistan , but also in relation to Kazakhstan and Kyrghyzstan , the 1998-1999 national TACIS programmes envisage projects that will facilitate the implementation of these partnership and cooperation agreements .
In this respect , the Commission has made it clear that the priority is to promote democracy within the society , including by helping with the preparation of elections .
Moreover , in the context of these partnership and cooperation agreements , a parliamentary cooperation committee will be set up for each country .
This will allow for direct discussions between the representatives of the parliaments of each of the Central Asian republics and the European Parliament .
In this way , Parliament will itself be able to bring up the issue of the protection of human rights in an appropriate context and increase its control over the bilateral relations between the Union and the Central Asian countries .
Thank you , Mr de Silguy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Community Customs Code
The next item is the report ( A4-0080 / 99 ) by Mr Paasilinna , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2913 / 92 establishing the Community Customs Code ( COM ( 98 ) 0226 - C4-0370 / 98-98 / 0134 ( COD ) ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Paasilinna .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are here to discuss a Commission proposal to change the basic regulation governing the Community Customs Code .
The Commission 's aim has been to simplify and rationalise the customs regulation , which is certainly justified , as it contains a total of 253 articles and innumerable subparagraphs and repeals at least 28 legal instruments in use before the regulation came into force .
This jungle of legislation has sprouted such an impenetrable thicket of clauses and paragraphs that presumably only a few people in the Union have a complete command of its content .
However the proposal still does not manage to any significant extent to fulfill the Commission 's objectives to clarify the rules , which is unfortunate .
To keep legislation complicated and abstruse is to wield power : when people are unable to understand laws they must obey , power falls into the hands of those professionally equipped to interpret the law .
As Parliament will not now approve all the proposals , the matter will obviously be dealt with later by the Conciliation Committee , possibly while Finland holds the presidency .
The Customs Code has a significant impact on Community trade policy , especially agricultural policy , where traditional agricultural taxation has in fact become customs duty .
The Code likewise affects indirect taxation , because it is still used to apply VAT to products imported from third countries .
Furthermore , the rules affect Community anti-fraud policy in the context of the transit system , as security factors have now been included in the rules to be applied .
The Code is also a tool for compiling trade statistics , and it therefore affects statistics on foreign trade .
I have amended the Commission 's proposal concerning the use of data-processing techniques for making customs declarations .
My amendment has been approved by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and I hope that it will also be approved here in the House .
In my own country , as in many other Member States , it is important that the use of electronic customs declarations should be established once and for all , and accompanying documents should also not be submitted in paper form .
Using electronic media will speed up the work of the customs authorities and make it more effective .
One very serious problem in the European Union is that the customs authorities in the different Member States are still not in full , real-time contact with one another .
On the other hand , it would appear that our adversaries , that is to say the criminals , are quite capable of keeping in contact .
I would therefore ask the Commission what stage the computerisation of the customs declaration system has reached , to make it less likely to be breached than is the case today .
With customs clearance , as with electronic commerce , for example , the parallel churning out of hard-copy documentation is harming the electronic system and preventing its development as part of the move towards rationalisation , efficiency and sustainability .
I also did not agree with the Commission 's proposal in relation to Article 5 on direct and indirect representation to customs agents .
According to estimates , this would mean that some twenty thousand customs agents would lose their jobs , and , furthermore , there would be less reliability and more fraud , especially in southern Member States .
The committee agreed with me on this .
I would ask you to look especially closely at Amendment No 13 .
I still propose the addition of a new Article 1 ( 21a ) , as supported by my group in my original proposal .
It relates to the ultimate origin of goods in relation to preferential status , and the question of bona fide operations .
In it I propose that if a certificate issued by the authorities of a non-member country proves to be incorrect , no tax penalty should be imposed solely on the importer acting in good faith .
My proposed amendment will make the situation easier for labour-intensive SMEs , especially , and will allow the risk to be distributed .
It was a close result , but the committee voted to grant extremely broad protection to the importer , with the consequence that the Community , to which revenue is due , would have to bear the whole risk rather than it being fairly distributed .
Now I have discovered that Mrs Peijs , who tabled Amendment No 9 which was approved by the committee , is withdrawing it , so we can now support this new article which I have just described and which is , I believe , a sufficiently good compromise between the Commission 's proposal and Mrs Peijs 's amendment .
If the Community loses resources as a result of criminal activity , it is obviously always the taxpayers in the Member States who will have to make good the shortfall in the end .
For this reason the Community must have the means to intervene in criminal operations or abuse on the part of exporters and the authorities in exporting countries .
Mr President , the Community Customs Code is instrumental in the Union 's commercial policy and is an essential tool in completing the internal market and in protecting the EU 's financial interests .
There is no doubt that we must continue to revise customs regulations and procedures and to adapt them to the new situations that arise . In this way , we will eliminate possible judicial or procedural gaps .
If there is a new situation that emphasises the need to amend the present Code , then it is without doubt the gradual growth of the Community 's trade . This growth is due to the progressive opening up of the markets and developments in the information society .
These are changes that require the Code to be updated with a view to simplifying and streamlining it so that it is more in step with the new realities . Therefore , the Committee on External Economic Relations welcomes the Commission 's proposal for amendment as it agrees with its philosophy .
However , its specific content is far removed from the measures proposed .
The Commission realises that wanting to improve efficiency is not enough and that a better balance must also be guaranteed between the much-needed simplification and modernisation of procedures it proposes and the fight against fraud .
In fact , in the context of the gradual liberalisation of the markets and taking into account the system of preferences the Union has established with many third countries , and with the ACP countries in particular , it is all the more vital to have legal instruments available to help combat forgery and fraud . And we must also ensure that the rules of origin are applied , particularly where preferential and non-preferential rules are concerned .
At the same time , and in view of the abolition of customs barriers between Member States due to the completion of the internal market , it is all the more essential to establish effective control measures that guarantee the uniform application of customs procedures throughout the Community . In this way , we will avoid any gaps that might encourage fraud and crime .
However , the Commission 's text does not contain any proposals that take these aspects into consideration , aspects that could be of the utmost importance .
To fill in the gaps , I have tabled two amendments , Amendment Nos 14 and 15 , that include the conclusions of the opinion that the Committee on External Economic Relations approved unanimously . And I should like to bring these amendments to the attention of the House and the Commission and ask you to vote in favour of them .
In fact , what we are discussing here is allowing goods declarations to be submitted in electronic form . Nonetheless , we are still maintaining the obligation - and I do mean the obligation - for all goods declarations that are submitted electronically to be accompanied by the relevant supporting documents , which may also be submitted in electronic form .
In addition , we are discussing the idea that customs authorities must adopt control measures to guarantee the correct and uniform application of Community rules throughout the Union .
It is only in doing this that we will be able to implement genuinely effective control measures to combat all fraud and forgery .
In accepting these amendments , we will not only send out an unmistakeable signal from the Union on the fight against fraud ; we will also help improve the competitiveness of businesses and , as a result , promote economic growth and job creation within the Community .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to express my appreciation of Mr Paasilinna 's report and my gratitude for the inclusion of many amendments that were proposed by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
In our opinion , the Commission is seeking to transfer too many legislative powers to the committee .
It is gratifying that both of our committees want to change that .
Having said that , I should like to focus the remainder of my remarks on one point , a point which , in my view and in the view of the Committee on Budgetary Control , relates to an extremely serious problem .
More than 50 % of all goods imported into the European Union are subject to what are known as preferential tariff arrangements .
Certificates of origin must be presented for all these goods .
There is undoubtedly a temptation to present false certificates with a view to paying as little customs duty as possible .
These manipulations do not only defraud the Union of budgetary resources ; they are naturally perpetrated at the expense of honest producers and importers too .
When such manipulations occur , the Community Customs Code provides for the possibility of waiving the liability to customs duty if the exporter has been dealt with in good faith .
Two of the rapporteur 's amendments - No 9 and No 13 - relate to this point .
The Committee on Budgetary Control , though grateful for the adoption of several of its own amendments , feels that these two amendments run directly counter to its interests .
They are formulated in excessively lax or generalised terms .
If they were adopted with this wording , all importers or exporters - whether Amendment No 9 only refers to exporters and Amendment No 13 only to importers - would be able to assert that they had acted in good faith .
That is too lax , it is too dangerous , especially since our fraud prevention unit UCLAF has to cover the entire European Union with only a small number of officials to investigate suspicious cases .
The risk of being convicted for a false declaration is too slight .
I would therefore ask the rapporteur to reconsider his Amendments Nos 9 and 13 and to withdraw them if possible , otherwise he will be opening the doors to fraud on an even grander scale .
Besides , we have information that the Council and the Commission are working on a more precise form of wording to define what good faith is and what may not be regarded as good faith .
The future blacklists may also be seen in connection with the certificates of origin .
I therefore strongly recommend that Amendments Nos 9 and 13 should be reconsidered and , if possible , withdrawn .
We cannot subscribe to them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in 1997 alone , a total of ECU 13.6 million was collected in customs duties .
That corresponds to 86.4 % of the Union 's traditional own resources .
It is a well-known fact that customs duties constitute the only real tax revenue in the EU budget .
The current debate on net contributors and recipients underlines the importance of applying the Community customs system effectively and efficiently .
For that reason , we are very favourably disposed to the report before us .
It must also be said , however , that legal stipulations naturally have to apply in equal measure to import checks and export checks . It is surely illogical to make a distinction .
The crux of the matter , however , concerns the liability for erroneous certification of the origin of a product .
The question is whether the European importer or the exporter from outside the EU is liable for the appearance on a certificate of origin of false information resulting from an error by the overseas authorities .
We believe that efforts should be made to introduce the proposed electronic procedures at an early date and to ensure that they are efficient and , above all , easy to set up , because to my mind the current proposal is too complicated .
A distinction should also be made between sensitive goods and normal or mixed cargoes , because detailed checks are most probably impracticable in such cases .
It is conceivable that these mistakes could be caused by errors made by the exporting companies or by the authorities of non-EU states , but they could also be the result of fraudulent transactions .
That is why care should be taken to design forgery-proof documents , to use rubber stamps with various unknown colours of ink , to introduce digital signatures and in particular to ensure that a note is made of the departure time of consignments and their destination , so that customs checks can reveal precisely when the goods left and where they were delivered and so that any discrepancies in the timings can be very efficiently investigated .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , for its part , is proposing that importers should only be held liable if they are found to be personally responsible in whole or in part for the production of false certificates of origin .
If , however , the certificates of origin are falsified as a result of malpractice on the part of the exporter or the foreign authorities , any importer who has observed the rules must be excluded from liability .
If we had a sensible set of rules , we could rid the trading system of an enormous additional burden .
The importer must be able to rely on the authenticity of a certificate .
It is up to the politicians to organise the system accordingly .
It would be unreasonable to require importers to conduct their own investigations , particularly in cases where there is no reason to doubt the authenticity of the certificate .
Mr President , with a proposal that is incomprehensible and totally without foundation , the Commission is seeking to amend Article 5 of the Community Customs Code in a way that we believe will be the death knell for a sector which is already suffering unemployment and underemployment .
It should be noted that in 1993 , with the abolition of internal borders , this particular sector suffered job losses in excess of 80 or 85 % .
The Commission is now proposing to abolish the alternative possibility available to each Member State to make its own choice between direct or indirect customs representation , according to its financial needs .
This possibility was established several decades ago , it has stood the test of time , and it has been shown to function smoothly , since it gives each Member State the opportunity to take into account the particular aspects of its own customs area and to promote the proper , responsible , speedy and cost-effective handling of customs operations .
The duties of customs agents demand technical expertise and require an in-depth knowledge of customs legislation to enable customs agents to categorise goods according to their customs classification and to determine the level of duties and taxes .
Because of the criteria for entry into the profession and the personal qualities required - professional ability , reliability and presence of mind - customs agents are now on a par with those who work in the customs authority . They contribute to combating fraud and help to ensure a swift flow of traffic through the timely release of goods .
They also reduce the cost of storage and distribution of goods , to the benefit both of competitiveness and the smooth flow of external trade .
The Commission is invoking the argument of reduced competition and the infringement of the principle of freedom to provide services .
However , this is an unfounded argument , because on the one hand , customs agents are self-employed , they do not have a collective tariff , and they are in competition with each other . On the other hand , the users of customs services can either carry out the necessary formalities with the customs authorities themselves , or they can be represented by a method which , in accordance with national legislation , is not the sole prerogative of customs agents .
The arguments deployed by the Commission are fanciful , untenable and arbitrary .
There is not a single quantitative study to support its curious claims .
The report by Mr Paasilinna , whom I congratulate on his work , convincingly refutes the claims of the Commission .
We shall vote in favour of it .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Paasilinna .
The report shows that the customs union remains at the centre of the political debate : that should come as no surprise , because objectives such as the simplification of formalities , legal certainty for operators and safeguarding the Community 's financial interests , on which everyone is agreed in theory , can still be viewed differently when it actually comes to applying them .
I must also say that the debate has in addition been fuelled by a major problem of an institutional nature , one that threatens to deprive the Community , in the immediate future at least , of the drive for reform which is needed in relation to specific policies and , more particularly , the customs union .
The Community Customs Code is one of the pillars - the most important of all - that will help secure uniform administrative action within the limits dictated by the principle of subsidiarity .
Views can differ on this .
As far as the Commission is concerned , achieving uniform administrative measures in relation to customs , to guarantee effectiveness and efficiency , frequently proves difficult , not only because of the limited resources available to the Commission but also , and above all , because the Member States remain sovereign with regard to the application of the Community rules .
That is the result of an excessively rigid and formalistic interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity , as Parliament was able to see for itself in the debates on the Customs 2000 programme .
I must add that , as a result of this situation , the Commission is frequently the butt of criticism , which is understandable but sometimes rather unfair , because it is alleged to be incapable of securing adequate customs controls .
While it is true that expectations often exceed the possibilities open to the Commission , it should also at least be recognised that the Commission itself has to be given the instruments it needs to make the Customs Code into an effective framework , in particular by adopting implementing rules that are clear and effective , albeit in a very limited context .
Only in the light of that framework , Mr President , is it possible to understand some of the differences in opinion that are emerging as we assess what the outcome of the process of amending the Customs Code should be .
Turning now to our position on the amendments , on Amendment No 1 , the Commission is able to accept only that the limits set in some Member States for direct representation to be used to meet customs formalities should be compatible with the objectives of a single market .
The Commission does , however , recognise that a period of transition may be needed ; however , what I said a few moments ago means that we are unable to take on board Amendment No 11 .
Amendment No 2 does not pose any problem , and nor does the first part of Amendment No 3 .
However , there is one thing worrying the Commission : if it is left to the discretion of the Member States to decide whether the documents accompanying the customs declaration should be submitted to or merely kept at the disposal of the customs authorities , we may find administrative practice varying from one state to another .
That part of Amendment No 3 is therefore not acceptable ; on the other hand , Amendment No 14 , which shares the same objective , cannot be accepted because it is irrelevant .
In practice , the first part of that amendment reiterates what is contained in the current text of the code , and the second part is identical to the amendment put forward by the Commission .
Moving on to Amendments Nos 4 to 8 and 12 , which are linked to the reform of the economic conditions under the customs regimes , the Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 6 and 12 , but cannot set aside its proposal , as required under Amendment No 4 .
The Commission can , however , clarify the wording of its initial proposal .
Amendments Nos 5 and 7 are unacceptable because they would prevent the Commission from getting rid of a bureaucratic obstacle when examining the economic conditions .
Amendment No 8 fails to take account of the fact that the Commission has itself proposed deleting another provision : if both were deleted , we would be left with a clear legal vacuum ; that amendment is therefore not acceptable .
Amendments Nos 9 and 13 concern the issue of the good faith of the economic operators .
The Commission has followed closely the work of the House in this area and generally agrees with its objective , that is to say to find a solution which helps the importer by apportioning more equitably the risk that a certificate may not be valid .
Amendment No 9 has been withdrawn , and the Commission would not , in any event , have been able to accept it .
However , Amendment No 13 seems to us a better indicator of how to find a more appropriate and balanced solution to the problem of the responsibility of economic operators .
In that sense , Amendment No 13 may be considered a positive contribution and , therefore , the Commission could accept it as the basis for a more extensive revision of Article 220 .
We therefore intend presenting , in the revised proposal following the vote in the House , a new version of Article 220 to provide a better balance between the responsibilities of importers , exporters , third country authorities and the Community customs authorities responsible for assessing whether the parties have acted in good faith .
Again in relation to the responsibilities of economic operators , the Commission believes that reducing the period of limitation from three to two years would mark significant progress in enhancing legal certainty for honest operators .
Unfortunately , Amendment No 10 stands in the way of that .
Removal of that section of the Commission proposal is also likely to deprive us of the possibility of taking interim measures .
The Commission therefore feels unable to accept the amendment .
Turning , finally , to Amendment No 15 , the Commission considers that the aim of that amendment , that is to say adequate controls , cannot be defined in theoretical terms in the Customs Code , but must be related to specific aspects , good faith for instance , or the risk element .
For that reason , the Commission does not consider the amendment acceptable and believes that it would be more relevant in relation to anti-fraud legislation .
In once again extending my thanks to Mr Paasilinna , I wish to take just a moment to respond to his question concerning the national information systems .
As you will be aware , the Commission has set up the Common Communication Network - Common Systems Interface , known as CCN-CSI , to enable the national systems to communicate with each other and with the systems set up by the Commission itself .
That platform will also be used in the context of the new information transit system which will come into operation at the end of this year between the five partners taking part in it , that is to say Germany , Italy , Spain , the Netherlands and Switzerland .
Let me end by inviting those honourable Members who are interested to take part in a demonstration of the system on 31 March .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I see that we have a large group of young Europeans in the gallery .
I should like to welcome them and thank them for coming . I should also like to say that this is where , from one day to the next , we do our modest work in the hope that , when they are a little older , they will find a Europe of peace , of people living peacefully together and a Europe of social justice .
Once again , welcome to Parliament .
Applause
Protection of inventions by utility model
The next item is the report ( A4-0096 / 99 ) by Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive approximating the legal arrangements for the protection of inventions by utility model ( COM ( 97 ) 0691 - C4-0676 / 97-97 / 0356 ( COD ) ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes .
Mr President , legislation has been adopted in all areas of industrial property in the European Union except in the case of utility models .
The fact that utility models exist allows small technical advances that aid the human race to also benefit their creators , even though the level of invention does not warrant as much protection as under a patent .
The utility model is especially useful for both individual inventors and for small undertakings .
What is more , the existence of an instrument providing an alternative for minor inventions means that the level of invention required can be interpreted more strictly .
The Commission has opted for harmonisation and has put forward a proposal for a directive that valiantly tackles the delicate task of approximating twelve laws with many different points and introducing legislation in three countries that do not have this system .
This proposal adopts three of the classic requirements in the protection of inventions : novelty , level of invention and industrial advantage .
However , the requirement that utility models must include a practical or technical advantage has been overlooked , despite this being an essential and inevitable part of their nature .
This requirement clarifies the distinction between the utility model and the design or trademark with a view to preventing those who might infringe the utility model from sidestepping protection by means of superficial alterations to the designs that would enable them to copy technical innovations from its component parts .
We propose defining the utility model by reference to a structure , a mechanism or a configuration .
This means that the inventor only has to put forward a structure which has an industrial advantage , using a quick and simple procedure with minimum legal certainty .
This would also mean excluding substances and processes from protection , as the Economic and Social Committee has also proposed .
The lower level of legal certainty offered by the utility model compared to the patent is the price that has to be paid for the speed and lower cost of the utility model .
In our report , we suggest a series of measures to add to the Commission 's proposal in order to improve the degree of legal certainty of the model without harming the speed and lower cost of obtaining this instrument .
The measures I propose are mainly contained in the amendments . And naturally , they go along the lines that , although the level of invention or the creative input is not the same as for a patent , a mere declaration of the level of invention from the applicant will not suffice .
Therefore , as a first step , we propose that the definition from the European Patents Convention be adopted but in a less strict form than required by the Convention .
Another measure is to introduce the opposition procedure to swiftly settle disputes concerning utility models .
We should also promote those involved to draw up a search report , which is compulsory in the event of legal proceedings being undertaken .
We must improve protection conditions and use them for reference . Further , as a last step , we believe that there should be an additional ground for revocation where the proprietor of the utility model was not entitled to obtain it .
This new ground revokes the registration and not the invention itself , which is valid and can be protected if the inventor or his successor submits the applications .
Therefore , Commissioner , in spite of my aim to add these measures , I agree with the Commission on many fundamental aspects .
We believe that a lower level of invention should be required in comparison to patents and that no formal verification of the substantive requirements should be necessary .
We have readily accepted the amendments by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs but I must also say - as I see my colleague Mrs Oddy is here - that I rejected her amendments , Amendments Nos 34 and 35 , in committee . However , they have now also been tabled by another colleague , Mrs Thors , and having studied them in detail , I intend to accept them .
Lastly , I should like to point out that the duration of a utility model is shorter than that of a patent .
We agree with a maximum protection period of ten years , which is the same as most countries . As a result , we propose that no renewal should be granted - if requested by the search report - as a deterrent against an excessive duration and , at the same time , as a way of strengthening legal certainty and improving information .
Mr President , at this time of night we are not here to debate complex issues but I should like to begin at the end .
And I am doing so because the rapporteur has now generously accepted the amendments that were tabled by Mrs Oddy , who is one of my colleagues in the Socialist Group and a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and that are now tabled by the Liberal Members , Mrs Thors and Mrs Riis-Jørgensen . These two amendments refer to games and toys and it is a shame that the visitors who were here earlier have left because this affects them directly .
I say this as I believe that perhaps one of the innovations Parliament could introduce is to also allow games to be utility models and to be protected .
And I am disappointed that our visitors left - I think the President frightened them somewhat - as they would probably be able to help us and submit a utility model .
Perhaps , in doing so , they could use the method the rapporteur is now proposing , although we will naturally have to find out what the Commission intends to do in this respect .
We have to find out what one-stop shopping is ; it is a term we are used to in Spain but for different reasons .
Here , we are talking about a different sort of one-stop shopping , but the idea is that if someone submits a utility model in an EU country , then this model should be recognised throughout the entire Community .
In this respect , the rapporteur is attempting to go slightly further than normal legislative work , because the Commission 's Green Paper only talked of three stages : firstly , harmonisation ; then mutual recognition by the Member States ; and lastly , regulations .
We still have not reached the stage of a uniform Community regulation but we could take another small step towards this stage .
It would be very interesting to know what the Commission thinks of this .
I should like to ask Commissioner Monti if he believes that , in the short term and on the basis of the proposals Parliament is making here , the Commission could establish this one-stop shopping procedure in such a way so as to ensure that if an inventive young person discovers an interesting toy , he can go to one EU country alone and , using this one-stop shopping procedure , be assured that his game will be recognised throughout the Community .
My colleague , Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes , is a colleague in two senses of the word : both as a Member of this House and as a professor of international law .
And it is clear that he has done some extraordinary work and that this is an excellent analytical and well researched report .
At an academic symposium , I would probably argue with him over a few points , because there will always be reasons for disagreement , but I believe that he has done some exceptional analytical work .
For example , he has paid great attention to the definition of invention , and what invention involves .
This is an issue that could lead to a lengthy discussion , as could the definition of the utility model based on a structure or configuration but not on a substance or specific procedure .
However , at this time of night , these issues are probably of little interest to the Members and I only wish to say that the Socialist Group supports the amendments by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights as well as the two amendments tabled by the Liberal Group .
Thank you very much , Mr Medina Ortega .
I do not believe that I frightened our young European visitors with my warm words .
But you may well be right in that young people are very intuitive and they may have guessed that I am a paediatrician , which may be what frightened them off .
In any case , I did not intend to alarm them but to simply give them a warm welcome to this House .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the utility model is a means of protection used in one form or another by most European countries , with the notable exception of Germany and France .
Given that these various certificates exist , it was indeed right to try to harmonise them .
We are therefore entirely in favour of the harmonisation of the legal provisions involved .
The rapporteur 's proposal is of a very high standard , as is always the case with Mr Aoveros .
Nevertheless , I have certain questions surrounding what seem to be inaccuracies .
One example of this is Amendment No 10 , which proposes a definition of invention that we believe to be somewhat broad and imprecise .
Also , the procedures for the one-stop shop should perhaps be clarified .
Is it a solely declarative procedure ?
On what elements is mutual recognition based ?
What linguistic rules will be applied ?
The rapporteur envisages a 50 % reduction in taxes for SMEs , individuals and universities .
This is a very good measure , as the utility model must be economical , especially for SMEs .
I think that it would be particularly beneficial if all the taxes were so low that there was no need to reduce them .
Mr President , I welcome this report and congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
This proposed directive introduces the right to register a utility model .
This is a less-developed right than that which would qualify for a patent .
This right does not currently exist in all Member States .
For example , in the United Kingdom - my own country - this concept does not exist and consequently inventors can only register patents .
To register a patent , more research is needed , and higher standards of development .
The advantage of registering a utility model , as opposed to a patent , is that it is a quicker , cheaper and more simple procedure .
It is therefore to be welcomed .
I thank the rapporteur for accepting my amendment , tabled in committee , and now taken up by Mrs Thors , as this will assist the European toy industry and will be of great interest for Europe 's younger citizens .
I have received some letters of concern from interested parties that the Commission proposal , as drafted , is a little too lax .
The rapporteur has addressed these concerns by introducing requirements for searches before litigation and before the life of the utility model can be extended beyond six years .
I support these proposals and again thank the rapporteur for his diligent work .
I must congratulate Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes on the quality of his report .
I welcome the fact that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights has not queried the Commission approach to this dossier and that the features of utility models , as set out in the proposal for a directive , have been retained . These are : an inventive step lesser than required for trade marks , no preliminary examination of the conditions of merit , and a period of protection limited to ten years .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has adopted 33 amendments , and the Commission is able to accept 24 of them , but five of that number in part only .
We in fact think that these amendments clarify and better define some aspects of the proposal .
I am referring more particularly here to Amendments Nos 4 and 33 , which provide for the directive to be monitored by the Commission .
That will allow us to assess the practical operation of the directive and to fill in any gaps three years after the directive has been incorporated by the Member States .
The Commission cannot , however , accept nine amendments , including Amendments Nos 1 , 6 in part and 13 concerning the introduction of a one-stop shopping procedure .
I well understand what motivates these amendments , but introducing a procedure of that nature goes beyond the objective of this proposal for a directive , which is to align the national provisions on utility models which have a more direct impact on the operation of the single market .
Moreover , that sort of procedure would raise a number of problems at a legal and a practical level without resolving the problems of transfer , but would not appear to respond to any of the needs voiced by the relevant economic groups .
Amendment No 18 , which provides for the introduction of an opposition procedure , also goes beyond the limits of the kind of harmonisation the directive is meant to achieve .
This is a procedural issue that must be left to the assessment of the Member States , in accordance with the principle of proportionality .
Moreover , no such proposal has ever been tabled in the discussions of the groups of experts in the Council .
However , Mr Medina Ortega , as in the case of the earlier amendments , the possibility of introducing an opposition procedure could be considered as part of the monitoring provided for in the directive itself .
Other amendments also raise problems : I am referring here to parts of Amendments Nos 2 , 6 and 8 and the whole of Amendments Nos 23 and 24 which relate , directly or indirectly , to the scope of the directive .
These amendments are designed to exclude substances and processes from the scope of the directive .
I would draw your attention to the fact that excluding substances and processes from protection by utility model harks back to a now outdated view .
The consultation set under way with the 1995 Green Paper showed that most of the groups concerned were in favour of including substances and processes .
The three-dimensional requirement , which therefore excludes protection of substances and processes , is a step backwards in Member States ' legislation .
Currently , only four Member States regard three-dimensional format as a condition of obtaining protection by utility model .
For those reasons , the Commission is unable to take on board these amendments .
Nor can we accept Amendment No 12 , which provides for a reduction in fees for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I absolutely appreciate the concerns reflected in that amendment , but a provision of that nature cannot be included in a harmonising directive , as it would have financial implications for the Member States disproportionate to the aim of the directive .
It might be possible to introduce a recital mirroring the concept which underpins that amendment .

There are other amendments which the Commission is unable to accept : Amendment No 15 which provides , in addition to control a posteriori , control a priori of the exemptions , cannot be accepted because it calls into question the fact that there is no formal examination of the conditions of protection ; nor can we accept part of Amendments Nos 6 and 10 or the whole of Amendment No 16 , which put forward practical or technical advantage as an additional condition for obtaining protection .
That would introduce a new requirement , whereas technical or practical advantage must be considered as simply justifying inventive activity .
Nor are we able to accept Amendment No 30 , which provides that applications for utility models are invalid if the owner was not entitled to the utility model , since the invention could no longer be considered to be new ; rather than making it invalid , it would be appropriate to make provision , in cases of that kind , for the right to be transferred to the genuine inventor .


I should like to end by mentioning the amendments tabled during this part-session : the Commission can , in principle , accept Amendments Nos 34 and 35 , both of which are designed to allow full and equal legal protection for games and toys by utility models : in particular , by deleting the word ' game ' in Article 3 ( 2 ) ( c ) , Amendment No 34 will place games and toys on an equal footing for the purposes of protection by utility model ; Amendment No 35 reflects the same need in its Article 6 which relates to the criteria for defining inventive activity .
But Amendment No 35 , although , as I have said , acceptable in principle , needs to be worded differently in the Commission 's view .
I think , Mr President , that if , as we had all hoped , our young Europeans had waited until now , they might perhaps have understood that we were discussing games and toys , albeit , I regret to say , in rather complicated technical terms .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Social protection in Europe
The next item is the report ( A4-0099 / 99 ) by Mr Pronk , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the report from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : Social protection in Europe ( 1997 ) - Executive summary ( COM ( 98 ) 0243 - C4-0375 / 98 ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Pronk .

Mr President , I know that Mr Flynn cannot be here this evening because of an urgent appointment , although the report does , of course , come under his portfolio .
But I am very pleased that Commissioner Monti is here , because I must admit that his work in this field was part of the inspiration for our report .
There are certain parallels between the fields of social security and taxation , firstly because a substantial proportion of social security is paid for out of tax revenue , secondly because people often regard social security contributions as taxes , and thirdly , and most importantly , because under the Amsterdam Treaty both can only be changed by a unanimous decision .
So it is good to see the laborious but constant progress that the Commissioner has made in the field of taxation .
We welcome the Commission 's report on social security .
The social security system was a response to the social question that arose at the end of the last century , and now , a century later , we can see that the problems associated with it have still not been resolved .
However , social security has proved to be an important instrument for adapting the 19th century market economy to the needs of social justice .
If we look at the figures we can see that , at 28.5 % , social security and social protection account for a considerable proportion of Europe 's GDP .
Millions of people in the European Union depend on unemployment benefits , invalidity benefits , pensions and health-care schemes .
The Union 's prosperity has also advanced thanks to this comprehensive system which provides help in times of difficulty , need and crisis .



The Council of Ministers delivered a recommendation in 1992 on the convergence of social protection objectives and policies , and I have therefore included a number of recommendations in my report to promote greater convergence .

I call on the Commission to put forward an action plan which should include the following : the criteria for a benchmarking process in the area of social security ; secondly , a code of conduct for avoiding harmful competition via social security systems ; thirdly , precise figures for the economic damage arising from the evasion of social security contributions ; fourthly , proposals for minimum standards based on the Amsterdam Treaty for certain areas of social protection ; and fifth , the determination of a poverty line in order to establish an acceptable minimum income .
There are two points I would like to enlarge on .
The first is the benchmarking process .
Following the example of the European employment strategy - another successful element in the European Union 's social and economic policy - and the criteria for economic and monetary union , comparisons must be made between the Member States .
Benchmarking can help the Member States to make decisions in order to develop a sound and decent social protection system , particularly now when a number of factors are placing increasing pressure on the system , such as the growth in the number of people of retirement age and the number of one-person households .
Both of these groups tend to be very dependent on the social security system .
The second point I wish to enlarge on is the idea of producing figures on the economic damage arising from the evasion of social security contributions .
In my view , this is something that is often sidelined as unimportant and therefore negligible , and people tend to think that only small sums are involved .
Yet I have never seen any figures to prove this scientifically .
The evasion of contribution payments affects something else on which the European social model stands or falls , and that is solidarity .
Mr President , I do not have much time left , and social security is something we could talk about at length .
I know that there are a number of others who wish to speak in this debate .
I would like to thank everyone for enabling us to reach a consensus , and I hope that this report will be adopted .
Above all , I hope that the Commission will be able to use it to produce a policy for convergence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me at the start of this debate to express my regret at the resignation a few hours ago of the German Finance Minister .
I am saying this in the context of the present discussion , because in Oskar Lafontaine we had found a comrade-in-arms , one of the few European politicians who was far-sighted enough to recognise and defend the European dimension at all times .
You especially , Commissioner Monti , will understand my response to this news , because Mr Lafontaine had begun to implement the proposal you made quite some time ago on the reduction of non-wage labour costs as a means of making labour a less expensive production factor .
Many aspects of social protection in Europe , of course , are still not given nearly enough consideration in terms of their European dimension in many Member States .
Politicians are still far happier to discuss them in the small provincial forum of national politics and fail to realise that the people of our countries , the workforce , have long come to expect European action too in this domain .
The Socialist Group supports Mr Pronk 's report , partly because it provides good continuity from the first two reports which we adopted here in the Chamber and for which I had the pleasure of doing the preparatory work and formulating the conclusions .
I also find it right and proper that Mr Pronk has not endorsed everything the Commission has proposed , since there were certainly some points in the report of which we were highly critical in the committee .
I shall only mention one of the proposals which I believe is unacceptable in its present form : in connection with the need to cut health service costs , you have proposed more direct contributions by patients towards the cost of services .
I believe that would be a very one-sided perspective , and we shall naturally be unable to adopt everything as it stands .
Mr Pronk dealt with several areas in detail .
I intend to confine myself to a few points that seem to me to be very important , such as proposals on a flexible transition to retirement and consultation between management and labour on such matters .
In many Member States , employers have been far too ready to discard older workers by means of systematic early retirement .
That will certainly have to be made more flexible .
In addition , we shall have to pay more serious attention than has been given in the past to the need for women to be accorded equal rights within the social security system , and we have supplemented the report in that respect .
I also support Mr Pronk 's proposals because , with his Dutch regard for consensus , if I may say that , he has adopted demands that we in the PSE Group made in various areas where we expect specific aims , specific measures and above all directives and action programmes from the Commission .
It is not enough , now that we have the third communication - fine and good and important though it may be - to produce more new communications .
We need quite specific legislative proposals , including proposals based on Articles 13 and 137 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The Commission also has our support in the negotiations , in the struggle with the Council of Ministers .
They know that Parliament expects more than communications .
We also expect tangible qualitative progress .
What has been submitted in the framework of the dialogue between European management and labour is not enough for us either , not even the latest results , which still fall far short of the expectations of the European Parliament .
I should like to take up one final point made by Mr Pronk .
At the end of his speech , he referred to solidarity and to the evasion of welfare contributions in our systems .
We must not forget that employers are by far the main culprits when it comes to the evasion of welfare contributions , as any of us who have looked behind the scenes will know .
Public opinion , unfortunately , has a highly distorted view of this situation .
We all know about the economic benefits of the single market , which are becoming increasingly obvious .
But what we lack is social protection at the European level .
Social security is not a relic from the past but the model for the future , a model through which the people of Europe can begin once more to trust and accept the European institutions .
Applause
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by expressing my sincere thanks to the rapporteur for the work he has done .
I emphatically welcome the proposed action plan .
May I say to Mrs Weiler that her contribution has demonstrated the broad cross-party consensus that exists within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
But I should also like to say that while I do not , of course , entirely share her regret at the resignation of Mr Lafontaine , I do freely admit that there is now a danger that the labour wing of the German Social Democratic Party will face difficult times as well .
There can be no doubt that the preservation of peace within European society crucially depends on social security .
All Member States must launch additional efforts to increase employment .
Besides unemployment , demographic development is also a major burden on the welfare state .
In the face of this pressure , the principle of social solidarity must not be sacrificed under any circumstances .
I fully agree with the rapporteur on that point . We must try to increase the activity rate .
That applies to women , but it also applies to our senior citizens who , as you said , Mrs Weiler , suffer discrimination .
The burden of statutory non-wage labour costs , particularly in the service sector , must be reduced .
At the same time , the reduction process must not lead to distortions of competition .
Atypical forms of work present another problem .
It is high time an appropriate level of social protection was created at European level for those whose work does not fit into the usual pattern .
Without intensive cooperation among the Member States , there will be no progress on social protection and employment .
At the same time , it is especially important to exclude any scope for social dumping .
Pressure must be exerted to obtain further progress towards the equal treatment of men and women .
Gradual convergence of the national welfare systems must be pursued , with due regard for the subsidiarity principle .
The development of supplementary pension schemes , based on the formation of coverage capital , must be subject to strict safeguards to protect employees from fraud and loss of pension rights .
The compulsory systems must not be eroded and put at risk .
Before the European Union is enlarged , the applicant countries must redefine and improve the criteria for the convergence of their welfare systems so as to avoid unforeseen consequences for the entire EU .
The emigration of young , well-qualified specialists could set back the applicant countries ' economies by several years , as well as wreaking havoc on the labour markets of the established Member States .
Last , but by no means least , let me say quite emphatically that , within the framework of social solidarity , the European model must come up with sound solutions in terms of the creation of pro-family employment strategies .
At the same time , we must never forget that , in addition to childcare , consideration must also be given to the ever-increasing need for employees to care for elderly parents and other dependent family members .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Pronk report contains a whole raft of measures which we really need to take , and the convergence of social security and taxation is becoming a particularly important issue , partly as a result of the introduction of the euro .
But the actual situation in reality is quite different , with the Member States still creating obstacles to prevent people from working in other countries .
One current example is Germany , where there are tax obstacles that make it very difficult for foreign companies to take work in Germany .
The staff of such companies have to pay regular taxes , which I think is extremely strange , and it is something that Mr Lafontaine has failed to tackle .
My own country , the Netherlands , also knows a bit about this sort of thing .
The review of the taxation agreement between Belgium and the Netherlands places an enormous financial burden on Dutch frontier workers .
As long as we have these huge differences in tax and social security and we still get up to all kinds of tricks when it comes to recognising diplomas and certificates , a great many job opportunities will be lost in border areas , both now and in the future .
Another example is the lack of policy coordination on supplementary pensions , both on the question of deductibility and on tax on the eventual payments .
This is a major obstacle to the free movement of workers , and I am therefore very pleased that Commissioner Monti announced this week that he is to put forward a proposal very shortly to deal with these problems .
I have always welcomed his proposals in this field , and I hope that the Council will act upon them .
This morning in our discussion of the annual economic report for 1999 , I called for greater international mobility of labour .
This will become increasingly important over the next few years , since EMU means that unemployment can no longer be tackled with monetary measures alone .
Labour mobility is needed as an adaptation mechanism for tackling regional unemployment in the Member States .
But we must not allow social security discrepancies to prevent this mobility from happening .
We therefore need to work together to achieve convergence in this field , both on social security and on taxation .
Mr President , this morning , a French newspaper ran the headline ' Social Europe stumbles ' . Indeed , it is true that there is still a great deal to be done in the context of the single market and the single currency to ensure that social protection is not the variable used for adjustment to the detriment of workers , and that the Union 's companies are not subjected to unfair competition through widespread social dumping .
However , it is true that if social Europe is stumbling , it is because we do not have sufficient legal bases .
This is the reason behind the determination of politicians such as Bartho Pronk , who is making every effort to bring about a social Europe , and his report today is proof of that .
In France , the President of the Republic pointed out in his speech to the national parliament that as well as a European civilisation , there is a European social model , which cannot be separated from European citizenship .
That is why we must constantly defend this European social model .
It is with this in mind that I completely support the rapporteur 's objective of establishing a certain degree of social convergence in Europe , not through standardisation , but through increased cooperation between the Member States on social matters .
I also support Bartho Pronk 's request for minimum European standards for certain social provisions , as well as a structured process of voluntary consultation at European level on the objectives and policies related to social protection , especially as regards the European employment strategy that was adopted at the Luxembourg summit .
I am convinced that adopting guidelines on social matters would genuinely encourage our governments to seek a productive and essential balance between solidarity and competitiveness .
As we have just celebrated Women 's Day , I would like to emphasise an important element for the many women who work , that is , reconciling their family and professional lives .
Obviously , this not only affects women , but also children .
In this respect , the report calls on the Council to include specific objectives in the guidelines on social policy to develop child-care structures as well as facilities for relatives who require a certain level of care .
I would like us to be able to include this dimension of social protection in the social policy that is to be defined by Parliament .
I am aware that certain politicians are not in favour of this .
I would like to quote these words from a German socialist Minister , who was speaking about the Treaty of Amsterdam : ' So many difficult compromises have been hammered out that it is not very glamorous for a Prime Minister to go back home and tell his people that he has managed to negotiate measures on child policy ' . This is an outrageous thing to say , and in my view child policy is also part of the social protection we owe our citizens .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Pronk on his report , and also the Committee for Employment and Social Affairs which , through its amendments , has made it a very good one .
A few aspects of social security and a social system founded on solidarity which are important , indeed crucial , to me are stated at the outset , namely that everyone must assume responsibility and contribute in a spirit of solidarity to basic social security .
Even though private supplementary insurance may be both right and important as an element in the adjustment of our social insurance systems , which are suffering under the strain of increasing numbers of elderly people in the population , it must not be allowed to undermine our common responsibility , with the result that we end up with different levels of health care - we hear shocking stories of such situations in countries like the USA .
We must instead safeguard the principle of common responsibility and maintain a social system based on solidarity .
Unemployment costs a great deal of money and puts severe stress on social expenditure .
For that reason , it is important as part of our social security to ensure that more jobs are created .
A factor involved here is the need to bring down tax on labour , which is something that Mr Pronk also takes up .
The internal market has of course increased the need for cooperation and coordination in the field of social security .
There is also a need for a code of conduct on illegal competition with inferior social provisions - what we are accustomed to call social dumping .
There is a need for minimum levels of security of employment , which should include the proliferation of atypical forms of employment which are now appearing .
We must however also remember that , when we speak of social convergence , it is a voluntary adjustment , a coordination of aims and strategies , which is required .
It is to a large extent a question of mutual recognition of social security provisions , employment insurance schemes , pension systems and so on , which is also important in the context of freedom of movement .
With the new proposal which the Commission has put forward , on which I have been asked to draw up Parliament 's report , protection is also extended to citizens of third countries , frontier workers , students and so forth , which is entirely the right way to go .
Finally , the report takes up discrimination and social exclusion .
The resolve to devise a coherent plan to tackle this as soon as possible and to reduce the number of socially excluded and poor people in Europe is really something that we in the Green Group support .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a lot of very worthwhile points have been made about the Pronk report , and I agree with the calls for general solidarity and for a realistic and careful approach to a new society in which the concept of care has assumed a whole new dimension .
All of these things must be included in the programme .
These days , the Member States are making very considerable efforts to provide social protection , but because society is changing and ageing , because so many women now have jobs outside the home , because there are one-parent families and so on , there are more and more new things that social protection does not cover .
I would urge that our view of the responsibilities in this field should not be too dogmatic , but that we should at least grant the same social rights which should also be available to those in unpaid work .
Commissioner , it is obvious that we need a European social pillar .
Cooperation between the Member States needs to be stepped up as a result of EMU and the European employment strategy .
There must be a social safety net for everyone .
We do not actually have much time left , because convergence on social protection is urgently needed .
I would call for entirely practical measures to be taken , as Mr Pronk does in his report and the Social Affairs Committee does as well .
The current differences in the cost of social protection distort competition between the Member States and thus threaten employment .
I would like to mention just one example of the many I could quote .
Renault 's departure from Flanders has caused great bitterness .
We need minimum standards for social security and pay if we are to have a genuinely social Europe .
But this in itself is not a solution for countries with a very highly developed and expensive social security system based on general solidarity , which has a considerable effect on the cost of labour .
We do not want social security in such countries to disintegrate , but it is clear that an effective employment policy must remain the basis of the system throughout Europe .
There should not be employment in some countries with little social protection and unemployment in countries with a high level of social protection .
No , thank you .
Convergence is what we need , and the sooner the better !
Mr President , perhaps I take a rather different view from the rest of you , not so much on the matter itself as on the place where matters should be dealt with .
Questions of welfare , relationships between children and parents and between the generations , education , social security , and dental and medical care are , first and foremost , national issues .
There is no reason to harmonise them or to regulate them in detail at EU level .
On the other hand , there are sound reasons for the mutual recognition of different systems , so that people who move from one country to another can avail themselves of their social benefits in the new country .
In this area , there are many deficiencies and a great deal to be done .
The most important question at EU level in my view is employment .
But in that area the EU has failed !
When Sweden applied for membership 10 years ago , in 1990 , we had unemployment running at 2.3 % .
Today the figure matches the EU average , 10 to 12 % .
There are immigrant areas in Sweden which , ten years ago , had an unemployment rate of 50 % ; the current rate is 75 % , perhaps even 90 % .
I am not saying that it is the EU 's or anyone else 's fault , but I am saying that we have failed to solve the most serious social problem , which is hitting vulnerable groups unable to do much about that reality - children and unemployed people who have nothing to live on - particularly hard .
The EU has paid too much attention to the economy , markets , trade and competition .
It was important to do that , but there was not always the same concern to consider the consequences .
The project that overshadows everything is EMU , which has been very costly in terms of economy plans , cutbacks and increased unemployment .
We now have 18 million unemployed and 50 million people in poverty .
That is far too many !
Apart from unemployment , social questions to which the EU should give priority are the major problems concerning the shaping of public opinion to combat discrimination against groups such as immigrants , women and the unemployed , trafficking in human beings and the fight against drugs .
In this area , there is any amount of work to be done .
Here too , the approach should be to give advice , direction and support to the Member States through common guidelines at EU level , but to leave the implementation of decisions to the national level .
EU cooperation in the social field should concentrate on the following four areas : jobs and unemployment , reducing exclusion and poverty , curbing discrimination and social dumping , and strengthening equality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , throughout the Union , welfare systems and welfare reforms are at the top of the political agenda .
There are good reasons why political action is so obviously required in this area .
The introduction of the euro has undoubtedly had an impact on wage policies and hence on social protection in the various Member States .
At the same time , despite a high level of economic activity , Europe is struggling to cope with a vast army of unemployed .
This means that welfare systems have been subject to increasing demand , while the funds allocated to them have been increasingly restricted .
Our finance ministers , as you all know , have to operate with tight budgets , and increasing taxes would only harm Europe 's international standing as a business location .
Against this background , the common aim of all the efforts to reform welfare systems must be to safeguard the effectiveness of the system in the long term , while structuring it in such a way - and let me stress this point - that it promotes economic growth and the creation of new jobs , instead of stifling them .
Let me start by thanking Mr Pronk for his excellent report and for his generous words which I personally welcome for two reasons .
The objective , namely tax coordination to which he made reference , does not aim simply at improving the single market but has also a social objective in making tax systems more labour-friendly .
In the instruments there are indeed striking similarities between what has been devised to fight harmful tax competition and what the rapporteur is proposing in terms of a code of conduct for avoiding harmful competition via social security systems .
Mr Pronk has taken the opportunity arising from the publication of the report on social protection for 1997 , presented by the Commission at the initiative and under the guidance of Commissioner Flynn to open up a debate in Parliament on the future challenges facing Europe 's social protection systems .
This is valuable and also very timely , for reasons that I will come to .
I can state that the Commission welcomes the resolution that you are debating today .
You are giving the right message at the right time .
Europe is living through a period of change : change in the world of work , change in society and in family structures , technological change and a major demographic change .
All Member States face these changes to a greater or lesser extent .
We need new , innovative approaches if our social protection systems are to continue to perform their traditional and very important roles : income redistribution , building social cohesion , and providing security against social risks as they have done over the last fifty years .
In 1995 the Commission launched a debate on the future of social protection .
The aim was to trigger a process of joint reflection to look together for solutions and to learn from each other .
Not having been an initiator of this - it was Commissioner Flynn - I can say in retrospect , on a personal basis , that this was perhaps one of the very first examples of trying to achieve progress through comparison , through peer review , and similar processes , which I find very helpful .
In 1997 the Commission took stock of this debate in its communication : Modernising and Improving Social Protection .
The Commission 's main message throughout this process has been that there is an urgent need to modernise social protection in the European Union .
Modernising means adapting systems to the new social and economic conditions in which they operate .
It does not mean abandoning the high ideals and important objectives which lie behind these systems .
It means changing methods and approaches where necessary in order to ensure that we can continue to give our citizens the high levels of social protection that they want .
At the same time we must ensure that our systems are sustainable .
The important of a high level of social protection was underlined in the reactions to the 1997 communication , in particular the resolution of the European Parliament , prepared by Mrs Weiler , and in the discussions on the European social policy forum .
The process of rapid social , economic and political change goes on .
At European level alone , since we launched our debate on modernising and improving social protection we can take note of the following : the Amsterdam Treaty has been adopted and will shortly come into force , incorporating a new chapter on employment and other relevant developments to do with social exclusion , non-discrimination and public health .
The European employment strategy has been successfully put into place and Member States have made a good start on implementation .
The single currency was introduced in January .
Enlargement negotiations have been launched with five countries in Central and Eastern Europe .
It is important to recognise that these developments will impact on both Member States ' social protection systems and our ways of cooperating at European level .
The time is ripe to take the process of joint reflection on the future of our social protection systems a step further .
The proposals made in Parliament 's resolution go in the right direction .
You clearly support what is a central theme in this process - the need to work together closely and the great benefits that can flow from doing so .
Social protection policy is a matter for which Member States have responsibility .
There are considerable differences between the systems of the 15 Member States .
Nevertheless we are facing common problems and challenges .
We have common objectives .
All of us have much to gain from a common reflection .
You also send a clear message to the Commission and the Member States to be ambitious in this process .
The Commission will keep these views very much in mind when we come back with our proposals on how to take forward these ideas on social protection .
We will be issuing a new and ambitious communication in the next few months .
Your resolution is a timely input in that regard that we value very much .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Mr Schiedermeier has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , allow me to make a brief comment .
Many of our colleagues will take any opportunity to criticise the conduct of the Commission .
That is why I find it all the more regrettable that there are Members of the House who deliver their contributions to the debate and then immediately leave the Chamber without waiting for the reply from the Commissioner , who has been good enough to stay here until 9 p.m.
May I offer my personal apologies for the conduct of my colleagues .
Thank you , Mr Schiedermeier .
Your comments will be recorded in the Minutes .
With that , ladies and gentlemen , we have reached the end of our agenda .
It has been a longer day than usual , which has meant extra work for all the services of the House , who deserve our particular thanks .
The sitting was closed at 9 p.m.
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I rise on the comment made by my colleague , Mr Evans , yesterday regarding the quantity of documentation we receive .
I feel he has made a very good point .
Given the amount of paper we have received this morning , if these votes are going to continue , will the President look into the provision of extra trunks for Members in future to allow us to get the results back to our offices in Brussels ?
I will ask the services to investigate that matter .
Parliament approved the Minutes
VOTES
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations fully supports this report and the amendments which were adopted in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
The Commission 's proposal calls into question the Community Customs Code as defined in the original Regulation ( EEC ) No 2913 / 92 .
I must stress the importance of the Community Customs Code for third countries , in particular the former CEECs .
This code serves as a reference and a model for many countries in urgent need of operational customs legislation enabling them to integrate into the world of international trade .
In terms of commercial policy , although the customs tariff is losing its importance as an instrument for the protection of certain industries , it is still used to support competition policy .
Anti-dumping and countervailing duties are applied in accordance with the rules and procedures of the Community Customs Code .
With regard to agricultural policy , the code 's customs procedures are used to manage the export refund arrangements .
The new WTO rules depend on the code .
In terms of external trade statistics , the Single Administrative Document provided for in the Code Implementing Provisions remains the instrument on which the gathering of statistics is based .
Given this essential role of the Community Customs Code , our group cannot understand the Commission 's proposal to eliminate or minimise the role of Member States in the procedure for implementing the Community Customs Code .
As an example , in the current regulation Member States may reserve the right , on their territory , to make customs declarations by direct or indirect representation in order to preserve the role of the customs agent .
In this new proposal , the Commission limits this right to the indirect representation procedure .
If this measure were adopted , the role of the customs agents would be significantly limited and a large number would disappear .
The new provisions therefore seem to favour negative changes with a reduction in customs control by Member States , the elimination of jobs for customs agents and therefore an increase in the opportunities for fraud and a reduction in the Community preference .
As for the customs procedures and the placing of goods under a customs procedure , the Commission is proposing a system of exceptions for all companies making declarations electronically .
The very principle of protection by Member States will be diminished because these electronic documents will eventually be sent directly to the Community institutions .
To conclude , from the two examples which I have just given , you will understand why our group is using its vote to oppose any change to the Community Customs Code which would lead to a reduction in Community preference and in the role of companies and national authorities in the customs process .
I am surprised that , under the pretext of administrative simplification , the Commission is proposing to weaken the principle of Community preference together with a de facto reduction in controls which risk leading to an increase in fraud , particularly on the eve of new negotiations within the World Trade Organisation .
The report deals with a range of social questions which do not fall within the EU 's decision-making powers .
We consider that the EU 's regulatory system in the social field should concentrate entirely on minimum measures designed to counteract social dumping .
Other aspects of social policy must be handled at national and local level .
This report goes considerably further in the quest for harmonisation and in making proposals in fields such as child care and pensions .
We therefore voted against the report .
The unfaltering political choice of the European Union and Member States to further dismantle not only the social security system but also , in more general terms , the system of social protection which has reigned in Europe since the war as a result of the effective struggles of the workers ' movement is becoming ever more apparent .
The Commission report on social protection in Europe calls on Member States to strengthen their efforts to promote gainful employment .
It regards the provision of medical and hospital care as a mere commercial commodity and insured people as consumers who must limit their demand . It proposes measures to modernise social protection and to adapt systems of social protection to changing circumstances by means of privatisation of health provision and pension cover .
The report of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , while it contains some positive findings and puts forward relevant measures , accepts in its entirety the new social protection framework . It addresses existing problems of the financing of systems of social protection from the standpoint of their impact on the competitiveness of the European economy , thereby lending support to those who call for a reduction in spending and for partial privatisation of social provision .
Regarding the assessment contained in the report that the strengthening of market mechanisms in the area of medical and hospital care must not result in a two-tier health service , we wish to say that privatising a part of medical and hospital care and strengthening market mechanisms in the sector will lead , de facto , to the creation of a two-tier health service .
Those with high levels of income will have no difficulty in paying high levels of contributions to private , profit-making schemes , while the overwhelming majority of working people will be restricted to minimum , low levels of provision .
The situation in Greece is typical , where we see that the NHS is being consciously downgraded and stripped bare , while the private sector is being shamefully strengthened .
We are categorically opposed to attempts - in the name of cost reduction - to further reduce the level of pension provision from state social security services and to reduce pensions which provide a minimum survival income , which will benefit private profit-making pension schemes to which those people will turn who want to improve on state subsistence pensions .
The recent announcement made by the President of IKA that the setting-up of a new supplementary insurance fund is being studied , which will function along purely private lines and which will be based on the principle of a direct link between the level of contributions and the level of provision , with the possible direct participation of private insurance capital , is giving rise to grave concerns .
We reject the new model of social protection which is being prepared .
We know that these choices are a direct consequence of the unpopular austerity policies imposed by the convergence criteria and the stability and growth pact and which exacerbate the problems of financing the state social security system and will eventually lead to its demise .
We believe that in the short term , the most fundamental way of addressing the problems of the state social protection system is to boost full-time , stable employment by promoting productive investment , especially in labour-intensive sectors . This can be achieved by providing support in terms of financial and tax incentives for SMEs which absorb the greatest share of overall employment , and by reducing working hours without reducing wages .
We also feel that there are solutions - other than the ones put forward - to the immediate financial problems of social security organisations , such as the strict enforcement of existing provisions of social security legislation regarding contributions , combating the evasion of social security contributions and undeclared work , taxing profit-making movements of capital , and the abolition of exemptions in the taxation of income from movable assets and derivatives .
Side by side with the working population , we are fighting to maintain and strengthen the state social security system of social protection , to broaden and improve the quality of provision in order to bring it in line with the objective of a high level of unified state social protection .
This report is right when it says that with the euro , the Member States now have no monetary options for relieving economic pressures , so that competitiveness , even within the European Union , will be focused more than ever on wage costs , taxation and the cost of social protection .
This is just one of the enormous problems that the introduction of the euro has caused , problems that have been swept under the carpet for purely ideological reasons without any proper debate .
Nevertheless , I totally reject the idea of harmonising social security at European level .
In Belgium , we know what it means when two nations are required to share the same social security system .
The automatic financing mechanisms produce the very opposite of solidarity , a sort of organised robbery .
This may sound harsh , but it is true .
We are heading in this same direction at European level , only worse , because experience with the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund has taught us that local and national authorities are , by definition , not very careful with ' European ' money .
So spare us this pressure for European harmonisation .
We need to understand that the greatest progress and the best forms of social security are achieved within clearly defined limits .
We can always create other forms of Community or extra-Community solidarity , but that is something else entirely .
Maritime cabotage , manning conditions on passenger craft
Mr President , the rapporteur , Mrs McIntosh , who has produced a substantial and important piece of work in this report , unfortunately cannot be here today .
She has therefore asked me to present the report .
I think that the basic consideration which one must focus on when dealing with a matter such as this is that the shipping industry in the EU is currently having a very difficult time .
It is up against increasingly harsh competition from other countries .
The ferry operators , for example , either immediately this summer or in a few years ' time in the event of a postponement , are faced with the abolition of duty-free trading and hence the loss of a substantial portion of their revenue .
In its proposal , the Commission emphasises the importance of free access to shipping markets throughout the world , along with the need to raise quality standards and to maintain or increase competition .
The Commission can also show that considerable progress has been made in these areas .
At the same time , however , working conditions for seafarers in the Union have deteriorated and employment is showing a consistently downward trend .
All this is the result of flagging-out , manning reductions and cheaper labour from third countries .
These developments have hitherto hit the freight sector hardest , but could also spread to the passenger sector .
The Commission is concerned to devise a Community policy which will both remove the incentive for flagging-out and harmonise market conditions for seafarers .
Hence the Commission 's first proposal under which the regulation on cabotage would be amended to provide for crews from third countries to be placed on an equal footing with seafarers from the Community .
The second proposal concerns the manning of vessels in regular passenger and ferry traffic .
On the matter of working conditions as well , the Commission is seeking equal treatment irrespective of whether the crew members are resident in a Member State or not .
There are grounds for misgivings as to some of the Commission 's proposals .
First of all , the question is prompted whether the time is right , having regard to all the problems that shipping is already facing in the EU .
The proposed directives on cabotage have given rise to concern in the industry , since they amount to direct intervention on the labour market , which many see as running directly counter to free trade in goods and services .
One of the aims the Commission seeks to achieve is to create equal conditions for competitors within the EU .
In actual fact , working conditions vary greatly from one Member State to another .
It is therefore also difficult to see the effect of the proposed measures .
The conclusion on this is that it is difficult for the moment to see any acceptable reason why the regulation on passenger traffic should be amended .
The present version expires in the year 2001 .
It should be added that the Commission has itself already proposed voluntary changes ; that happened , for example , in a report which was presented in 1995 .
The rapporteur therefore proposes that we should not make any change in this part before the Commission has examined what effects the liberalisation of passenger and ferry traffic will have .
Amendment No 4 proposes that the economic and social consequences of the liberalisation of cabotage should be reviewed and a report submitted to the Council and Parliament at the latest by 1 January 2001 .
On the basis of this report , the Commission should then present proposals on a definitive system .
As regards the directive on manning , efforts should be concentrated on areas other than those the Commission addresses .
If we want to increase the competitiveness of the entire industry , the first concern should be to promote training and know-how in the maritime sector , something the Transport Committee has taken up in other contexts too .
The rapporteur has developed this in Amendment No 8 .
Let me conclude by just saying that the rapporteur takes a positive view of all the amendments proposed , with the exception of Amendment No 7 .
Mr President , earlier this week Parliament had an in-depth discussion about the future of Europe 's railways , and today gives us the opportunity to do the same in regard to intra-European Union shipping .
I thank the rapporteur , Miss McIntosh , for her work .
I am sorry she cannot be with us here today - no doubt it is due to other commitments in another house .
I should also like to say that her initial ideas , based on Conservative Party dogma , were not relevant , nor indeed helpful .
However , she has changed her mind on that and we now have a more balanced , more pro-European report as a result .
This report deals with manning levels on intra-EU services and on cabotage .
I am going to confine my remarks to the manning proposals , as it appears , sadly , that within the Council the cabotage issue is dead and buried .
Firstly , it must be said that these proposals deal with intra-EU and not deep-sea services .
Secondly , my Group believes that action has long been overdue because of the increase in use recently of non-EU seafarers to crew those vessels at wage rates and conditions of service well below accepted EU levels .
In short , EU shipowners have started to introduce flags of convenience in this sector , just as they have done previously on deep-sea operations .
The Commission should be congratulated on taking action early in the sector to ensure that , where third-country nationals are employed on intra-EU services , they are employed on the same conditions as our EU seafarers .
I shall be totally honest with the House this morning . I should like to see a directive which states that only EU seafarers must be used on intra-EU services .
However , I recognise that this is not possible , which is why our Group supports the principle of having the same conditions of service for those non-EU seafarers .
We cannot let our ferry operators , in particular , become cheap-labour , lower-standard employers .
If we do this , then we sign the final death warrant for European Union seafarers .
That is why this report is important ; that is why it is important that the European Union and the European Parliament send a message very clearly and very loudly to European ferry operators : we will not tolerate non-EU seafarers being employed on lower wages and conditions than our own people .
Mr President , the Commission rightly points out that there is a problem in the Community maritime sector as regards the decline of the seafaring profession and unemployment in the sector .
This situation is mainly due to the introduction of flag changes , to austerity measures and to cheaper manpower from third countries .
The cargo services sector seems to have been hit the hardest by these changes , but it seems that passenger services and ferry services may also be affected .
That is why , in the two reports we are debating , a number of measures have been proposed which attempt to address the problem .
The intentions of the Commission are essentially well-meaning , but two objections need to be raised . First of all , given that the directives cover all vessels which belong to the European Union but which are registered outside the Community , and given that there are maritime areas between Member States which are regarded as international waters , many questions arise as to the compatibility of the directive with the international commitments of the European Union and its Member States and with international law and international conventions .
We need to be very careful on this score .
Secondly , although the aim of the directive is to protect employment , it is not at all certain that in the end we will achieve this goal . The difficulties that will be faced by the regular ferry services as a result of the abolition of duty-free cannot be overcome by unified conditions of employment .
The proposal may go some way to putting a stop to the use of cheap labour , but it will not protect the sustainability of the services or employment .
In the end , it may not help our own seafarers , which must be our fundamental objective .
Let us not forget that many shipping companies are companies with a broad popular base , and therefore the motivation behind our reasoning must be to strengthen the competitiveness of these companies , since only in this way will we be able to serve the interests of our seafarers .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that although Mr Stenmarck has done an extremely good job of standing in for Mrs McIntosh , it seems a pity that she herself has not been able to present her last report in the House .
I agree with the rapporteur that maritime transport is indeed going through hard times , not just because it faces fierce competition , but also because it is a sector that has really dug its own grave by persisting in its old ways for far too long .
The abolition of duty-free has absolutely nothing to do with it , Mr Stenmarck , let us be quite clear on that point .
It is about time that all the fuss about duty-free stopped and the maritime sector got on with things like everybody else .
Duty-free still exists outside the Community , and that is bad enough .
So what is the problem ?
The problem is a serious social one .
Contrary to what everyone thinks , ship 's captains and officers are not really very well paid , and these days no one wants to spend a long time away from home without a break .
This is why there are no European crews any more , and it also means that the infrastructure is collapsing .
The nautical colleges are disappearing , which is jeopardising maritime safety .
We have seen many examples of this , such as in your own country , Mr President , where the only tug available was manned by Chinese and a Chinese restaurant owner had to be fetched to communicate with them .
Generally there are not enough European crews available and we have to do something about this .
We need to improve the social conditions for the entire crew , and in particular for the officers .
Mr President , on the occasion of the debate on the amendment of Council Regulation No 3577 / 92 , I would like to say that we think it essential to highlight the negative impact that the relaxation of cabotage has had on the employment of maritime workers in the Community .
For countries like Greece in particular , the relaxation of cabotage for passenger , cargo and ferry services in domestic waters is closely associated with sovereign rights and with the ability of the country to defend itself in the particularly sensitive area of the Aegean . It also exacerbates social problems such as procurement , the development of small and peripheral islands , and maintaining island populations .
Moreover , it is giving rise to significant concerns about the new , immediate and extremely serious threat of the prospect of thousands of job losses .
However , the Commission has failed to draw the necessary conclusions from the current implementation of the Council regulation on the relaxation of cabotage . Without first conducting a necessary and substantial impact study , it is proceeding to amend it , thereby further aggravating the situation .
With this proposal , the Commission is aiming to limit the competence of the host state to determining the required proportion of Community nationals in the crew , while all other matters relating to manning will be the responsibility of the flag state .
Vital issues such as the integrated structure and conditions of work and pay are to be decided on the basis of the flag state 's legislation .
This will mean segregating the crew into those who are included in the integrated structure by being listed on the ship 's register , and those who are not .
It will also encourage practices of social dumping and will have a catastrophic impact on employment .
By way of example , in certain European countries hotel staff , chambermaids , cooks and so on are not included in the employment structure , and therefore , in the name of equal conditions of competition , shipowners in Greece are demanding that this should be extended to ships flying the Greek flag .
All issues relating to manning levels must be decided in a uniform manner by the host state .
Against this background , we support the report of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which is calling for the proposals in question to be rejected .
We also support the request for a study to be carried out into the economic and social impact of the liberalisation of cabotage .
As regards the proposal for a directive on manning conditions , it is clear that all seafarers have a right to equal treatment , regardless of their nationality .
However , we are categorically opposed to the derogations put forward in the report , since these essentially allow for the circumvention of these provisions through the possibility of exemptions and waivers provided for in Article 3 , which the report unfortunately accepts .
Moreover , we believe that equal treatment must include not just conditions of employment , but must also cover working and safety conditions , pay and the implementation of collective bargaining agreements for the whole of the crew .
Against this background , therefore , we must put an end to any derogations which are negotiated through bilateral agreements which are often concluded with third countries .
Although the report of the Committee on Transport and Tourism accepts the proposal , it does not call for the amendment of those articles which lead to its circumvention . Its assessment is based on the argument of non-intervention in the labour market , which does not dispel the concern about the trend of using cheap labour from third countries .
Specifying the conditions for the employment of third-country nationals , which must be the same as the conditions applying to residents of the Member State which is the flag state , does not however deal with the problem of undeclared , uninsured work .
The rapporteur has made a very laudable effort , but we cannot agree with her on this point .
Undermining the provisions will lead to undeclared work and to unemployment among Community seafarers .
Mr President , the McIntosh report caused quite a stir in the Committee on Transport .
There seem to be substantial interests involved in the proposals .
In the first section on the conditions for cabotage within a Member State , it is proposed that each member of the crew should be paid the same , irrespective of origin .
This is designed to prevent social dumping , sailing with crews that are cheaper to employ than European workers .
However , I do not think this will cost many EU nationals their jobs , since 95 % of the crews on the vessels concerned are EU nationals anyway , mainly doing maritime work , whereas the non-EU nationals on the same vessels are mainly in non-maritime jobs .
So there is hardly any competition between the two groups .
This also means that the increase in costs for the shipowners applies only to a small number of workers .
The increase in labour costs as a result of this measure is almost completely offset by the income from duty-free .
I cannot see why people doing the same job should be paid different wages just because they are a different nationality , so there is every reason to agree with the Commission proposal .
The second proposal on manning conditions for ferry services between Member States extends the scope of these conditions to shipping companies established outside the European Union .
Under the relevant international conventions , only the port state can apply safety measures on board and more especially in the proximity of the vessel .
So as far as I can tell , the Commission proposal goes further than is actually possible at the moment .
In conclusion , I agree with the substance of the rapporteur 's Amendment No 4 , but I do not think that this directive is the right place to address this issue .
Mr President , the Commission deserves thanks for compiling its report , and thanks also go to the rapporteur for having brought out the importance and significance of the issue from the point of view of both employment and the future of shipping .
Every day an enormous number of people travel on passenger craft and ferries in the EU Member States , and their safety relies on professional expertise in the various tasks that are carried out on board by employees who can be entrusted with serious responsibilities .
An important factor here is that the pay and other working conditions of those employed in navigation should be in line with those of other occupations .
The Commission 's proposals tackle that very issue , and the European Parliament today has the opportunity to make its own important contribution to the final decision to be taken .
Using an unskilled and underpaid workforce to gain a competitive edge in shipping is a threat both to EU employment policy and transport safety .
There are , however , calls far and wide to outlaw this improper competitive practice .
The issue now to be discussed shows the European Union 's resolve to counter this negative development .
Safeguarding and improving employment is one of the most important obligations the European Union has taken upon itself ; many would say it is the most important .
All the institutions have expressed the will to tackle this issue , but often the problem has been that it has been hard to find practical ways of achieving this aim at Union level .
There has been conflict when such great emphasis has been placed on the importance of the employment objectives , yet responsibility for employment is ultimately the responsibility of the Member States .
Now the matter to be resolved is a practical example of employment policy being put into practice at Union level , and , in addition , it includes a sizeable element devoted to the issue of safety .
We must ensure that the EU develops and enlarges as a community in which market forces play the role that befits them , that is , one that is in the service of the people , and not one that dominates everyone and everything .
As markets become globalised , the European Union will perhaps be the main player , able to influence the framework for imposing conditions on the market within the context of the democratic decision-making process .
We must , in our own work , see to it that the Union fulfills that task .
We need a market economy , but not a market dictatorship .
There is reason to hope that the Commission and all the legislative machinery that evolves out of its initiative in the future will create regulations allowing us to live and travel safely in a Europe where our citizens earn their livelihood under the protection of a modern system of collective bargaining .
With regard to that , I wish to emphasise the importance of the trade unions , whose job is especially important now in the maritime sector when it comes to increasing safety standards for the public .
Mr President , we in Finland have a saying that once the ships were made of wood and the sailors of iron , but now the ships are of iron and the sailors are made of wood .
This will be the case if cheap labour is able to be exploited freely in EU shipping .
As the previous speaker said , it is also a matter of safety .
There are very many examples of problems : ships capsize , as for example the Estonia did , in the Baltic Sea , and others catch fire .
In these situations we need staff who have language skills , who are knowledgeable when it comes to local conditions , and who can rescue people from disaster .
This is why we cannot have a situation where the safety of navigation is under threat all because of cheap labour .
All these rules are positive , in the same way as the continuation of duty-free shopping would serve this purpose in the Nordic countries .
Mr President , I welcome Miss McIntosh 's report which supports the adoption of the proposal for a Council directive on manning conditions for regular passenger and ferry services operating between Member States .
May I take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur , albeit in her absence , for her excellent work on such an important and complex subject .
The Commission can agree to two of the amendments proposed .
It can accept the substance of Amendment No 1 , provided that it is put into an appropriate article on definitions , since it is in favour of excluding exclusively cargo services from the scope of the directive .
I would point out here that the Commission is currently carrying out a study of the directive 's economic impact , as requested by various delegations in the Council .
The scope of the directive may therefore be defined in greater detail in the light of the results of the study , which will be submitted to the Council in April .
As far as Amendment No 5 is concerned , the Commission can accept it on condition that the deadline for submission of the report is given .
Let us now move on to the amendments which the Commission cannot accept .
Amendment No 2 cannot be accepted as employment contracts are by definition individual contracts and cannot therefore be included in the article in question , where they would be placed alongside universally applicable instruments .
Amendment No 3 cannot be accepted as the right to allow seafarers to reside permanently on board ships , or to prohibit them from so doing , is not a matter which is internationally regulated .
Just because he provides regular ferry services does not give a seafarer the right to reside in a Member State , and the Commission does not intend to interfere in an area which would cause problems regarding residence rights in the European Union .
Of course this is without prejudice to any decisions which may be adopted under the second and third pillars .
Amendment No 4 cannot be accepted as the directive deals exclusively with the treatment of third-country seafarers working on regular passenger and ferry services between Member States , and is therefore not the appropriate context in which to make such a proposal .
In actual fact , the Commission is in the process of drawing up a communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the recruitment and training of seafarers in the European Union , which will assess what actions might be undertaken to encourage young people to enter the maritime professions and to promote quality training .
It will also examine how the education and training of seafarers are funded in the Member States .
As regards the proposal for a Council regulation , I note with regret that the rapporteur has departed from the Commission 's proposal and has opted instead for an alternative text requiring the Commission to submit a proposal for a definitive system of manning rules by 1 January 2003 .
Such a proposal would have to be based on the report on the economic and social impact of the liberalisation of island cabotage , which is to be submitted to the Council and Parliament by 1 January 2001 .
The Commission cannot agree to such amendments .
On 17 June 1997 , the Commission adopted a report which among other matters dealt with the economic and social impact of the liberalisation of island cabotage .
The report concluded that in such a labour-intensive sector as passenger and ferry services , a proposal allowing Member States to impose a compulsory quota of Community nationals in crews would be enough to properly safeguard the jobs of European Union seafarers and would also enable the internal market to operate on the basis of Community social provisions .
The report also concluded that in the cargo cabotage sector , which is linked up to international traffic and is less labour-intensive , there are not sufficient grounds to justify continuing to apply the host State 's rules , as is the case at present .
In the proposed regulation an extra clause has been added which requires the host State to apply its own provisions on working conditions to third-country seafarers providing such services and employed on board ships flying its flag .
The European Parliament asks for the regulation not to be amended before the assessment of the impact of island cabotage is complete .
We should remember that as far as manning conditions are concerned , the provisions of the flag State normally apply to shipping companies ; under the terms of the regulation in its present form , the host Member States can impose all their own rules on manning conditions , including rules on the minimum wage , qualifications required and social security for seafarers , as well as provisions on working time , rest periods , holidays and so on .
This amounts to a major and unjustified restriction of the freedom to provide services , as shipping companies from other Member States have to comply with the various requirements even when just carrying out a single cabotage operation .
Various companies have already written to the Commission voicing their concern about this .
On the basis of the legislation which is currently in force , it seems likely that the impact of liberalisation will be slight indeed .
The Commission feels that its own proposal offers a balanced solution which can effectively guarantee freedom to provide services as well as safeguarding Community seafarers ' jobs on passenger services between the Member States of southern Europe , which is a highly labour-intensive sector .
At the same time , it enables the restrictions which would arise from the enforcement of all the host State 's rules to be avoided .
In conclusion , I would like to thank Parliament for helping to ensure the swift adoption of the common position on these important measures , which will enable us to get rid of social dumping thanks to the application of Community employment rules to third-country nationals working on regular services , which as we have said are highly labour-intensive .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
In successive votes , Parliament adopted two legislative resolutions
EU - India Enhanced Partnership
The next item item is the report ( A4-0066 / 99 ) by Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the Communication from the Commission on EU-India Enhanced Partnership ( COM ( 96 ) 0275 - C4-0407 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ' We end today a period of ill fortune and India discovers herself again .
The achievement we celebrate today is but a step , an opening of opportunity , to the greater triumphs and achievements that await us ' .
These were the words of Nehru to the Constituent Assembly of the Indian Union on 14 August 1947 , a few hours before the proclamation of India 's independence .
He continued in words which are still relevant today : ' The service of India means the service of the millions who suffer . It means the ending of poverty and ignorance and disease and inequality of opportunity ' .
For fifty years India has pursued these objectives with determination .
Although illiteracy , poverty and disease have not been eradicated since independence was proclaimed , enormous progress has been made .
In 1947 , three-quarters of the population lived below the poverty line .
Life expectancy at birth was 32 years whereas now this has nearly doubled to 62 years .
Illiteracy affected 84 % of the population whereas now over half of the population can read .
The country depended on external aid for agricultural production whereas now , thanks to the green revolution of the 1960s , India is self-sufficient in terms of food .
The major famines are no more than a bad memory , even though much still remains to be done to save many children from malnutrition .
In terms of population growth , the most pessimistic experts who thought that India could not control this have been proven wrong .
However , the figures reveal a population of 970 million , compared with 350 million in 1947 , and the World Bank estimates the number of Indians will reach 1.3 billion by 2025 , thus exceeding the population of China .
The population issue must therefore be a social and economic priority .
Since the beginning of this decade , India has embraced liberalisation . It has offered enormous markets and hoped for foreign investors but these have not appeared due to a protectionist commercial policy which imposes hefty customs duties and quantitative restrictions .
Yet economic and commercial reforms have allowed India to increase its participation in the world economy .
Politically , India can be proud that it is the largest parliamentary democracy in the world .
A new government led by the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) emerged from the last elections in March 1998 .
On entering office , Prime Minister Attal Vajpayee announced his declared intention to make India a nuclear power .
By conducting several tests in May last year , the Hindu nationalists of the BJP have tried to implement an independent nuclear policy , breaking with the previous policy of not exercising its nuclear option which had been maintained for nearly a quarter of a century .
The people were perhaps surprised but not so the international observers .
These events had the effect of suspending the progress of my report for several months .
The final text calls on India to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty ( CTBT ) and the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) .
We also consider it essential to restart the dialogue between India and Pakistan in order to come to a peaceful solution on the question of Kashmir .
We are also calling for the continuation of dialogue on disarmament in these two countries .
The proposed partnership agreement is part of a new generation of agreements aimed at redefining the external action of the European Union .
India was one of the first countries to establish relations with the Union and since 1973 three agreements have been signed , initially defining commercial relations and then establishing an institutional framework for economic cooperation and development .
The present partnership will go much further .
It proposes an intensified political dialogue between the two parties , the abolition of barriers to investment and trade and measures promoting cultural contacts and a permanent dialogue with civil society .
Other elements in the partnership 's agenda include the preservation of biodiversity and the fight against drugs and money-laundering .
My report also concentrates on development aid which represents 95 % of the European aid granted to India .
The abolition of child labour is also one of the priorities and , where this cannot be avoided , a voluntary code of conduct for companies is recommended .
As the victims of age-old prejudice , women suffer every form of exploitation .
Furthermore , India is one of the few countries in the world where there are more men than women .
This is why the budget for basic health care has been increased .
Education for girls is of crucial importance since the figures show that educated women are at less risk from maternal and infant mortality .
Too many clichés abound .
To associate India with shantytowns , extreme poverty and nothing else is too simplistic .
We hope that the EU-India dialogue will allow India to assume its rightful place on the world stage and that it will allow our Asia strategy to be revised so that it is not solely targeted at China .
Applause
Mr President , along with China , India is one of the biggest and most important states on the Asian continent .
I therefore welcome the fact that the rapporteur has done such an excellent job of promoting stronger partnership with India .
It is a rising economic power attracting private investment , and it is somewhere where my own country , the Netherlands , for example , has a good deal of its administrative work done by local companies because of their technical know-how and because the wage levels are lower .
Nevertheless , India with its large population still needs a great deal of development aid .
The interesting thing about India is that it is a subcontinent with an impressive culture , and it is this culture which , in the context of development cooperation , has prevented it from simply putting itself in the hands of the donor countries , as has happened with Bangladesh and Sri Lanka , for example .
India is still in charge of policy in this field , which is a good thing to see .
Unfortunately , this mentality is also something of an obstacle , particularly for the further liberalisation of its trade system .
Strengthening links with India through top-level dialogue , as the Commission is proposing , could encourage movement in the right direction here , enabling this country with its established democracy to play a major role in the WTO .
All things considered , India has suffered less than expected from the economic crisis in Asia .
The Financial Times reported this week that the Indian telephone company has reduced call rates by 10 % , and by even more for international calls .
I think this is remarkable .
However , there are still some rather worrying developments , as the rapporteur said : child labour , increasing religious tensions , partly caused by Hindu nationalists , the conflict in Kashmir and , of course , the developments on the nuclear front .
Developments in neighbouring China are also worrying , but India could one day act as a counterbalance between the ASEAN countries , China and Japan , which would be a good thing .
The recent meeting between India and Pakistan was also a welcome development .
All of these issues can be put on the agenda if there is a stronger partnership between India and the EU .
As a former journalist , vice-chairman of the Subcommittee on Human Rights and member of the friendship association with India , I would like to take this opportunity to highlight the case of a missing Indian journalist , Ram Singh .
India promised in 1997 to provide information on this man , but up to now we have heard nothing .
I hope that the Indian diplomats here can do so .
My group supports the partnership and we congratulate the rapporteur .
Mr President , in my opinion India is a country which has possibilities for the future .
I am pleased that the EU is willing to continue and strengthen the partnership we have had for a long time and which , let us hope , will continue for a long time to come .
Many think that India is a strange country which is difficult to get to know .
And so it is , if we see it through Western eyes .
But that is not how we should see it ; we should look at India from within and with different eyes .
Then we shall discover that India is a unique country .
I for one , on many of my journeys , have experienced incredible sympathy and generosity , which seem to know no bounds .
However , apart from the positive aspects , there are also many development problems in India .
We must of course endeavour to help India in every possible way to take the right road , not because we want to control the country , but because we do not want it to make the same mistakes as many countries in Europe have done .
I would like to comment on a few points here - I will not go through them all since Mrs André-Léonard has already raised many important points , which I of course entirely support .
One of the comments I wish to make concerns regional cooperation in India and with countries around India .
Regional cooperation is indeed of very great importance for the entire region , where India as the largest country clearly has a special position .
None of these countries can isolate itself entirely .
If a solution is to be found to many of the problems present in the region , problems with Pakistan and the Kashmir question for example , regional cooperation is of the utmost importance .
I also think that India increasingly realises and understands that .
Increased intergovernmental cooperation is therefore a precondition for the region to achieve positive development in terms of peace , the environment and balancing out economic and social differences in the region .
As regards the nuclear tests , we all had a great shock when we heard that India , immediately followed by Pakistan , had carried out test explosions .
It sounded to me very much like the most stupid thing which India had done for a long time .
This is definitely not the way to secure cooperation and trust .
Nor does it square with the picture of India I have acquired and of the country I have got to know over many years .
My group and I of course condemn these nuclear tests .
Clearly we urge India to sign and ratify the nuclear test ban and non-proliferation treaties , and of course also the ban on anti-personnel mines , as soon as possible .
The Kashmir question is also important .
Here we come back to regional cooperation , which I believe can play a major role .
We hope of course that a peaceful solution can be found .
Progress has also been made in recent times .
The Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan recently met in Pakistan to discuss the question .
It was the first time in a great many years that an Indian Prime Minister had set foot in Pakistan .
We have also tabled an amendment to the André-Léonard report on this , which I hope you can support .
We have discussed freedom of religion in Parliament many times , most recently during the February part-session .
Regrettably , a very long list can be compiled of attacks and violence against religious minorities in India .
Unfortunately , there are repeated occurrences , despite the fact that the Indian Constitution guarantees religious freedom .
There are of course also a number of provisions to protect human rights .
When we speak of human rights , we must not forget that India still has the death penalty , which is unworthy of a democracy .
I therefore truly hope that India will abolish this sanction as soon as possible .
India has also still not signed the Convention on torture .
It is of course important too that this should be done as soon as possible .
We get repeated reports , from Amnesty International among others , that torture is going on in India .
Serious cases of torture have also occurred in the police .
I hope that India can sign this convention and that it will endeavour to solve these problems as soon as possible .
We in the Green Group have tabled an amendment precisely on this human rights issue , mainly in regard to the many unsolved cases which have arisen in relation to Kashmir ; it is estimated that there have been over 800 unsolved cases since 1990 .
Of course this is to impress upon India that it must make progress in resolving this matter .
When it comes to the environment , the problem is that India has nuclear power .
These nuclear power stations were obtained from the Soviet Union , which does not give any guarantee for the future .
I therefore hope that we can have greater cooperation on renewable energy resources so that nuclear power can be phased out in India , just as we want to phase it out in the EU countries .
Renewable energy resources show very great potential in India , especially where wind and solar energy are concerned .
Finally , we in the Green Group will of course support this partnership and will vote for the excellent André-Léonard report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Sir Leon Brittan always tells us that there is no alternative to his policy of kowtowing and exaggerated politeness on the red carpets of Beijing . He claims that there is no alternative to this policy which is based on sacrificing democracy , the rule of law and the freedom of the Tibetans , the Mongols and the inhabitants of Turkestan .
He says that there is no alternative to the negation of human rights and to the Chinese gulags .
Yet we now have an alternative as indicated in this report by Mrs André-Léonard which is heading in the right direction .
For India is the alternative for the European Union and its Asia policy .
A true strategic partnership should be established with this great country of a billion inhabitants , compared with 1.2 billion in China .
India is the largest democracy in the world and a country which , under the government of Mr Vajpayee , has not changed considerably since the government of Mr Rao .
Substantial economic reforms have been initiated and just as substantial economic progress has been made . The country is opening up to the world market , albeit still too slowly , and is strengthening its relations with the rest of the world .
So should we continue to follow Sir Leon when he tell us that there is no alternative ?
Or should we , the Commission , the Council and this House , make an effort to establish a programme which will allow us to rapidly instigate a strategic relationship with this country ?
We still have a long way to go .
The Commission delegation in Delhi is totally inadequate .
This House does not even have an ad hoc delegation with India , although it does have one with the Chinese Communist empire . There is also no annual EU-India summit .
This House , and the Council and the Commission in particular , need a genuine strategy and measures which will allow us to be suitably equipped to meet this major challenge of ensuring India 's progress towards increased democracy .
In my opinion , and certain Members have broached this problem , we must not look for excuses or pay attention to the problem of the nuclear tests in India .
India is quite rightly equipping itself with the means to protect itself , just as we did faced with the Soviet empire .
Why should we be so tolerant of the nuclear strike force of the Chinese Communist empire and yet make such a fuss because India , whose problem is not really with Pakistan but with the neighbouring Communist empire , equips itself with a deterrent power .
When the situation changed for us with the collapse of the Soviet empire and the lessening of the threat , we were able to start to disarm .
I believe that India , faced with such a country , has the legitimate right to equip itself with the means to protect itself .
I must congratulate Mrs André-Léonard on her report which contains some positive elements . The ball is now in the Commission 's and Council 's court to establish a strategic timetable with the Indian Parliament and the Indian Government so that India can become our favoured partner in Asia .
Mr President , with regard to this interesting report by Mrs André-Léonard , I am amazed at the lack of priority which this House tends to give to the issue of our relations with India , the largest democracy in the world . This is particularly true when you compare , for example , the emphasis given to our relations with China .
The refusal to discuss this report at the end of the sitting seems rather cavalier given that this is such an important subject .
This report paints a fairly full picture of India 's current situation . This young democratic country has for some years been experiencing a sustained rate of growth and yet , in practice , the democracy seems to be built on extremely inegalitarian social structures .
The persistence of a caste system which the public authorities have not managed to challenge is at the root of an unfair distribution of benefits from the country 's growth .
The recent violations of human rights , in particular the violation of religious freedom to the detriment of the Christian communities , as in neighbouring Pakistan , are also worrying and may not have been sufficiently stressed by our rapporteur .
Furthermore , the economic development of India is still based too much on industries which use underpaid and exploited labour , in particular child labour .
The external commercial policy of the European Union must help to correct these problems by providing the instruments needed to promote fair trade .
It must encourage the overall level of production standards in India to be raised and must seek to reduce as much as possible the unscrupulous trade in products which are only competitive because of unacceptable social and health conditions .
A policy restricted to establishing codes of conduct would be doomed to ineffectiveness .
Europe 's action within the WTO must pursue the same objectives .
The rapporteur 's recommendations on the necessary diversification of our aid programmes , on their decentralisation , on improved capillary action and on the extension of micro-loans seem relevant because they are well suited to the social and geographic structures of India .
If applied , they should help to improve the effectiveness of these structures .
Mr President , India is a country where nearly everything is on such a large scale as to make it a problematic as well as an important and promising partner for the European Union .
This report clearly addresses the priority areas , the acute problems and those that are more deeply rooted .
A great deal has already been said , and quite rightly , about the nuclear tests , but I nevertheless believe that the development of the partnership has to depend upon the decisions made in this area .
It is also important for India to sign the Ottawa Convention banning anti-personnel mines .
I feel it is particularly important for the EU , both in its overall partnership policy and in its relations with India , to be significantly involved in the fight against the exploitation of children .
The contradictions between legislation in this field and the way it is implemented in India are far too great .
It is also quite staggering that such technologically gifted people - I am thinking here of the software sector , for example - allow their children to be socially and sexually exploited to such a dreadful extent .
Campaigns run by the central government have failed due to the resistance of organised crime and corruption and the lack of flanking measures .
The extreme suffering caused to children forced into prostitution , particularly those from Nepal , is quite simply unacceptable .
I therefore feel that the proposal in paragraph 44 , based on an initiative taken by President Clinton , is a constructive approach which may give some practical substance to European concern about the exploitation of children .
Firms would have to agree voluntarily to comply with certain minimum criteria in return for a fixed payment or bonus .
Implementing and policing this would certainly require some degree of political will and administrative expenditure , but it would be a definite signal and would hold out the prospect of achieving progress .
Mr President , I want to start by speaking from a specifically British viewpoint on India .
One of the arguments that was always put against British membership of the European Union was that it would mean that we would be turning our backs on the Commonwealth and that Europe was an inward-looking small club of rich nations that did not care about the rest of the world .
I always argued very strongly against that viewpoint in the 60s and 70s and argued that one of the great advantages of British membership of the European Union was precisely that it would bring the Commonwealth countries into a relationship with the rest of Europe , with all the advantages that could bring .
The report that we have before us today is a very good example of what precisely has happened .
Not only has the Commonwealth benefited by being brought into the Lomé Convention but also individual partnerships have been formed , such as the one we are discussing today .
I should like to congratulate Mrs André-Léonard very strongly on her excellent report which sets out very comprehensively the many social and political issues which face India .
We know there are problems .
The subcontinent of India has enormous potential but , as has been pointed out , many problems and tensions to be tackled particularly in its relationships with its immediate neighbours .
The European Union , as has been shown by this particular resolution , can engage very constructively with India , which is the biggest democracy in the world and which , for all its problems , remains a very strong and vibrant democracy after over 50 years of independence .
I would like to thank all the colleagues who have participated in this debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs André-Léonard , I too would like to thank you for the very thorough piece of work you have submitted to us .
The rapporteur quite rightly points out that India is an established democracy , and indeed one hardly dares imagine what the whole region would look like without this stabilising factor .
Nonetheless , the report hands out rather too much good advice for my liking .
Of course we should , for instance , condemn the attacks by religious fanatics , but this is what the Indian government does anyway , and we should not forget that leading Indian politicians have fallen victim to such fanatics .
We should therefore and above all look at supporting India in a very positive way .
I would like to make two further points .
Firstly , one of the proposed amendments quite rightly calls for the delegation in India to be reinforced .
That is however just one side of the story .
Cooperation between the Commission and the delegation would also need to improve , as it is not acceptable for aid-workers on the spot to be kept waiting for nine months before they get the first instalment of funding for their projects and to have to borrow money from other projects and other aid organisations until European Union resources are finally made available .
In instances of cofinancing it is particularly difficult to explain to a partner why they should provide their contribution whilst those on the European side drag their feet .
Secondly , I very much welcome the fact that some of the previous speakers also called for improved cooperation in the high-tech sector , for this is indeed the technology of the future for India , but if we do this I think we should nonetheless refrain from asking the Commission to draw up a code of conduct ; I feel this is not a job for the Commission but for other organisations to do .
Mr President , we are seeing on a daily basis that India , the largest democracy in the world , is making considerable progress in strengthening its political , economic and social structures .
As documented in our new external strategy from 1995 , we in Europe have a vital interest in fostering close relations based on shared values , fair partnership , economic cooperation with direct effects on jobs , and support for human rights .
In meetings I had over there , including in my capacity as vice-chairman of the European Parliament 's SAARC Delegation , I was able to see for myself the quality of the reforms .
It is remarkable how stable India has remained in the midst of Asia 's economic crisis thanks to its economic strength and innovative capacity .
The restructuring of the banking system and financial services and the expansion of the South Asia free trade area will be further important developments .
Nonetheless , as Mrs André-Léonard has already stated in her well-balanced report , our dialogue should not deal solely with economic matters .
Respect for human rights is an essential basis for all European Union agreements .
The fight against child labour can only be won if state authorities get actively involved , if a minimum income is guaranteed , if parents do their bit to ensure that their children are not reduced to the status of cheap and willing drudges .
Children must be able to attend school to get the education and training that will give them a future .
Village cooperative societies , micro-loans for women and NGO initiatives such as rugmark need our support .
Companies too must make their contribution by means of voluntary agreements to safeguard social standards .
The democracy so close to our hearts means respecting other religious persuasions as well .
There is no room for totalitarian philosophies .
Establishments in which people practise their religion must be protected against physical violence and threat just as ethnic minorities should be .
The words of Prime Minister Vajpayee need to be acted upon further .
The partnership between the largest state of the SAARC community and the European Union should be of high quality , built up through exchanges of young people , information and of course high tech , networks and a whole range of other experiences , involving political parties and parliaments as well .
Applause
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission and in particular of Vice-President Marín , I wish to warmly thank Parliament for having persevered with the work on the Commission 's communication of June 1996 on an enhanced partnership with India , despite all the difficulties encountered .
I should like to particularly congratulate Mrs André-Léonard , who never tired in her efforts to bring this project to a positive conclusion .
I also thank her colleagues , Mr Rocard and Mr Malerba and the many honourable Members who have contributed through their questions , contributions in debate , observations and proposals for amendments , to assuring that the final outcome is both comprehensive and of high quality .
We are all aware of the unfortunate events of May last year , when India took the world by surprise and decided to reconduct nuclear tests after almost a quarter of a century .
There was a need for the European Union , especially the European Parliament , to observe closely events as they evolved and incorporate them fully into the analysis of our relations with India .
This has delayed the completion of the report .
In our view , all the institutions of the European Union reacted to these events in a balanced manner .
The message to both India and Pakistan was firm and simple , namely , that for the European Union , the principle of nuclear non-proliferation is non-negotiable .
This is , again , made very clear in the text of the resolution before us .
While emphasising principles , there is no alternative to pursuing the immediate priority objectives : lowering tensions and preventing an arms race on the subcontinent .
In the long term we must make every effort to reintegrate India and Pakistan into the non-proliferation system .
In the case of India in particular there is no alternative to dialogue .
India is the second most populous country on this globe , with a proud and tested democratic tradition .
Democracy has enabled India to preserve its unity , despite an ethnic , linguistic and religious diversity that is even more varied than in our European Union .
Sanctions would likely have fed frustrations , reinforced the radical sectors in Indian society and shut out the country even further from international efforts towards building a global security system .
The report rightly emphasises the legitimacy of India 's aspirations to be recognised as a global player .
Few developing , even developed , countries could stand the strain of preserving a comparable democratic routine in the face of challenges as daunting as India 's .
The nuclear tests have certainly given India worldwide attention , but for the wrong reasons .
Indeed , they may well have set back India 's global aspirations .
On the other hand , there are aspects of global concern which cannot be tackled successfully without a contribution by the giant India .
I will not list them here as they are so clearly identified in the report .
The current level and depths of our political relations with India still do not reflect the fact that the European Union is India 's most important and only growing export market , its first source of investment and technology and also its principal aid donor .
However , in high-level meetings , as in our daily contacts with our partners , we are confronted with the fact that the European Union is little understood in India and its role hardly acknowledged .
This applies to all levels of Indian society , including the government .
In order to put our political relationship with India on a footing that reflects not only the importance of our economic relations but also the status of both the EU and India as global players , it is imperative that we work on increasing our visibility in India .
I , therefore , welcome your support towards setting up a press and information unit in the Commission 's delegation in New Delhi , as is already the case in other major capitals .
Already we seem to be gaining some ground in this aspect .
Our decision to maintain dialogue following the nuclear tests and to expand dialogue into new areas is contributing to enhancing our profile .
The euro has received , and continues to receive , extensive coverage in the Indian media .
I , therefore , very much welcome the proposal contained in the resolution that the European Parliament take on a more active role in maintaining regular dialogue with its Indian counterpart and that Parliament be given the resources to do so effectively .
India is not only a democracy in name but also a living and vibrant democratic body politic with a free and fiercely competitive press which has the largest combined circulation worldwide .
Indians are proud of their traditions and especially sensitive about their democratic credentials .
We must take into account these sensitivities when adopting declarations , especially when exhorting India on the issue of minority rights and human rights in general .
This does not imply that dialogue with India on matters relating to human rights is not possible .
It is not only possible , but also highly desirable .
The Commission does not , and never has , side-stepped its responsibilities in this field .
The Commission is convinced that dialogue at all levels , including an intensified dialogue between India 's civil society and the EU and its respective institutions , which must also include Parliament , is the only way forward .
However , we are not convinced that public declarations would not have the opposite effect ; namely , make such dialogue more difficult , at least in the short term .
Last January the 10th EC / India Joint Commission Meeting was held in Brussels .
On this occasion we formally launched the high-level economic dialogue between India and the EU .
We are convinced that this is the way forward to building confidence and trust .
The vote on the House 's report on an enhanced EU / India partnership is very timely .
I should like to thank the House for its tremendous effort .
It is reassuring to know that we have the support of Parliament in this extraordinary venture of building our relationship with this great country .
Finally , I was interested in the interventions of those , including Mr Dupuis , who strongly underlined the need to institute an annual EU / India summit .
We believe this proposal deserves serious consideration in a constructive spirit .
I believe this reflection should build on , in particular , two sets of elements : on the one hand , the already existing mechanisms which have been set up including an annual ministerial meeting at Troika-level , senior officials meeting , strategy planners meeting , consultations in the margins of multilateral fora and a series of working groups .
Despite the hiatus imposed by the nuclear tests , we have been working hard to make these mechanisms fully operational .
The second context in which the idea of an annual EU / India summit should be considered is the evolution in the structures concerning common security and foreign policy that the Amsterdam Treaty is about to bring into force very soon .
Applause
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Before we move on to the vote , Mr Wibe has asked for the floor .
Mr President , according to Rule 112 ( 2 ) , at least one third of Members must be present in plenary sitting if there is to be a quorum .
That means 209 Members .
When I look around , I think I can estimate the number of Members present at about 60 to 70 .
I doubt whether there are more than 100 Members present in the House .
The rest have gone home .
I have been an MEP for four years .
We have never on any Friday fulfilled the conditions for a quorum .
We have before us an important agreement .
I think that we should show to the world 's largest democracy , India , the respect that we are at least a quorum when we take a decision on this agreement .
I therefore call for a count to establish whether there are 209 Members in the Chamber or not .
Mr Wibe , in accordance with the same Rule that you mentioned , Rule 112 - of which you only mentioned part - in order to request the President to establish if a quorum is present , you must have the support of at least 29 Members .
The President noted that the request for the quorum to be established did not have the support required by the Rules
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , there will be no discussion on this matter .
This item is now closed .
You may have the floor , but only if it is on a different matter .
Mr President , I should just like to make one comment .
I would point out to Mr Wibe that even yesterday when there were some very important votes to be taken , there were not even 29 members of his group present .
So if you are going to make this kind of comment , you need to be sure that you have some people from your own political family to support you .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , you have shaken my good faith in you , since I had already told you that there would be no discussion on this matter .
The Chair has the last word , and you did not let me have it , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
In any event , we are not going to debate this issue any further .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Parliament adopted the resolution
Ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to join you in congratulating Mrs André-Léonard and in thanking her for her work .
The EU must make every effort to shape its cooperation with India in such a way that the country 's nuclear weapons do not come to be used and that there is no proliferation of fissile materials for nuclear power and nuclear arms .
The EU must also impose stringent demands on India to investigate and process the unsolved disappearances which have occurred in Kashmir , and must demand an end to the violation of human rights .
Macro-financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina
The next item is the report ( A4-0097 / 99 ) by Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision providing macro-financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina ( COM ( 98 ) 0652 - C4-0704 / 98-98 / 0311 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , here in Strasbourg last Wednesday we had the chance to talk to representatives of the various parties in the elected national parliament of Bosnia-Herzegovina for the first time in our Delegation for South-East Europe , led by our most energetic chairman Doris Pack .
This political dialogue showed us that we can take it as read that we and the Members of Parliament of Bosnia-Herzegovina are determined to work together and that they place a great deal of trust in us as representatives of the European Parliament and the European Union as a whole .
We should do justice to this trust and be guided by it in the work we do in the European Parliament , focusing our policies on peace , reconciliation and reconstruction and continuing to implement them consistently .
Over the last few days Bosnia-Herzegovina has been hitting the international headlines , and not just because the decision about the status of the city of Brcko has finally been taken .
From now on all sections of the population are to be covered by a single municipal and district administration , so as to put a stop to all the conflicts and blockades .
The Office of the High Representative has taken on an important role here , organising cooperation , ensuring that refugees return home and promoting peaceful coexistence in this region of Brcko .
In addition to this , the High Representative has done what was necessary and removed the President of Republika Srpska , Mr Poplasen , from office , thereby preventing the destructive forces associated with Milosevic from holding up the reconstruction work started there .
The international community is therefore utterly determined to continue with the reconstruction of Bosnia-Herzegovina and its constituent parts , in other words its entities , and to put a stop to those who oppose the Dayton peace process .
The macro-financial assistance for Bosnia-Herzegovina which we are discussing today is an important element in the European Union 's efforts to do its bit for the reconstruction of Bosnia-Herzegovina and to help the country to help itself .
The aim of the financial assistance is to support the economic reform and reconstruction programme for Bosnia-Herzegovina , as agreed with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , by means of firm pledges of financing .
Back in March 1998 the IMF and the World Bank outlined a macro-economic programme for Bosnia-Herzegovina .
After our ECOFIN Council in April 1998 also agreed to this EU financial assistance , the Commission stated at the fourth Donors ' Conference - supported by myself as the representative of the European Parliament - that it was in principle willing to provide Bosnia-Herzegovina with macro-financial assistance amounting to around 50 % of that given by the entire international community .
Out of this , EUR 30 million is to be given in loans and EUR 30 million in the form of grants .
With this proposed financial assistance the European Union hopes to support the implementation of an economic reform programme comprising a series of both macro-economic and institutional commitments , concerning both the common institutions of Bosnia-Herzegovina and the institutions of the two entities .
Although lasting peace is gaining ground in Bosnia-Herzegovina , the country 's structures are still fragile and still depend on international support .
The most urgently needed structural reforms at this stage are banking reforms , enterprise privatisation and restructuring , reform of the healthcare and pensions system , the introduction of a simplified system of customs tariffs and the liberalisation of foreign currency transactions and trade .
Most importantly of all , Bosnia-Herzegovina must earn revenue of its own , particularly revenue from customs duties .
However , corruption in the tax administration , an upsurge in organised crime and a plethora of cases of fraud mean that the organs of State - government , parliament and the judiciary - and spending controls do not yet work properly .
The amendments proposed by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , which I am now tabling , support the Commission in this action and I would ask for your approval of this report .
Mr President , on behalf of the Party of European Socialists I should like to congratulate Mr Schwaiger on his excellent , very clear report .
It sums up very comprehensively the extremely delicate situation which still prevails in Bosnia and Herzegovina and ways in which the European Union can assist in maintaining what is still a very fragile peace and help to move forward towards the creation of democracy and peaceful cooperation between its different ethnic groups , which we all want to see .
The EUR 60 m of aid being discussed here is a comparatively small sum but , as the rapporteur points out , Bosnia and Herzegovina has been receiving very large sums of money in the wake of the disastrous civil war and financial assistance on that scale is unlikely to continue .
It is therefore essential that this money is very carefully targeted and monitored to ensure that it is used to bring about the necessary reforms to enable the country to become self-sustaining .
Better infrastructure , efficiently functioning public administration supporting democratic structures and the continued transition to a market economy are vital to achieve this .
The PES supports all the amendments to the Commission proposals which will serve to strengthen the monitoring of the use of the money in a country where fraud , corruption and organized crime are , sadly , still part of the legacy of the civil war .
All of us in Europe have an interest in helping to improve security , employment and living standards and resettling refugees and displaced persons in a part of our continent .
It is a moral as well as financial imperative to ensure that this macro-financial assistance is targeted as effectively as possible to achieve these aims in partnership with the IMF and the World Bank .
The PES welcomes the full involvement of the European Parliament in this process .
Thank you very much , Mrs Hardstaff .
And now ladies and gentlemen , for five minutes and on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists - I am sorry , I must ask Parliament 's services to rectify what I have just said , since although I am sure that Mr von Habsburg could speak on behalf of any of us , in this case , he is in fact speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party . Mr von Habsburg , you have the floor for five minutes .
Thank you very much , Mr President , for honouring me by saying that I was a member of your party .
Our friendship is so strong that no party barriers come between us .
Mr President , Mr Schwaiger has once again done some excellent work here and has addressed a great many problems .
Perhaps I could look at what might be termed the political side , since this is , after all , one of the trickiest issues .
By the way , this is the best proof we could have that Friday sittings are worth attending .
Thinking back to all the nonsense that was talked on previous days , I must say that this subject is substantially more important than most of the others that have been discussed .
Let us be clear about one point : the problem of Bosnia is perhaps the most difficult of all for us to deal with , as the crisis there could not be predicted .
It was a sudden event which swept over the country , catching it unawares and directly exposing it to an attack from outside , from Serbia .
There were further difficulties besides , as demonstrated by events in Brcko , where a problem was once again left unresolved .
It is all very well to say that Brcko should be turned into a neutral zone .
However , this is not what had been clearly promised , which was that the wishes of the population would be followed .
In that case Brcko would obviously have joined the Federation of Bosnia rather than becoming neutral territory , although that would still have been better than handing it straight over to the Serbs , since there are scarcely any Serbs in Brcko .
The majority of people there were Muslims and Croats , who certainly had no wish to live under Serbian rule .
We should also consider that even the dismissal of Mr Poplasen from his post as President of Republika Srpska has yet again shown that the clean-up operation so vitally necessary if there is to be cooperation has not yet taken place in Republika Srpska .
The fact that Mr Karadzic 's cronies continue in power to a certain extent poisons the whole situation .
Therefore our task , first and foremost , is to help the present , legitimate government .
This also means , of course , helping this legitimate government by setting a good example ourselves .
It was most regrettable that a number of the worst cases of corruption in the Commission were related to this very area , and perhaps not enough has yet been done to clear up these cases .
We are a long way , after all , from putting the Commission 's house in order and it is high time , given the situation , for this to be done .
When all is said and done , it has to be acknowledged that many of the problems listed here , such as corruption , fraud and crime , actually stem from Republika Srpska and again and again spill over into the territory of the Federation .
The latter , which I have frequently visited , enjoys quite a high degree of law and order .
It is Republika Srpska which spreads disorder and which is still under totalitarian leadership , whereas the present government in Bosnia , as well as Muslims , Croats and even Serbs , genuinely believe in democracy .
Yes , such a thing is possible !
The problem is that we have never given them enough support .
We could have worked very well with these Serbs , had we decided not to play games over and over again with Karadzic , Vladic and company , whatever their names are .
This is an absolutely fundamental political problem .
We shall have to call upon our Union to pursue a clear and unambivalent policy not just towards Republika Srpska within Bosnia , but also in Serbia itself .
There is one point we must grasp , which is that as long as Milosevic is in power there will be no peace , just as there would never have been peace in Germany had Hitler been allowed to continue in power !
They are after all broadly similar characters .
We must finally resolve to give effective support to those forces existing in Serbia - we have seen them here ourselves on occasion .
Only then will we have peace .
Mr President , I will first pay tribute to the rapporteur for what is a good report .
I do not do that as a matter of routine but only when it is justified , which is the case here .
I readily concur with Mr von Habsburg 's description of the political situation in these countries - he knows it much better than I do .
It is thus a question of creating democracy in a country which must now rebuild after war and terror have ravaged its people both physically and socially for so long .
It is a question of creating political reforms for democracy , stability , a market economy and sustainable growth .
It is a question of creating living conditions for the people who live in these areas , and who must both cope with their own everyday lives and deal with displaced persons and returning refugees .
After all the crises we have now had in the Commission , with fraud and mismanagement of resources , which have been discussed in this Chamber many times , not least in connection with matters involving reconstruction programmes , it is immensely important , indeed a condition , that resources for these programmes should actually be used for the intended purpose and that we achieve the results sought by the programme .
This demands proper control of how the money is spent .
Since , in the wake of the war , crime and disorder are also rife in the receiving countries , with fraud and corruption as part of everyday life , it is even more important that the money we commit is not subject to mismanagement on the donor 's side .
It is immensely important , from the point of view of trust towards us as politicians and parliamentarians , that matters now proceed according to acceptable rules .
It is also important to cooperate with other lenders and funding agencies , such as the IMF and the European Investment Bank , and to involve the new institutions , the banking system , the central bank and so forth in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Reporting on and monitoring of activities is also absolutely crucial , so that we who are now appropriating funds can ascertain what happens and correct any errors .
It is also a good idea to have a clear deadline for when reports and so on are to be presented .
This is a good proposal .
It can also be a good reform - everything depends on how it is set up , implemented and controlled .
Mr President , even in the peaceful states of Central and Eastern Europe we see that economic and financial assistance have no effect without the rule of law and good governance .
But this is particularly the case in a country destroyed by war , where the war may have ended but peace has not yet been achieved .
There is crime and corruption everywhere , even in our own countries , but of course it is far worse in a country whose future is something not many people believe in and who therefore feel that they need to feather their own nests quickly before everything falls apart .
Through statements like those made by Lord Owen , who said that Republika Srpska might be annexed to Serbia after all , we are supporting crime and mismanagement .
This destroys confidence that the country of Bosnia-Herzegovina will continue to exist in the future , and that is dangerous because it could bring all our economic and financial efforts to nothing .
I therefore hold the view that we need political stability , and this primarily involves the return of displaced people and refugees .
I regret that so far the Commission and the Council have not been able to give me any statistics on how many displaced people and refugees have returned to each entity , so that we could make a scientific comparison of how many have returned to the Muslim Croat Federation and how many , or rather how few , have been able to go back to Republika Srpska - virtually none in the latter case .
If we had figures available we would see what the ratio was .
Therefore I urgently request that such data be provided to help us assess the situation .
As far as Brcko is concerned , neutrality is certainly better than annexing it to Serbia against the will of the people , but this neutrality can only be a transitional solution .
It must be internationally guaranteed .
It brings back fateful memories of the Baltic Corridor before the Second World War .
We have to recognise that true peace is still a long way off for this country .
Step by step we must try to bolster stability , but we should also realise that it will take years , maybe even decades , for normal conditions to be restored .
I therefore welcome the Schwaiger report for its practical and critical attitude and also for its endeavours to help people in specific ways and to consolidate administration and the rule of law , without which there will be fresh waves of refugees , and the return of refugees and all the reconstruction work we have done , of which many are justifiably so proud , will immediately come under threat if the highly fragile peace there is destroyed .
Dayton was just a first step , and a thoroughly inadequate agreement at that , and we need to make considerable improvements to it here .
Mr President , the Commission congratulates the rapporteur , Mr Schwaiger , for the excellent report which Parliament is to vote on today , and thanks him for the support he has given to the Commission 's proposal .
The Commission is proposing macro-financial assistance for Bosnia-Herzegovina amounting to a total of EUR 60 million , consisting of a loan of up to EUR 30 m and a non-repayable component of up to EUR 30 m .
The granting of a non-repayable component is due to the country 's level of development and will require a special decision from the budgetary authority .
To make sure that this assistance is provided in good time , without having to wait for the legal basis to be adopted , the Commission will ask the budgetary authority to consider this decision as a matter of urgency , in line with the strategy pursued by the international donor community and by the European Union in particular after the constitution of the State of Bosnia-Herzegovina following the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement in December 1995 .
The operation is designed to be a one-off addition to the measures provided for under the PHARE And OBNOVA programmes .
The specific objective of the operation proposed is to support efforts to bring about macro-economic stability and structural reform in Bosnia-Herzegovina , in the context of the programme agreed with the International Monetary Fund .
Furthermore , at the last meeting of the Peace Implementation Council , held on 15-16 December in Madrid , ministers recognised that economic reforms , together with the strengthening of the common institutions , are fundamental priorities if the autonomous development of Bosnia-Herzegovina is to be safeguarded .
Since the authorities in Bosnia-Herzegovina concluded a stand-by agreement with the IMF in May 1998 , some progress has been made on fundamental economic reforms .
A common currency , the convertible marka , has been adopted , a common state budget has been passed , and budgetary spending by both entities has been strictly kept within the constraints of the revenue available .
On 1 January 1999 , a single customs code , consistent with European Union rules , came into force , and progress has been made in harmonising the trade regimes of both entities .
In addition , a World Bank programme to improve the management of public finances has been completed .
Nonetheless , a hefty package of work still remains to be done .
Gross domestic product per capita is estimated at well below pre-war levels .
Overall unemployment is estimated at between 35 and 40 % .
Bosnia-Herzegovina 's external financial situation is still shaky and not enough progress has been made in fundamental sectors such as privatisation , the reform of the banking and payments system and tax reform .
To conclude , Mr President , I should like to make a number of comments on the rapporteur 's proposed amendments .
The Commission supports Amendments Nos 1 , 4 and 5 .
It also shares the concerns expressed in many of the amendments rejected , but at the same time it considers it important to safeguard the effective implementation of the assistance , the integrity of the aims pursued and the exceptional nature of this financial instrument .
The implementation procedures have proved their worth in many similar operations managed by the Commission .
Making the procedures unduly burdensome could jeopardise the efficacy of the operation .
I would like to emphasise that the Commission intends to guarantee that the macro-financial assistance complements and is entirely consistent with other forms of Community assistance to Bosnia-Herzegovina .
In particular , it intends to make full use of the advice of CAFAO , the Tax and Customs Assistance Office funded by the European Union , and will give priority to the implementation of measures recommended by the Office to combat fraud and corruption .
I would also point out , whilst on this subject , that the macro-financial assistance provided in the form 